# Text slice — ai_engineering_2025_ch03_ingest.md
# corpus: /Users/dubs/Projects/scholia.skill/literature/cs-ai-textbook-canon
# slug: ai_engineering_2025 · chapter: 03
# hooks: 9 · route: fan-out
# DO NOT monolith-read — subagent uses this slice + ingest only.

Chapter 3. Evaluation Methodology

The more AI is used, the more opportunity there is for catastrophic
failure. We’ve already seen many failures in the short time that
foundation models have been around. A man committed suicide after being
encouraged by a chatbot. Lawyers submitted false evidence hallucinated
by AI. Air Canada was ordered to pay damages when its AI chatbot gave a
passenger false information. Without a way to quality control AI
outputs, the risk of AI might outweigh its benefits for many
applications.

As teams rush to adopt AI, many quickly realize that the biggest hurdle
to bringing AI applications to reality is evaluation. For some
applications, figuring out evaluation can take up the majority of the
development effort.¹

Due to the importance and complexity of evaluation, this book has two
chapters on it. This chapter covers different evaluation methods used to
evaluate open-ended models, how these methods work, and their
limitations. The next chapter focuses on how to use these methods to
select models for your application and build an evaluation pipeline to
evaluate your application.

While I discuss evaluation in its own chapters, evaluation has to be
considered in the context of a whole system, not in isolation.
Evaluation aims to mitigate risks and uncover opportunities. To mitigate
risks, you first need to identify the places where your system is likely
to fail and design your evaluation around them. Often, this may require
redesigning your system to enhance visibility into its failures. Without
a clear understanding of where your system fails, no amount of
evaluation metrics or tools can make the system robust.

Before diving into evaluation methods, it’s important to acknowledge the
challenges of evaluating foundation models. Because evaluation is
difficult, many people settle for word of mouth^(²) (e.g., someone says
that the model X is good) or eyeballing the results.³ This creates even
more risk and slows application iteration. Instead, we need to invest in
systematic evaluation to make the results more reliable.

Since many foundation models have a language model component, this
chapter will provide a quick overview of the metrics used to evaluate
language models, including cross entropy and perplexity. These metrics
are essential for guiding the training and finetuning of language models
and are frequently used in many evaluation methods.

Evaluating foundation models is especially challenging because they are
open-ended, and I’ll cover best practices for how to tackle these. Using
human evaluators remains a necessary option for many applications.
However, given how slow and expensive human annotations can be, the goal
is to automate the process. This book focuses on automatic evaluation,
which includes both exact and subjective evaluation.

The rising star of subjective evaluation is AI as a judge—the approach
of using AI to evaluate AI responses. It’s subjective because the score
depends on what model and prompt the AI judge uses. While this approach
is gaining rapid traction in the industry, it also invites intense
opposition from those who believe that AI isn’t trustworthy enough for
this important task. I’m especially excited to go deeper into this
discussion, and I hope you will be, too.

Challenges of Evaluating Foundation Models

Evaluating ML models has always been difficult. With the introduction of
foundation models, evaluation has become even more so. There are
multiple reasons why evaluating foundation models is more challenging
than evaluating traditional ML models.

First, the more intelligent AI models become, the harder it is to
evaluate them. Most people can tell if a first grader’s math solution is
wrong. Few can do the same for a PhD-level math solution.⁴ It’s easy to
tell if a book summary is bad if it’s gibberish, but a lot harder if the
summary is coherent. To validate the quality of a summary, you might
need to read the book first. This brings us to a corollary: evaluation
can be so much more time-consuming for sophisticated tasks. You can no
longer evaluate a response based on how it sounds. You’ll also need to
fact-check, reason, and even incorporate domain expertise.

Second, the open-ended nature of foundation models undermines the
traditional approach of evaluating a model against ground truths. With
traditional ML, most tasks are close-ended. For example, a
classification model can only output among the expected categories. To
evaluate a classification model, you can evaluate its outputs against
the expected outputs. If the expected output is category X but the
model’s output is category Y, the model is wrong. However, for an
open-ended task, for a given input, there are so many possible correct
responses. It’s impossible to curate a comprehensive list of correct
outputs to compare against.

Third, most foundation models are treated as black boxes, either because
model providers choose not to expose models’ details, or because
application developers lack the expertise to understand them. Details
such as the model architecture, training data, and the training process
can reveal a lot about a model’s strengths and weaknesses. Without those
details, you can evaluate only a model by observing its outputs.

At the same time, publicly available evaluation benchmarks have proven
to be inadequate for evaluating foundation models. Ideally, evaluation
benchmarks should capture the full range of model capabilities. As AI
progresses, benchmarks need to evolve to catch up. A benchmark becomes
saturated for a model once the model achieves the perfect score. With
foundation models, benchmarks are becoming saturated fast. The benchmark
GLUE (General Language Understanding Evaluation) came out in 2018 and
became saturated in just a year, necessitating the introduction of
SuperGLUE in 2019. Similarly, NaturalInstructions (2021) was replaced by
Super-NaturalInstructions (2022). MMLU (2020), a strong benchmark that
many early foundation models relied on, was largely replaced by MMLU-Pro
(2024).

Last but not least, the scope of evaluation has expanded for
general-purpose models. With task-specific models, evaluation involves
measuring a model’s performance on its trained task. However, with
general-purpose models, evaluation is not only about assessing a model’s
performance on known tasks but also about discovering new tasks that the
model can do, and these might include tasks that extend beyond human
capabilities. Evaluation takes on the added responsibility of exploring
the potential and limitations of AI.

The good news is that the new challenges of evaluation have prompted
many new methods and benchmarks. Figure 3-1 shows that the number of
published papers on LLM evaluation grew exponentially every month in the
first half of 2023, from 2 papers a month to almost 35 papers a month.

[A graph with a line going up Description automatically generated]

Figure 3-1. The trend of LLMs evaluation papers over time. Image from Chang et al. (2023).

In my own analysis of the top 1,000 AI-related repositories on GitHub,
as ranked by the number of stars, I found over 50 repositories dedicated
to evaluation (as of May 2024).⁵ When plotting the number of evaluation
repositories by their creation date, the growth curve looks exponential,
as shown in Figure 3-2.

The bad news is that despite the increased interest in evaluation, it
lags behind in terms of interest in the rest of the AI engineering
pipeline. Balduzzi et al. from DeepMind noted in their paper that
“developing evaluations has received little systematic attention
compared to developing algorithms.” According to the paper, experiment
results are almost exclusively used to improve algorithms and are rarely
used to improve evaluation. Recognizing the lack of investments in
evaluation, Anthropic called on policymakers to increase government
funding and grants both for developing new evaluation methodologies and
analyzing the robustness of existing evaluations.

[A graph of a graph showing the growth of a number of people Description
automatically generated with medium confidence]

Figure 3-2. Number of open source evaluation repositories among the 1,000 most popular AI repositories on GitHub.

To further demonstrate how the investment in evaluation lags behind
other areas in the AI space, the number of tools for evaluation is small
compared to the number of tools for modeling and training and AI
orchestration, as shown in Figure 3-3.

Inadequate investment leads to inadequate infrastructure, making it hard
for people to carry out systematic evaluations. When asked how they are
evaluating their AI applications, many people told me that they just
eyeballed the results. Many have a small set of go-to prompts that they
use to evaluate models. The process of curating these prompts is ad hoc,
usually based on the curator’s personal experience instead of based on
the application’s needs. You might be able to get away with this ad hoc
approach when getting a project off the ground, but it won’t be
sufficient for application iteration. This book focuses on a systematic
approach to evaluation.

[A bar graph with text Description automatically generated]

Figure 3-3. According to data sourced from my list of the 1,000 most popular AI repositories on GitHub, evaluation lags behind other aspects of AI engineering in terms of open source tools.

Understanding Language Modeling Metrics

Foundation models evolved out of language models. Many foundation models
still have language models as their main components. For these models,
the performance of the language model component tends to be well
correlated to the foundation model’s performance on downstream
applications (Liu et al., 2023). Therefore, a rough understanding of
language modeling metrics can be quite helpful in understanding
downstream performance.⁶

As discussed in Chapter 1, language modeling has been around for
decades, popularized by Claude Shannon in his 1951 paper “Prediction and
Entropy of Printed English”. The metrics used to guide the development
of language models haven’t changed much since then. Most autoregressive
language models are trained using cross entropy or its relative,
perplexity. When reading papers and model reports, you might also come
across bits-per-character (BPC) and bits-per-byte (BPB); both are
variations of cross entropy.

All four metrics—cross entropy, perplexity, BPC, and BPB—are closely
related. If you know the value of one, you can compute the other three,
given the necessary information. While I refer to them as language
modeling metrics, they can be used for any model that generates
sequences of tokens, including non-text tokens.

Recall that a language model encodes statistical information (how likely
a token is to appear in a given context) about languages. Statistically,
given the context “I like drinking __”, the next word is more likely to
be “tea” than “charcoal”. The more statistical information that a model
can capture, the better it is at predicting the next token.

In ML lingo, a language model learns the distribution of its training
data. The better this model learns, the better it is at predicting what
comes next in the training data, and the lower its training cross
entropy. As with any ML model, you care about its performance not just
on the training data but also on your production data. In general, the
closer your data is to a model’s training data, the better the model can
perform on your data.

Compared to the rest of the book, this section is math-heavy. If you
find it confusing, feel free to skip the math part and focus on the
discussion of how to interpret these metrics. Even if you’re not
training or finetuning language models, understanding these metrics can
help with evaluating which models to use for your application. These
metrics can occasionally be used for certain evaluation and data
deduplication techniques, as discussed throughout this book.

Entropy

Entropy measures how much information, on average, a token carries. The
higher the entropy, the more information each token carries, and the
more bits are needed to represent a token.⁷

Let’s use a simple example to illustrate this. Imagine you want to
create a language to describe positions within a square, as shown in
Figure 3-4. If your language has only two tokens, shown as (a) in
Figure 3-4, each token can tell you whether the position is upper or
lower. Since there are only two tokens, one bit is sufficient to
represent them. The entropy of this language is, therefore, 1.

[A couple of squares with numbers Description automatically generated]

Figure 3-4. Two languages describe positions within a square. Compared to the language on the left (a), the tokens on the right (b) carry more information, but they need more bits to represent them.

If your language has four tokens, shown as (b) in Figure 3-4, each token
can give you a more specific position: upper-left, upper-right,
lower-left, or lower-right. However, since there are now four tokens,
you need two bits to represent them. The entropy of this language is 2.
This language has higher entropy, since each token carries more
information, but each token requires more bits to represent.

Intuitively, entropy measures how difficult it is to predict what comes
next in a language. The lower a language’s entropy (the less information
a token of a language carries), the more predictable that language. In
our previous example, the language with only two tokens is easier to
predict than the language with four (you have to predict among only two
possible tokens compared to four). This is similar to how, if you can
perfectly predict what I will say next, what I say carries no new
information.

Cross Entropy

When you train a language model on a dataset, your goal is to get the
model to learn the distribution of this training data. In other words,
your goal is to get the model to predict what comes next in the training
data. A language model’s cross entropy on a dataset measures how
difficult it is for the language model to predict what comes next in
this dataset.

A model’s cross entropy on the training data depends on two qualities:

1.  The training data’s predictability, measured by the training data’s
    entropy

2.  How the distribution captured by the language model diverges from
    the true distribution of the training data

Entropy and cross entropy share the same mathematical notation, H. Let P
be the true distribution of the training data, and Q be the distribution
learned by the language model. Accordingly, the following is true:

- The training data’s entropy is, therefore, H(P).

- The divergence of Q with respect to P can be measured using the
  Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence, which is mathematically represented
  as D_(KL)(P||Q).

- The model’s cross entropy with respect to the training data is
  therefore: H(P, Q) = H(P) + D_(KL)(P||Q).

Cross entropy isn’t symmetric. The cross entropy of Q with respect to
P—H(P, Q)—is different from the cross entropy of P with respect to
Q—H(Q, P).

A language model is trained to minimize its cross entropy with respect
to the training data. If the language model learns perfectly from its
training data, the model’s cross entropy will be exactly the same as the
entropy of the training data. The KL divergence of Q with respect to P
will then be 0. You can think of a model’s cross entropy as its
approximation of the entropy of its training data.

Bits-per-Character and Bits-per-Byte

One unit of entropy and cross entropy is bits. If the cross entropy of a
language model is 6 bits, this language model needs 6 bits to represent
each token.

Since different models have different tokenization methods—for example,
one model uses words as tokens and another uses characters as tokens—the
number of bits per token isn’t comparable across models. Some use the
number of bits-per-character (BPC) instead. If the number of bits per
token is 6 and on average, each token consists of 2 characters, the BPC
is 6/2 = 3.

One complication with BPC arises from different character encoding
schemes. For example, with ASCII, each character is encoded using 7
bits, but with UTF-8, a character can be encoded using anywhere between
8 and 32 bits. A more standardized metric would be bits-per-byte (BPB),
the number of bits a language model needs to represent one byte of the
original training data. If the BPC is 3 and each character is 7 bits, or
⅞ of a byte, then the BPB is 3 / (⅞) = 3.43.

Cross entropy tells us how efficient a language model will be at
compressing text. If the BPB of a language model is 3.43, meaning it can
represent each original byte (8 bits) using 3.43 bits, this language
model can compress the original training text to less than half the
text’s original size.

Perplexity

Perplexity is the exponential of entropy and cross entropy. Perplexity
is often shortened to PPL. Given a dataset with the true distribution P,
its perplexity is defined as:

PPL(P) = 2^(H(P))

The perplexity of a language model (with the learned distribution Q) on
this dataset is defined as:

PPL(P, Q) = 2^(H(P, Q))

If cross entropy measures how difficult it is for a model to predict the
next token, perplexity measures the amount of uncertainty it has when
predicting the next token. Higher uncertainty means there are more
possible options for the next token.

Consider a language model trained to encode the 4 position tokens, as in
Figure 3-4 (b), perfectly. The cross entropy of this language model is 2
bits. If this language model tries to predict a position in the square,
it has to choose among 2 = 4 possible options. Thus, this language model
has a perplexity of 4.

So far, I’ve been using bit as the unit for entropy and cross entropy.
Each bit can represent 2 unique values, hence the base of 2 in the
preceding perplexity equation.

Popular ML frameworks, including TensorFlow and PyTorch, use nat
(natural log) as the unit for entropy and cross entropy. Nat uses the
base of e, the base of natural logarithm.⁸ If you use nat as the unit,
perplexity is the exponential of e:

PPL(P, Q) = e^(H(P, Q))

Due to the confusion around bit and nat, many people report perplexity,
instead of cross entropy, when reporting their language models’
performance.

Perplexity Interpretation and Use Cases

As discussed, cross entropy, perplexity, BPC, and BPB are variations of
language models’ predictive accuracy measurements. The more accurately a
model can predict a text, the lower these metrics are. In this book,
I’ll use perplexity as the default language modeling metric. Remember
that the more uncertainty the model has in predicting what comes next in
a given dataset, the higher the perplexity.

What’s considered a good value for perplexity depends on the data itself
and how exactly perplexity is computed, such as how many previous tokens
a model has access to. Here are some general rules:

More structured data gives lower expected perplexity

    More structured data is more predictable. For example, HTML code is
    more predictable than everyday text. If you see an opening HTML tag
    like <head>, you can predict that there should be a closing tag,
    </head>, nearby. Therefore, the expected perplexity of a model on
    HTML code should be lower than the expected perplexity of a model on
    everyday text.

The bigger the vocabulary, the higher the perplexity

    Intuitively, the more possible tokens there are, the harder it is
    for the model to predict the next token. For example, a model’s
    perplexity on a children’s book will likely be lower than the same
    model’s perplexity on War and Peace. For the same dataset, say in
    English, character-based perplexity (predicting the next character)
    will be lower than word-based perplexity (predicting the next word),
    because the number of possible characters is smaller than the number
    of possible words.

The longer the context length, the lower the perplexity

    The more context a model has, the less uncertainty it will have in
    predicting the next token. In 1951, Claude Shannon evaluated his
    model’s cross entropy by using it to predict the next token
    conditioned on up to 10 previous tokens. As of this writing, a
    model’s perplexity can typically be computed and conditioned on
    between 500 and 10,000 previous tokens, and possibly more,
    upperbounded by the model’s maximum context length.

For reference, it’s not uncommon to see perplexity values as low as 3 or
even lower. If all tokens in a hypothetical language have an equal
chance of happening, a perplexity of 3 means that this model has a 1 in
3 chance of predicting the next token correctly. Given that a model’s
vocabulary is in the order of 10,000s and 100,000s, these odds are
incredible.

Other than guiding the training of language models, perplexity is useful
in many parts of an AI engineering workflow. First, perplexity is a good
proxy for a model’s capabilities. If a model’s bad at predicting the
next token, its performance on downstream tasks will also likely be bad.
OpenAI’s GPT-2 report shows that larger models, which are also more
powerful models, consistently give lower perplexity on a range of
datasets, as shown in Table 3-1. Sadly, following the trend of companies
being increasingly more secretive about their models, many have stopped
reporting their models’ perplexity.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          LAMBADA   LAMBADA   CBT-CN   CBT-NE   WikiText2   PTB     enwiki8   text8   WikiText103   IBW
          (PPL)     (ACC)     (ACC)    (ACC)    (PPL)       (PPL)   (BPB)     (BPC)   (PBL)         (PPL)
  ------- --------- --------- -------- -------- ----------- ------- --------- ------- ------------- --------
  SOTA    99.8      59.23     85.7     82.3     39.14       46.54   0.99      1.08    18.3          21.8

  117M    35.13     45.99     87.65    83.4     29.41       65.85   1.16      1.17    37.50         75.20

  345M    15.60     55.48     92.35    87.1     22.76       47.33   1.01      1.06    26.37         55.72

  762M    10.87     60.12     93.45    88.0     19.93       40.31   0.97      1.02    22.05         44.575

  1542M   8.63      63.24     93.30    89.05    18.34       35.76   0.93      0.98    17.48         42.16
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table 3-1. Larger GPT-2 models consistently give lower perplexity on
  different datasets. Source: OpenAI, 2018.
  {#ch03a_table_1_1730150757038068 .less_space .pagebreak-before}

Warning

Perplexity might not be a great proxy to evaluate models that have been
post-trained using techniques like SFT and RLHF.⁹ Post-training is about
teaching models how to complete tasks. As a model gets better at
completing tasks, it might get worse at predicting the next tokens. A
language model’s perplexity typically increases after post-training.
Some people say that post-training collapses entropy. Similarly,
quantization—a technique that reduces a model’s numerical precision and,
with it, its memory footprint—can also change a model’s perplexity in
unexpected ways.¹⁰

Recall that the perplexity of a model with respect to a text measures
how difficult it is for this model to predict this text. For a given
model, perplexity is the lowest for texts that the model has seen and
memorized during training. Therefore, perplexity can be used to detect
whether a text was in a model’s training data. This is useful for
detecting data contamination—if a model’s perplexity on a benchmark’s
data is low, this benchmark was likely included in the model’s training
data, making the model’s performance on this benchmark less trustworthy.
This can also be used for deduplication of training data: e.g., add new
data to the existing training dataset only if the perplexity of the new
data is high.

Perplexity is the highest for unpredictable texts, such as texts
expressing unusual ideas (like “my dog teaches quantum physics in his
free time”) or gibberish (like “home cat go eye”). Therefore, perplexity
can be used to detect abnormal texts.

Perplexity and its related metrics help us understand the performance of
the underlying language model, which is a proxy for understanding the
model’s performance on downstream tasks. The rest of the chapter
discusses how to measure a model’s performance on downstream tasks
directly.

How to Use a Language Model to Compute a Text’s Perplexity

A model’s perplexity with respect to a text measures how difficult it is
for the model to predict that text. Given a language model X, and a
sequence of tokens [x₁, x₂, ..., x_(n)], X’s perplexity for this
sequence is:

$P\left( x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n} \right)^{- \frac{1}{n}} = \left( \frac{1}{P\left( x_{1},x_{2},â¦,x_{n} \right)} \right)^{\frac{1}{n}} = \left( \prod_{i = 1}^{n}\frac{1}{P\left( x_{i} \middle| x_{1},...,x_{i - 1} \right)} \right)^{\frac{1}{n}}$

where P(x_(i)|x₁, ..., x_(i − 1)) denotes the probability that X assigns
to the token x_(i) given the previous tokens x₁, ..., x_(i − 1).

To compute perplexity, you need access to the probabilities (or
logprobs) the language model assigns to each next token. Unfortunately,
not all commercial models expose their models’ logprobs, as discussed in
Chapter 2.

Exact Evaluation

When evaluating models’ performance, it’s important to differentiate
between exact and subjective evaluation. Exact evaluation produces
judgment without ambiguity. For example, if the answer to a
multiple-choice question is A and you pick B, your answer is wrong.
There’s no ambiguity around that. On the other hand, essay grading is
subjective. An essay’s score depends on who grades the essay. The same
person, if asked twice some time apart, can give the same essay
different scores. Essay grading can become more exact with clear grading
guidelines. As you’ll see in the next section, AI as a judge is
subjective. The evaluation result can change based on the judge model
and the prompt.

I’ll cover two evaluation approaches that produce exact scores:
functional correctness and similarity measurements against reference
data. Note that this section focuses on evaluating open-ended responses
(arbitrary text generation) as opposed to close-ended responses (such as
classification). This is not because foundation models aren’t being used
for close-ended tasks. In fact, many foundation model systems have at
least a classification component, typically for intent classification or
scoring. This section focuses on open-ended evaluation because
close-ended evaluation is already well understood.

Functional Correctness

Functional correctness evaluation means evaluating a system based on
whether it performs the intended functionality. For example, if you ask
a model to create a website, does the generated website meet your
requirements? If you ask a model to make a reservation at a certain
restaurant, does the model succeed?

Functional correctness is the ultimate metric for evaluating the
performance of any application, as it measures whether your application
does what it’s intended to do. However, functional correctness isn’t
always straightforward to measure, and its measurement can’t be easily
automated.

Code generation is an example of a task where functional correctness
measurement can be automated. Functional correctness in coding is
sometimes execution accuracy. Say you ask the model to write a Python
function, gcd(num1, num2), to find the greatest common denominator (gcd)
of two numbers, num1 and num2. The generated code can then be input into
a Python interpreter to check whether the code is valid and if it is,
whether it outputs the correct result of a given pair (num1, num2). For
example, given the pair (num1=15, num2=20), if the function gcd(15, 20)
doesn’t return 5, the correct answer, you know that the function is
wrong.

Long before AI was used for writing code, automatically verifying code’s
functional correctness was standard practice in software engineering.
Code is typically validated with unit tests where code is executed in
different scenarios to ensure that it generates the expected outputs.
Functional correctness evaluation is how coding platforms like LeetCode
and HackerRank validate the submitted solutions.

Popular benchmarks for evaluating AI’s code generation capabilities,
such as OpenAI’s HumanEval and Google’s MBPP (Mostly Basic Python
Problems Dataset) use functional correctness as their metrics.
Benchmarks for text-to-SQL (generating SQL queries from natural
languages) like Spider (Yu et al., 2018), BIRD-SQL (Big Bench for
Large-scale Database Grounded Text-to-SQL Evaluation) (Li et al., 2023),
and WikiSQL (Zhong, et al., 2017) also rely on functional correctness.

A benchmark problem comes with a set of test cases. Each test case
consists of a scenario the code should run and the expected output for
that scenario. Here’s an example of a problem and its test cases in
HumanEval:

    Problem

    from typing import List

    def has_close_elements(numbers: List[float], threshold: float) -> bool:
          """ Check if in given list of numbers, are any two numbers closer to each 
          other than given threshold.
          >>> has_close_elements([1.0, 2.0, 3.0], 0.5) False
          >>> has_close_elements([1.0, 2.8, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 2.0], 0.3) True 
          """

    Test cases (each assert statement represents a test case)

    def check(candidate):
          assert candidate([1.0, 2.0, 3.9, 4.0, 5.0, 2.2], 0.3) == True
          assert candidate([1.0, 2.0, 3.9, 4.0, 5.0, 2.2], 0.05) == False
          assert candidate([1.0, 2.0, 5.9, 4.0, 5.0], 0.95) == True
          assert candidate([1.0, 2.0, 5.9, 4.0, 5.0], 0.8) == False
          assert candidate([1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 2.0], 0.1) == True
          assert candidate([1.1, 2.2, 3.1, 4.1, 5.1], 1.0) == True
          assert candidate([1.1, 2.2, 3.1, 4.1, 5.1], 0.5) == False

When evaluating a model, for each problem a number of code samples,
denoted as k, are generated. A model solves a problem if any of the k
code samples it generated pass all of that problem’s test cases. The
final score, called pass@k, is the fraction of the solved problems out
of all problems. If there are 10 problems and a model solves 5 with k =
3, then that model’s pass@3 score is 50%. The more code samples a model
generates, the more chance the model has at solving each problem, hence
the greater the final score. This means that in expectation, pass@1
score should be lower than pass@3, which, in turn, should be lower than
pass@10.

Another category of tasks whose functional correctness can be
automatically evaluated is game bots. If you create a bot to play
Tetris, you can tell how good the bot is by the score it gets. Tasks
with measurable objectives can typically be evaluated using functional
correctness. For example, if you ask AI to schedule your workloads to
optimize energy consumption, the AI’s performance can be measured by how
much energy it saves.¹¹

Similarity Measurements Against Reference Data

If the task you care about can’t be automatically evaluated using
functional correctness, one common approach is to evaluate AI’s outputs
against reference data. For example, if you ask a model to translate a
sentence from French to English, you can evaluate the generated English
translation against the correct English translation.

Each example in the reference data follows the format (input, reference
responses). An input can have multiple reference responses, such as
multiple possible English translations of a French sentence. Reference
responses are also called ground truths or canonical responses. Metrics
that require references are reference-based, and metrics that don’t are
reference-free.

Since this evaluation approach requires reference data, it’s
bottlenecked by how much and how fast reference data can be generated.
Reference data is generated typically by humans and increasingly by AIs.
Using human-generated data as the reference means that we treat human
performance as the gold standard, and AI’s performance is measured
against human performance. Human-generated data can be expensive and
time-consuming to generate, leading many to use AI to generate reference
data instead. AI-generated data might still need human reviews, but the
labor needed to review it is much less than the labor needed to generate
reference data from scratch.

Generated responses that are more similar to the reference responses are
considered better. There are four ways to measure the similarity between
two open-ended texts:

1.  Asking an evaluator to make the judgment whether two texts are the
    same

2.  Exact match: whether the generated response matches one of the
    reference responses exactly

3.  Lexical similarity: how similar the generated response looks to the
    reference responses

4.  Semantic similarity: how close the generated response is to the
    reference responses in meaning (semantics)

Two responses can be compared by human evaluators or AI evaluators. AI
evaluators are increasingly common and will be the focus of the next
section.

This section focuses on hand-designed metrics: exact match, lexical
similarity, and semantic similarity. Scores by exact matching are binary
(match or not), whereas the other two scores are on a sliding scale
(such as between 0 and 1 or between –1 and 1). Despite the ease of use
and flexibility of the AI as a judge approach, hand-designed similarity
measurements are still widely used in the industry for their exact
nature.

Note

This section discusses how you can use similarity measurements to
evaluate the quality of a generated output. However, you can also use
similarity measurements for many other use cases, including but not
limited to the following:

Retrieval and search

    find items similar to a query

Ranking

    rank items based on how similar they are to a query

Clustering

    cluster items based on how similar they are to each other

Anomaly detection

    detect items that are the least similar to the rest

Data deduplication

    remove items that are too similar to other items

Techniques discussed in this section will come up again throughout the
book.

Exact match

It’s considered an exact match if the generated response matches one of
the reference responses exactly. Exact matching works for tasks that
expect short, exact responses such as simple math problems, common
knowledge queries, and trivia-style questions. Here are examples of
inputs that have short, exact responses:

- “What’s 2 + 3?”

- “Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize?”

- “What’s my current account balance?”

- “Fill in the blank: Paris to France is like ___ to England.”

There are variations to matching that take into account formatting
issues. One variation is to accept any output that contains the
reference response as a match. Consider the question “What’s 2 + 3?” The
reference response is “5”. This variation accepts all outputs that
contain “5”, including “The answer is 5” and “2 + 3 is 5”.

However, this variation can sometimes lead to the wrong solution being
accepted. Consider the question “What year was Anne Frank born?” Anne
Frank was born on June 12, 1929, so the correct response is 1929. If the
model outputs “September 12, 1929”, the correct year is included in the
output, but the output is factually wrong.

Beyond simple tasks, exact match rarely works. Given the original French
sentence “Comment ça va?”, there are multiple possible English
translations, such as “How are you?”, “How is everything?”, and “How are
you doing?” If the reference data contains only these three translations
and a model generates “How is it going?”, the model’s response will be
marked as wrong. The longer and more complex the original text, the more
possible translations there are. It’s impossible to create an exhaustive
set of possible responses for an input. For complex tasks, lexical
similarity and semantic similarity work better.

Lexical similarity

Lexical similarity measures how much two texts overlap. You can do this
by first breaking each text into smaller tokens.

In its simplest form, lexical similarity can be measured by counting how
many tokens two texts have in common. As an example, consider the
reference response “My cats scare the mice” and two generated responses:

- “My cats eat the mice”

- “Cats and mice fight all the time”

Assume that each token is a word. If you count overlapping of individual
words only, response A contains 4 out of 5 words in the reference
response (the similarity score is 80%), whereas response B contains only
3 out of 5 (the similarity score is 60%). Response A is, therefore,
considered more similar to the reference response.

One way to measure lexical similarity is approximate string matching,
known colloquially as fuzzy matching. It measures the similarity between
two texts by counting how many edits it’d need to convert from one text
to another, a number called edit distance. The usual three edit
operations are:

1.  Deletion: “brad” -> “bad”

2.  Insertion: “bad” -> “bard”

3.  Substitution: “bad” -> “bed”

Some fuzzy matchers also treat transposition, swapping two letters
(e.g., “mats” -> “mast”), to be an edit. However, some fuzzy matchers
treat each transposition as two edit operations: one deletion and one
insertion.

For example, “bad” is one edit to “bard” and three edits to “cash”, so
“bad” is considered more similar to “bard” than to “cash”.

Another way to measure lexical similarity is n-gram similarity, measured
based on the overlapping of sequences of tokens, n-grams, instead of
single tokens. A 1-gram (unigram) is a token. A 2-gram (bigram) is a set
of two tokens. “My cats scare the mice” consists of four bigrams: “my
cats”, “cats scare”, “scare the”, and “the mice”. You measure what
percentage of n-grams in reference responses is also in the generated
response.¹²

Common metrics for lexical similarity are BLEU, ROUGE, METEOR++, TER,
and CIDEr. They differ in exactly how the overlapping is calculated.
Before foundation models, BLEU, ROUGE, and their relatives were common,
especially for translation tasks. Since the rise of foundation models,
fewer benchmarks use lexical similarity. Examples of benchmarks that use
these metrics are WMT, COCO Captions, and GEMv2.

A drawback of this method is that it requires curating a comprehensive
set of reference responses. A good response can get a low similarity
score if the reference set doesn’t contain any response that looks like
it. On some benchmark examples, Adept found that its model Fuyu
performed poorly not because the model’s outputs were wrong, but because
some correct answers were missing in the reference data. Figure 3-5
shows an example of an image-captioning task in which Fuyu generated a
correct caption but was given a low score.

Not only that, but references can be wrong. For example, the organizers
of the WMT 2023 Metrics shared task, which focuses on examining
evaluation metrics for machine translation, reported that they found
many bad reference translations in their data. Low-quality reference
data is one of the reasons that reference-free metrics were strong
contenders for reference-based metrics in terms of correlation to human
judgment (Freitag et al., 2023).

Another drawback of this measurement is that higher lexical similarity
scores don’t always mean better responses. For example, on HumanEval, a
code generation benchmark, OpenAI found that BLEU scores for incorrect
and correct solutions were similar. This indicates that optimizing for
BLEU scores isn’t the same as optimizing for functional correctness
(Chen et al., 2021).

[A screenshot of a computer Description automatically generated]

Figure 3-5. An example where Fuyu generated a correct option but was given a low score because of the limitation of reference captions.

Semantic similarity

Lexical similarity measures whether two texts look similar, not whether
they have the same meaning. Consider the two sentences “What’s up?” and
“How are you?” Lexically, they are different—there’s little overlapping
in the words and letters they use. However, semantically, they are
close. Conversely, similar-looking texts can mean very different things.
“Let’s eat, grandma” and “Let’s eat grandma” mean two completely
different things.

Semantic similarity aims to compute the similarity in semantics. This
first requires transforming a text into a numerical representation,
which is called an embedding. For example, the sentence “the cat sits on
a mat” might be represented using an embedding that looks like this:
[0.11, 0.02, 0.54]. Semantic similarity is, therefore, also called
embedding similarity.

“Introduction to Embedding” discusses how embeddings work. For now,
let’s assume that you have a way to transform texts into embeddings. The
similarity between two embeddings can be computed using metrics such as
cosine similarity. Two embeddings that are exactly the same have a
similarity score of 1. Two opposite embeddings have a similarity score
of –1.

I’m using text examples, but semantic similarity can be computed for
embeddings of any data modality, including images and audio. Semantic
similarity for text is sometimes called semantic textual similarity.

Warning

While I put semantic similarity in the exact evaluation category, it can
be considered subjective, as different embedding algorithms can produce
different embeddings. However, given two embeddings, the similarity
score between them is computed exactly.

Mathematically, let A be an embedding of the generated response, and B
be an embedding of a reference response. The cosine similarity between A
and B is computed as fracA ⋅ B||A||||B||, with:

- A ⋅ B being the dot product of A and B
- ||A|| being the Euclidean norm (also known as L² norm) of A. If A is
  [0.11, 0.02, 0.54],
  $\left| \middle| A \middle| \right| = \sqrt{0.11^{2} + 0.02^{2} + 0.54^{2}}$

Metrics for semantic textual similarity include BERTScore (embeddings
are generated by BERT) and MoverScore (embeddings are generated by a
mixture of algorithms).

Semantic textual similarity doesn’t require a set of reference responses
as comprehensive as lexical similarity does. However, the reliability of
semantic similarity depends on the quality of the underlying embedding
algorithm. Two texts with the same meaning can still have a low semantic
similarity score if their embeddings are bad. Another drawback of this
measurement is that the underlying embedding algorithm might require
nontrivial compute and time to run.

Before we move on to discuss AI as a judge, let’s go over a quick
introduction to embedding. The concept of embedding lies at the heart
semantic similarity, and is the backbone of many topics we explore
throughout the book, including vector search in Chapter 6 and data
deduplication in Chapter 8.

Introduction to Embedding

Since computers work with numbers, a model needs to convert its input
into numerical representations that computers can process. An embedding
is a numerical representation that aims to capture the meaning of the
original data.

An embedding is a vector. For example, the sentence “the cat sits on a
mat” might be represented using an embedding vector that looks like
this: [0.11, 0.02, 0.54]. Here, I use a small vector as an example. In
reality, the size of an embedding vector (the number of elements in the
embedding vector) is typically between 100 and 10,000.¹³

Models trained especially to produce embeddings include the open source
models BERT, CLIP (Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training), and
Sentence Transformers. There are also proprietary embedding models
provided as APIs.¹⁴ Table 3-2 shows the embedding sizes of some popular
models.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Model                               Embedding size
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Google’s BERT                       BERT base: 768
                                      BERT large: 1024

  OpenAI’s CLIP                       Image: 512
                                      Text: 512

  OpenAI Embeddings API               text-embedding-3-small: 1536
                                      text-embedding-3-large: 3072

  Cohere’s Embed v3                   embed-english-v3.0: 1024
                                      embed-english-light-3.0: 384
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table 3-2. Embedding sizes used by common models.
  {#ch03a_table_2_1730150757038080}

Because models typically require their inputs to first be transformed
into vector representations, many ML models, including GPTs and Llamas,
also involve a step to generate embeddings. “Transformer architecture”
visualizes the embedding layer in a transformer model. If you have
access to the intermediate layers of these models, you can use them to
extract embeddings. However, the quality of these embeddings might not
be as good as the embeddings generated by specialized embedding models.

The goal of the embedding algorithm is to produce embeddings that
capture the essence of the original data. How do we verify that? The
embedding vector [0.11, 0.02, 0.54] looks nothing like the original text
“the cat sits on a mat”.

At a high level, an embedding algorithm is considered good if
more-similar texts have closer embeddings, measured by cosine similarity
or related metrics. The embedding of the sentence “the cat sits on a
mat” should be closer to the embedding of “the dog plays on the grass”
than the embedding of “AI research is super fun”.

You can also evaluate the quality of embeddings based on their utility
for your task. Embeddings are used in many tasks, including
classification, topic modeling, recommender systems, and RAG. An example
of benchmarks that measure embedding quality on multiple tasks is MTEB,
Massive Text Embedding Benchmark (Muennighoff et al., 2023).

I use texts as examples, but any data can have embedding
representations. For example, ecommerce solutions like Criteo and Coveo
have embeddings for products. Pinterest has embeddings for images,
graphs, queries, and even users.

A new frontier is to create joint embeddings for data of different
modalities. CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) was one of the first major
models that could map data of different modalities, text and images,
into a joint embedding space. ULIP (unified representation of language,
images, and point clouds), (Xue et al., 2022) aims to create unified
representations of text, images, and 3D point clouds. ImageBind (Girdhar
et al., 2023) learns a joint embedding across six different modalities,
including text, images, and audio.

Figure 3-6 visualizes CLIP’s architecture. CLIP is trained using (image,
text) pairs. The text corresponding to an image can be the caption or a
comment associated with this image. For each (image, text) pair, CLIP
uses a text encoder to convert the text to a text embedding, and an
image encoder to convert the image to an image embedding. It then
projects both these embeddings into a joint embedding space. The
training goal is to get the embedding of an image close to the embedding
of the corresponding text in this joint space.

[A diagram of a computer Description automatically generated]

Figure 3-6. CLIP’s architecture (Radford et al., 2021).

A joint embedding space that can represent data of different modalities
is a multimodal embedding space. In a text–image joint embedding space,
the embedding of an image of a man fishing should be closer to the
embedding of the text “a fisherman” than the embedding of the text
“fashion show”. This joint embedding space allows embeddings of
different modalities to be compared and combined. For example, this
enables text-based image search. Given a text, it helps you find images
closest to this text.

AI as a Judge

The challenges of evaluating open-ended responses have led many teams to
fall back on human evaluation. As AI has successfully been used to
automate many challenging tasks, can AI automate evaluation as well? The
approach of using AI to evaluate AI is called AI as a judge or LLM as a
judge. An AI model that is used to evaluate other AI models is called an
AI judge.¹⁵

While the idea of using AI to automate evaluation has been around for a
long time,¹⁶ it only became practical when AI models became capable of
doing so, which was around 2020 with the release of GPT-3. As of this
writing, AI as a judge has become one of the most, if not the most,
common methods for evaluating AI models in production. Most demos of AI
evaluation startups I saw in 2023 and 2024 leveraged AI as a judge in
one way or another. LangChain’s State of AI report in 2023 noted that
58% of evaluations on their platform were done by AI judges. AI as a
judge is also an active area of research.

Why AI as a Judge?

AI judges are fast, easy to use, and relatively cheap compared to human
evaluators. They can also work without reference data, which means they
can be used in production environments where there is no reference data.

You can ask AI models to judge an output based on any criteria:
correctness, repetitiveness, toxicity, wholesomeness, hallucinations,
and more. This is similar to how you can ask a person to give their
opinion about anything. You might think, “But you can’t always trust
people’s opinions.” That’s true, and you can’t always trust AI’s
judgments, either. However, as each AI model is an aggregation of the
masses, it’s possible for AI models to make judgments representative of
the masses. With the right prompt for the right model, you can get
reasonably good judgments on a wide range of topics.

Studies have shown that certain AI judges are strongly correlated to
human evaluators. In 2023, Zheng et al. found that on their evaluation
benchmark, MT-Bench, the agreement between GPT-4 and humans reached 85%,
which is even higher than the agreement among humans (81%). AlpacaEval
authors (Dubois et al., 2023) also found that their AI judges have a
near perfect (0.98) correlation with LMSYS’s Chat Arena leaderboard,
which is evaluated by humans.

Not only can AI evaluate a response, but it can also explain its
decision, which can be especially useful when you want to audit your
evaluation results. Figure 3-7 shows an example of GPT-4 explaining its
judgment.

Its flexibility makes AI as a judge useful for a wide range of
applications, and for some applications, it’s the only automatic
evaluation option. Even when AI judgments aren’t as good as human
judgments, they might still be good enough to guide an application’s
development and provide sufficient confidence to get a project off the
ground.

[A screenshot of a paper Description automatically generated]

Figure 3-7. Not only can AI judges score, they also can explain their decisions.

How to Use AI as a Judge

There are many ways you can use AI to make judgments. For example, you
can use AI to evaluate the quality of a response by itself, compare that
response to reference data, or compare that response to another
response. Here are naive example prompts for these three approaches:

1.  Evaluate the quality of a response by itself, given the original
    question:

        “Given the following question and answer, evaluate how good the answer is
        for the question. Use the score from 1 to 5.
        - 1 means very bad.
        - 5 means very good.
        Question: [QUESTION]
        Answer: [ANSWER]
        Score:”

2.  Compare a generated response to a reference response to evaluate
    whether the generated response is the same as the reference
    response. This can be an alternative approach to human-designed
    similarity measurements:

        “Given the following question, reference answer, and generated answer,
        evaluate whether this generated answer is the same as the reference answer. 
        Output True or False.
        Question: [QUESTION]
        Reference answer: [REFERENCE ANSWER]
        Generated answer: [GENERATED ANSWER]”

3.  Compare two generated responses and determine which one is better or
    predict which one users will likely prefer. This is helpful for
    generating preference data for post-training alignment (discussed in
    Chapter 2), test-time compute (discussed in Chapter 2), and ranking
    models using comparative evaluation (discussed in the next section):

        “Given the following question and two answers, evaluate which answer is
        better. Output A or B.
        Question: [QUESTION]
        A: [FIRST ANSWER]
        B: [SECOND ANSWER]
        The better answer is:”

A general-purpose AI judge can be asked to evaluate a response based on
any criteria. If you’re building a roleplaying chatbot, you might want
to evaluate if a chatbot’s response is consistent with the role users
want it to play, such as “Does this response sound like something
Gandalf would say?” If you’re building an application to generate
promotional product photos, you might want to ask “From 1 to 5, how
would you rate the trustworthiness of the product in this image?”
Table 3-3 shows common built-in AI as a judge criteria offered by some
AI tools.

  AI Tools                        Built-in criteria
  ------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Azure AI Studio                 Groundedness, relevance, coherence, fluency, similarity
  MLflow.metrics                  Faithfulness, relevance
  LangChain Criteria Evaluation   Conciseness, relevance, correctness, coherence, harmfulness, maliciousness, helpfulness, controversiality, misogyny, insensitivity, criminality
  Ragas                           Faithfulness, answer relevance

  : Table 3-3. Examples of built-in AI as a judge criteria offered by
  some AI tools, as of September 2024. Note that as these tools evolve,
  these built-in criteria will change. {#ch03a_table_3_1730150757038092}

It’s essential to remember that AI as a judge criteria aren’t
standardized. Azure AI Studio’s relevance scores might be very different
from MLflow’s relevance scores. These scores depend on the judge’s
underlying model and prompt.

How to prompt an AI judge is similar to how to prompt any AI
application. In general, a judge’s prompt should clearly explain the
following:

1.  The task the model is to perform, such as to evaluate the relevance
    between a generated answer and the question.

2.  The criteria the model should follow to evaluate, such as “Your
    primary focus should be on determining whether the generated answer
    contains sufficient information to address the given question
    according to the ground truth answer”. The more detailed the
    instruction, the better.

3.  The scoring system, which can be one of these:

    - Classification, such as good/bad or relevant/irrelevant/neutral.

    - Discrete numerical values, such as 1 to 5. Discrete numerical
      values can be considered a special case of classification, where
      each class has a numerical interpretation instead of a semantic
      interpretation.

    - Continuous numerical values, such as between 0 and 1, e.g., when
      you want to evaluate the degree of similarity.

Tip

Language models are generally better with text than with numbers. It’s
been reported that AI judges work better with classification than with
numerical scoring systems.

For numerical scoring systems, discrete scoring seems to work better
than continuous scoring. Empirically, the wider the range for discrete
scoring, the worse the model seems to get. Typical discrete scoring
systems are between 1 and 5.

Prompts with examples have been shown to perform better. If you use a
scoring system between 1 and 5, include examples of what a response with
a score of 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 looks like, and if possible, why a response
receives a certain score. Best practices for prompting are discussed in
Chapter 5.

Here’s part of the prompt used for the criteria relevance by Azure AI
Studio. It explains the task, the criteria, the scoring system, an
example of an input with a low score, and a justification for why this
input has a low score. Part of the prompt was removed for brevity.

    Your task is to score the relevance between a generated answer and the question
    based on the ground truth answer in the range between 1 and 5, and please also 
    provide the scoring reason.

    Your primary focus should be on determining whether the generated answer
    contains sufficient information to address the given question according to the 
    ground truth answer. …

    If the generated answer contradicts the ground truth answer, it will receive a 
    low score of 1-2.

    For example, for the question "Is the sky blue?" the ground truth answer is "Yes, 
    the sky is blue." and the generated answer is "No, the sky is not blue."

    In this example, the generated answer contradicts the ground truth answer by 
    stating that the sky is not blue, when in fact it is blue.

    This inconsistency would result in a low score of 1–2, and the reason for the 
    low score would reflect the contradiction between the generated answer and the 
    ground truth answer.
              

Figure 3-8 shows an example of an AI judge that evaluates the quality of
an answer when given the question.

[A diagram of a question Description automatically generated]

Figure 3-8. An example of an AI judge that evaluates the quality of an answer given a question.

An AI judge is not just a model—it’s a system that includes both a model
and a prompt. Altering the model, the prompt, or the model’s sampling
parameters results in a different judge.

Limitations of AI as a Judge

Despite the many advantages of AI as a judge, many teams are hesitant to
adopt this approach. Using AI to evaluate AI seems tautological. The
probabilistic nature of AI makes it seem too unreliable to act as an
evaluator. AI judges can potentially introduce nontrivial costs and
latency to an application. Given these limitations, some teams see AI as
a judge as a fallback option when they don’t have any other way of
evaluating their systems, especially in production.

Inconsistency

For an evaluation method to be trustworthy, its results should be
consistent. Yet AI judges, like all AI applications, are probabilistic.
The same judge, on the same input, can output different scores if
prompted differently. Even the same judge, prompted with the same
instruction, can output different scores if run twice. This
inconsistency makes it hard to reproduce or trust evaluation results.

It’s possible to get an AI judge to be more consistent. Chapter 2
discusses how to do so with sampling variables. Zheng et al. (2023)
showed that including evaluation examples in the prompt can increase the
consistency of GPT-4 from 65% to 77.5%. However, they acknowledged that
high consistency may not imply high accuracy—the judge might
consistently make the same mistakes. On top of that, including more
examples makes prompts longer, and longer prompts mean higher inference
costs. In Zheng et al.’s experiment, including more examples in their
prompts caused their GPT-4 spending to quadruple.

Criteria ambiguity

Unlike many human-designed metrics, AI as a judge metrics aren’t
standardized, making it easy to misinterpret and misuse them. As of this
writing, the open source tools MLflow, Ragas, and LlamaIndex all have
the built-in criterion faithfulness to measure how faithful a generated
output is to the given context, but their instructions and scoring
systems are all different. As shown in Table 3-4, MLflow uses a scoring
system from 1 to 5, Ragas uses 0 and 1, whereas LlamaIndex’s prompt asks
the judge to output YES and NO.

+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Tool                  | Prompt                                                                                                                                                      | Scoring system        |
|                       | [partially omitted for brevity]                                                                                                                             |                       |
+=======================+=============================================================================================================================================================+=======================+
| MLflow                | Faithfulness is only evaluated with the provided output and provided context, please ignore the provided input entirely when scoring faithfulness.          | 1–5                   |
|                       | Faithfulness assesses how much of the provided output is factually consistent with the provided context.…                                                   |                       |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                             |                       |
|                       | Faithfulness: Below are the details for different scores:                                                                                                   |                       |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                             |                       |
|                       | - Score 1: None of the claims in the output can be inferred from the provided context.                                                                      |                       |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                             |                       |
|                       | - Score 2: …                                                                                                                                                |                       |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Ragas                 | Your task is to judge the faithfulness of a series of statements based on a given context. For each statement you must return verdict as 1 if the statement | 0 and 1               |
|                       | can be verified based on the context or 0 if the statement can not be verified based on the context.                                                        |                       |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+
| LlamaIndex            | Please tell if a given piece of information is supported by the context.                                                                                    | YES and NO            |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                             |                       |
|                       | You need to answer with either YES or NO.                                                                                                                   |                       |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                             |                       |
|                       | Answer YES if any of the context  supports the information, even if most of the context is unrelated. Some examples are  provided below.                    |                       |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                             |                       |
|                       | Information: Apple pie is generally double-crusted.                                                                                                         |                       |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                             |                       |
|                       | Context: An apple pie is a fruit pie… It is generally double-crusted, with pastry both above and below the filling ...                                      |                       |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                             |                       |
|                       | Answer: YES                                                                                                                                                 |                       |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+

: Table 3-4. Different tools can have very difficult default prompts for
the same criteria. {#ch03a_table_4_1730150757038100}

The faithfulness scores outputted by these three tools won’t be
comparable. If, given a (context, answer) pair, MLflow gives a
faithfulness score of 3, Ragas outputs 1, and LlamaIndex outputs NO,
which score would you use?

An application evolves over time, but the way it’s evaluated ideally
should be fixed. This way, evaluation metrics can be used to monitor the
application’s changes. However, AI judges are also AI applications,
which means that they also can change over time.

Imagine that last month, your application’s coherence score was 90%, and
this month, this score is 92%. Does this mean that your application’s
coherence has improved? It’s hard to answer this question unless you
know for sure that the AI judges used in both cases are exactly the
same. What if the judge’s prompt this month is different from the one
last month? Maybe you switched to a slightly better-performing prompt or
a coworker fixed a typo in last month’s prompt, and the judge this month
is more lenient.

This can become especially confusing if the application and the AI judge
are managed by different teams. The AI judge team might change the
judges without informing the application team. As a result, the
application team might mistakenly attribute the changes in the
evaluation results to changes in the application, rather than the
changes in the judges.

Tip

Do not trust any AI judge if you can’t see the model and the prompt used
for the judge.

Evaluation methods take time to standardize. As the field evolves and
more guardrails are introduced, I hope that future AI judges will become
a lot more standardized and reliable.

Increased costs and latency

You can use AI judges to evaluate applications both during
experimentation and in production. Many teams use AI judges as
guardrails in production to reduce risks, showing users only generated
responses deemed good by the AI judge.

Using powerful models to evaluate responses can be expensive. If you use
GPT-4 to both generate and evaluate responses, you’ll do twice as many
GPT-4 calls, approximately doubling your API costs. If you have three
evaluation prompts because you want to evaluate three criteria—say,
overall response quality, factual consistency, and toxicity—you’ll
increase your number of API calls four times.¹⁷

You can reduce costs by using weaker models as the judges (see “What
Models Can Act as Judges?”.) You can also reduce costs with
spot-checking: evaluating only a subset of responses.¹⁸ Spot-checking
means you might fail to catch some failures. The larger the percentage
of samples you evaluate, the more confidence you will have in your
evaluation results, but also the higher the costs. Finding the right
balance between cost and confidence might take trial and error. This
process is discussed further in Chapter 4. All things considered, AI
judges are much cheaper than human evaluators.

Implementing AI judges in your production pipeline can add latency. If
you evaluate responses before returning them to users, you face a
trade-off: reduced risk but increased latency. The added latency might
make this option a nonstarter for applications with strict latency
requirements.

Biases of AI as a judge

Human evaluators have biases, and so do AI judges. Different AI judges
have different biases. This section will discuss some of the common
ones. Being aware of your AI judges’ biases helps you interpret their
scores correctly and even mitigate these biases.

AI judges tend to have self-bias, where a model favors its own responses
over the responses generated by other models. The same mechanism that
helps a model compute the most likely response to generate will also
give this response a high score. In Zheng et al.’s 2023 experiment,
GPT-4 favors itself with a 10% higher win rate, while Claude-v1 favors
itself with a 25% higher win rate.

Many AI models have first-position bias. An AI judge may favor the first
answer in a pairwise comparison or the first in a list of options. This
can be mitigated by repeating the same test multiple times with
different orderings or with carefully crafted prompts. The position bias
of AI is the opposite of that of humans. Humans tend to favor the answer
they see last, which is called recency bias.

Some AI judges have verbosity bias, favoring lengthier answers,
regardless of their quality. Wu and Aji (2023) found that both GPT-4 and
Claude-1 prefer longer responses (~100 words) with factual errors over
shorter, correct responses (~50 words). Saito et al. (2023) studied this
bias for creative tasks and found that when the length difference is
large enough (e.g., one response is twice as long as the other), the
judge almost always prefers the longer one.¹⁹ Both Zheng et al. (2023)
and Saito et al. (2023), however, discovered that GPT-4 is less prone to
this bias than GPT-3.5, suggesting that this bias might go away as
models become stronger.

On top of all these biases, AI judges have the same limitations as all
AI applications, including privacy and IP. If you use a proprietary
model as your judge, you’d need to send your data to this model. If the
model provider doesn’t disclose their training data, you won’t know for
sure if the judge is commercially safe to use.

Despite the limitations of the AI as a judge approach, its many
advantages make me believe that its adoption will continue to grow.
However, AI judges should be supplemented with exact evaluation methods
and/or human evaluation.

What Models Can Act as Judges?

The judge can either be stronger, weaker, or the same as the model being
judged. Each scenario has its pros and cons.

At first glance, a stronger judge makes sense. Shouldn’t the exam grader
be more knowledgeable than the exam taker? Not only can stronger models
make better judgments, but they can also help improve weaker models by
guiding them to generate better responses.

You might wonder: if you already have access to the stronger model, why
bother using a weaker model to generate responses? The answer is cost
and latency. You might not have the budget to use the stronger model to
generate all responses, so you use it to evaluate a subset of responses.
For example, you may use a cheap in-house model to generate responses
and GPT-4 to evaluate 1% of the responses.

The stronger model also might be too slow for your application. You can
use a fast model to generate responses while the stronger, but slower,
model does evaluation in the background. If the strong model thinks that
the weak model’s response is bad, remedy actions might be taken, such as
updating the response with that of the strong model. Note that the
opposite pattern is also common. You use a strong model to generate
responses, with a weak model running in the background to do evaluation.

Using the stronger model as a judge leaves us with two challenges.
First, the strongest model will be left with no eligible judge. Second,
we need an alternative evaluation method to determine which model is the
strongest.

Using a model to judge itself, self-evaluation or self-critique, sounds
like cheating, especially because of self-bias. However, self-evaluation
can be great for sanity checks. If a model thinks its own response is
incorrect, the model might not be that reliable. Beyond sanity checks,
asking a model to evaluate itself can nudge a model to revise and
improve its responses (Press et al., 2022; Gou et al., 2023; Valmeekamet
et al., 2023).²⁰ This example shows what self-evaluation might look
like:

    Prompt [from user]: What’s 10+3?
    First response [from AI]: 30
    Self-critique [from AI]: Is this answer correct?
    Final response [from AI]: No it’s not. The correct answer is 13.
              

One open question is whether the judge can be weaker than the model
being judged. Some argue that judging is an easier task than generating.
Anyone can have an opinion about whether a song is good, but not
everyone can write a song. Weaker models should be able to judge the
outputs of stronger models.

Zheng et al. (2023) found that stronger models are better correlated to
human preference, which makes people opt for the strongest models they
can afford. However, this experiment was limited to general-purpose
judges. One research direction that I’m excited about is small,
specialized judges. Specialized judges are trained to make specific
judgments, using specific criteria and following specific scoring
systems. A small, specialized judge can be more reliable than larger,
general-purpose judges for specific judgments.

Because there are many possible ways to use AI judges, there are many
possible specialized AI judges. Here, I’ll go over examples of three
specialized judges: reward models, reference-based judges, and
preference models:

Reward model

    A reward model takes in a (prompt, response) pair and scores how
    good the response is given the prompt. Reward models have been
    successfully used in RLHF for many years. Cappy is an example of a
    reward model developed by Google (2023). Given a pair of (prompt,
    response), Cappy produces a score between 0 and 1, indicating how
    correct the response is. Cappy is a lightweight scorer with 360
    million parameters, much smaller than general-purpose foundation
    models.

Reference-based judge

    A reference-based judge evaluates the generated response with
    respect to one or more reference responses. This judge can output a
    similarity score or a quality score (how good the generated response
    is compared to the reference responses). For example, BLEURT (Sellam
    et al., 2020) takes in a (candidate response, reference response)
    pair and outputs a similarity score between the candidate and
    reference response.²¹ Prometheus (Kim et al., 2023) takes in
    (prompt, generated response, reference response, scoring rubric) and
    outputs a quality score between 1 and 5, assuming that the reference
    response gets a 5.

Preference model

    A preference model takes in (prompt, response 1, response 2) as
    input and outputs which of the two responses is better (preferred by
    users) for the given prompt. This is perhaps one of the more
    exciting directions for specialized judges. Being able to predict
    human preference opens up many possibilities. As discussed in
    Chapter 2, preference data is essential for aligning AI models to
    human preference, and it’s challenging and expensive to obtain.
    Having a good human preference predictor can generally make
    evaluation easier and models safer to use. There have been many
    initiatives in building preference models, including PandaLM (Wang
    et al., 2023) and JudgeLM (Zhu et al., 2023). Figure 3-9 shows an
    example of how PandaLM works. It not only outputs which response is
    better but also explains its rationale.

    [A diagram of a diagram Description automatically generated]
    Figure 3-9. An example output of PandaLM, given a human prompt and two generated responses. Picture from Wang et al. (2023), modified slightly for readability. The original image is available under the Apache License 2.0.

Despite its limitations, the AI as a judge approach is versatile and
powerful. Using cheaper models as judges makes it even more useful. Many
of my colleagues, who were initially skeptical, have started to rely on
it more in production.

AI as a judge is exciting, and the next approach we’ll discuss is just
as intriguing. It’s inspired by game design, a fascinating field..

Ranking Models with Comparative Evaluation

Often, you evaluate models not because you care about their scores, but
because you want to know which model is the best for you. What you want
is a ranking of these models. You can rank models using either pointwise
evaluation or comparative evaluation.

With pointwise evaluation, you evaluate each model independently,²² then
rank them by their scores. For example, if you want to find out which
dancer is the best, you evaluate each dancer individually, give them a
score, then pick the dancer with the highest score.

With comparative evaluation, you evaluate models against each other and
compute a ranking from comparison results. For the same dancing contest,
you can ask all candidates to dance side-by-side and ask the judges
which candidate’s dancing they like the most, and pick the dancer
preferred by most judges.

For responses whose quality is subjective, comparative evaluation is
typically easier to do than pointwise evaluation. For example, it’s
easier to tell which song of the two songs is better than to give each
song a concrete score.

In AI, comparative evaluation was first used in 2021 by Anthropic to
rank different models. It also powers the popular LMSYS’s Chatbot Arena
leaderboard that ranks models using scores computed from pairwise model
comparisons from the community.

Many model providers use comparative evaluation to evaluate their models
in production. Figure 3-10 shows an example of ChatGPT asking its users
to compare two outputs side by side. These outputs could be generated by
different models, or by the same model with different sampling
variables.

[A screenshot of a dictionary Description automatically generated]

Figure 3-10. ChatGPT occasionally asks users to compare two outputs side by side.

For each request, two or more models are selected to respond. An
evaluator, which can be human or AI, picks the winner. Many developers
allow for ties to avoid a winner being picked at random when drafts are
equally good or bad.

A very important thing to keep in mind is that not all questions should
be answered by preference. Many questions should be answered by
correctness instead. Imagine asking the model “Is there a link between
cell phone radiation and brain tumors?” and the model presents two
options, “Yes” and “No”, for you to choose from. Preference-based voting
can lead to wrong signals that, if used to train your model, can result
in misaligned behaviors.

Asking users to pick can also cause user frustration. Imagine asking the
model a math question because you don’t know the answer, and the model
gives you two different answers and asks you to pick the one you prefer.
If you had known the right answer, you wouldn’t have asked the model in
the first place.

When collecting comparative feedback from users, one challenge is to
determine what questions can be determined by preference voting and what
shouldn’t be. Preference-based voting only works if the voters are
knowledgeable in the subject. This approach generally works in
applications where AI serves as an intern or assistant, helping users
speed up tasks they know how to do—and not where users ask AI to perform
tasks they themselves don’t know how to do.

Comparative evaluation shouldn’t be confused with A/B testing. In A/B
testing, a user sees the output from one candidate model at a time. In
comparative evaluation, a user sees outputs from multiple models at the
same time.

Each comparison is called a match. This process results in a series of
comparisons, as shown in Table 3-5.

  Match #   Model A   Model B    Winner
  --------- --------- ---------- ----------
  1         Model 1   Model 2    Model 1
  2         Model 3   Model 10   Model 10
  3         Model 7   Model 4    Model 4
  …                              

  : Table 3-5. Examples of a history of pairwise model comparisons.
  {#ch03a_table_5_1730150757038107}

The probability that model A is preferred over model B is the win rate
of A over B. We can compute this win rate by looking at all matches
between A and B and calculating the percentage in which A wins.

If there are only two models, ranking them is straightforward. The model
that wins more often ranks higher. The more models there are, the more
challenging ranking becomes. Let’s say that we have five models with the
empirical win rates between model pairs, as shown in Table 3-6. It’s not
obvious, from looking at the data, how these five models should be
ranked.

  Model pair #   Model A   Model B   # matches   A >> B
  -------------- --------- --------- ----------- --------
  1              Model 1   Model 2   1000        90%
  2              Model 1   Model 3   1000        40%
  3              Model 1   Model 4   1000        15%
  4              Model 1   Model 5   1000        10%
  5              Model 2   Model 3   1000        60%
  6              Model 2   Model 4   1000        80%
  7              Model 2   Model 5   1000        80%
  8              Model 3   Model 4   1000        70%
  9              Model 3   Model 5   1000        10%
  10             Model 4   Model 5   1000        20%

  : Table 3-6. Example win rates of five models. The A >> B column
  denotes the event that A is preferred to B.
  {#ch03a_table_6_1730150757038117 .less_space .pagebreak-before}

Given comparative signals, a rating algorithm is then used to compute a
ranking of models. Typically, this algorithm first computes a score for
each model from the comparative signals and then ranks models by their
scores.

Comparative evaluation is new in AI but has been around for almost a
century in other industries. It’s especially popular in sports and video
games. Many rating algorithms developed for these other domains can be
adapted to evaluating AI models, such as Elo, Bradley–Terry, and
TrueSkill. LMSYS’s Chatbot Arena originally used Elo to compute models’
ranking but later switched to the Bradley–Terry algorithm because they
found Elo sensitive to the order of evaluators and prompts.²³

A ranking is correct if, for any model pair, the higher-ranked model is
more likely to win in a match against the lower-ranked model. If model A
ranks higher than model B, users should prefer model A to model B more
than half the time.

Through this lens, model ranking is a predictive problem. We compute a
ranking from historical match outcomes and use it to predict future
match outcomes. Different ranking algorithms can produce different
rankings, and there’s no ground truth for what the correct ranking is.
The quality of a ranking is determined by how good it is in predicting
future match outcomes. My analysis of Chatbot Arena’s ranking shows that
the produced ranking is good, at least for model pairs with sufficient
matches. See the book’s GitHub repo for the analysis.

Challenges of Comparative Evaluation

With pointwise evaluation, the heavy-lifting part of the process is in
designing the benchmark and metrics to gather the right signals.
Computing scores to rank models is easy. With comparative evaluation,
both signal gathering and model ranking are challenging. This section
goes over the three common challenges of comparative evaluation.

Scalability bottlenecks

Comparative evaluation is data-intensive. The number of model pairs to
compare grows quadratically with the number of models. In January 2024,
LMSYS evaluated 57 models using 244,000 comparisons. Even though this
sounds like a lot of comparisons, this averages only 153 comparisons per
model pair (57 models correspond to 1,596 model pairs). This is a small
number, considering the wide range of tasks we want a foundation model
to do.

Fortunately, we don’t always need direct comparisons between two models
to determine which one is better. Ranking algorithms typically assume
transitivity. If model A ranks higher than B, and B ranks higher than C,
then with transitivity, you can infer that A ranks higher than C. This
means that if the algorithm is certain that A is better than B and B is
better than C, it doesn’t need to compare A against C to know that A is
better.

However, it’s unclear if this transitivity assumption holds for AI
models. Many papers that analyze Elo for AI evaluation cite transitivity
assumption as a limitation (Boubdir et al.; Balduzzi et al.; and Munos
et al.). They argued that human preference is not necessarily
transitive. In addition, non-transitivity can happen because different
model pairs are evaluated by different evaluators and on different
prompts.

There’s also the challenge of evaluating new models. With independent
evaluation, only the new model needs to be evaluated. With comparative
evaluation, the new model has to be evaluated against existing models,
which can change the ranking of existing models.

This also makes it hard to evaluate private models. Imagine you’ve built
a model for your company, using internal data. You want to compare this
model with public models to decide whether it would be more beneficial
to use a public one. If you want to use comparative evaluation for your
model, you’ll likely have to collect your own comparative signals and
create your own leaderboard or pay one of those public leaderboards to
run private evaluation for you.

The scaling bottleneck can be mitigated with better matching algorithms.
So far, we’ve assumed that models are selected randomly for each match,
so all model pairs appear in approximately the same number of matches.
However, not all model pairs need to be equally compared. Once we’re
confident about the outcome of a model pair, we can stop matching them
against each other. An efficient matching algorithm should sample
matches that reduce the most uncertainty in the overall ranking.

Lack of standardization and quality control

One way to collect comparative signals is to crowdsource comparisons to
the community the way LMSYS Chatbot Arena does. Anyone can go to the
website, enter a prompt, get back two responses from two anonymous
models, and vote for the better one. Only after voting is done are the
model names revealed.

The benefit of this approach is that it captures a wide range of signals
and is relatively difficult to game.²⁴ However, the downside is that
it’s hard to enforce standardization and quality control.

First, anyone with internet access can use any prompt to evaluate these
models, and there’s no standard on what should constitute a better
response. It might be a lot to expect volunteers to fact-check the
responses, so they might unknowingly prefer responses that sound better
but are factually incorrect.

Some people might prefer polite and moderate responses, while others
might prefer responses without a filter. This is both good and bad. It’s
good because it helps capture human preference in the wild. It’s bad
because human preference in the wild might not be appropriate for all
use cases. For example, if a user asks a model to tell an inappropriate
joke and a model refuses, the user might downvote it. However, as an
application developer, you might prefer that the model refuses. Some
users might even maliciously pick the toxic responses as the preferred
ones, polluting the ranking.

Second, crowdsourcing comparisons require users to evaluate models
outside of their working environments. Without real-world grounding,
test prompts might not reflect how these models are being used in the
real world. People might just use the first prompts that come to mind
and are unlikely to use sophisticated prompting techniques.

Among 33,000 prompts published by LMSYS Chatbot Arena in 2023, 180 of
them are “hello” and “hi”, which account for 0.55% of the data, and this
doesn’t yet count variations like “hello!”, “hello.”, “hola”, “hey”, and
so on. There are many brainteasers. The question “X has 3 sisters, each
has a brother. How many brothers does X have?” was asked 44 times.

Simple prompts are easy to respond to, making it hard to differentiate
models’ performance. Evaluating models using too many simple prompts can
pollute the ranking.

If a public leaderboard doesn’t support sophisticated context
construction, such as augmenting the context with relevant documents
retrieved from your internal databases, its ranking won’t reflect how
well a model might work for your RAG system. The ability to generate
good responses is different from the ability to retrieve the most
relevant documents.

One potential way to enforce standardization is to limit users to a set
of predetermined prompts. However, this might impact the leaderboard’s
ability to capture diverse use cases. LMSYS instead lets users use any
prompts but then filter out hard prompts using their internal model and
rank models using only these hard prompts.

Another way is to use only evaluators that we can trust. We can train
evaluators on the criteria to compare two responses or train them to use
practical prompts and sophisticated prompting techniques. This is the
approach that Scale uses with their private comparative leaderboard. The
downside of this approach is that it’s expensive and it can severely
reduce the number of comparisons we can get.

Another option is to incorporate comparative evaluation into your
products and let users evaluate models during their workflows. For
example, for the code generation task, you can suggest users two code
snippets inside the user’s code editor and let them pick the better one.
Many chat applications are already doing this. However, as mentioned
previously, the user might not know which code snippet is better, since
they’re not the expert.

On top of that, users might not read both options and just randomly
click on one. This can introduce a lot of noise to the results. However,
the signals from the small percentage of users who vote correctly can
sometimes be sufficient to help determine which model is better.

Some teams prefer AI to human evaluators. AI might not be as good as
trained human experts but it might be more reliable than random internet
users.

From comparative performance to absolute performance

For many applications, we don’t necessarily need the best possible
models. We need a model that is good enough. Comparative evaluation
tells us which model is better. It doesn’t tell us how good a model is
or whether this model is good enough for our use case. Let’s say we
obtained the ranking that model B is better than model A. Any of the
following scenarios could be valid:

1.  Model B is good, but model A is bad.

2.  Both model A and model B are bad.

3.  Both model A and model B are good.

You need other forms of evaluation to determine which scenario is true.

Imagine that we’re using model A for customer support, and model A can
resolve 70% of all the tickets. Consider model B, which wins against A
51% of the time. It’s unclear how this 51% win rate will be converted to
the number of requests model B can resolve. Several people have told me
that in their experience, a 1% change in the win rate can induce a huge
performance boost in some applications but just a minimal boost in other
applications.

When deciding to swap out A for B, human preference isn’t everything. We
also care about other factors like cost. Not knowing what performance
boost to expect makes it hard to do the cost–benefit analysis. If model
B costs twice as much as A, comparative evaluation isn’t sufficient to
help us determine if the performance boost from B will be worth the
added cost.

The Future of Comparative Evaluation

Given so many limitations of comparative evaluation, you might wonder if
there’s a future to it. There are many benefits to comparative
evaluation. First, as discussed in “Post-Training”, people have found
that it’s easier to compare two outputs than to give each output a
concrete score. As models become stronger, surpassing human performance,
it might become impossible for human evaluators to give model responses
concrete scores. However, human evaluators might still be able to detect
the difference, and comparative evaluation might remain the only option.
For example, the Llama 2 paper shared that when the model ventures into
the kind of writing beyond the ability of the best human annotators,
humans can still provide valuable feedback when comparing two answers
(Touvron et al., 2023).

Second, comparative evaluation aims to capture the quality we care
about: human preference. It reduces the pressure to have to constantly
create more benchmarks to catch up with AI’s ever-expanding
capabilities. Unlike benchmarks that become useless when model
performance achieves perfect scores, comparative evaluations will never
get saturated as long as newer, stronger models are introduced.

Comparative evaluation is relatively hard to game, as there’s no easy
way to cheat, like training your model on reference data. For this
reason, many trust the results of public comparative leaderboards more
than any other public leaderboards.

Comparative evaluation can give us discriminating signals about models
that can’t be obtained otherwise. For offline evaluation, it can be a
great addition to evaluation benchmarks. For online evaluation, it can
be complementary to A/B testing.

Summary

The stronger AI models become, the higher the potential for catastrophic
failures, which makes evaluation even more important. At the same time,
evaluating open-ended, powerful models is challenging. These challenges
make many teams turn toward human evaluation. Having humans in the loop
for sanity checks is always helpful, and in many cases, human evaluation
is essential. However, this chapter focused on different approaches to
automatic evaluation.

This chapter starts with a discussion on why foundation models are
harder to evaluate than traditional ML models. While many new evaluation
techniques are being developed, investments in evaluation still lag
behind investments in model and application development.

Since many foundation models have a language model component, we zoomed
into language modeling metrics, including perplexity and cross entropy.
Many people I’ve talked to find these metrics confusing, so I included a
section on how to interpret these metrics and leverage them in
evaluation and data processing.

This chapter then shifted the focus to the different approaches to
evaluate open-ended responses, including functional correctness,
similarity scores, and AI as a judge. The first two evaluation
approaches are exact, while AI as a judge evaluation is subjective.

Unlike exact evaluation, subjective metrics are highly dependent on the
judge. Their scores need to be interpreted in the context of what judges
are being used. Scores aimed to measure the same quality by different AI
judges might not be comparable. AI judges, like all AI applications,
should be iterated upon, meaning their judgments change. This makes them
unreliable as benchmarks to track an application’s changes over time.
While promising, AI judges should be supplemented with exact evaluation,
human evaluation, or both.

When evaluating models, you can evaluate each model independently, and
then rank them by their scores. Alternatively, you can rank them using
comparative signals: which of the two models is better? Comparative
evaluation is common in sports, especially chess, and is gaining
traction in AI evaluation. Both comparative evaluation and the
post-training alignment process need preference signals, which are
expensive to collect. This motivated the development of preference
models: specialized AI judges that predict which response users prefer.

While language modeling metrics and hand-designed similarity
measurements have existed for some time, AI as a judge and comparative
evaluation have only gained adoption with the emergence of foundation
models. Many teams are figuring out how to incorporate them into their
evaluation pipelines. Figuring out how to build a reliable evaluation
pipeline to evaluate open-ended applications is the topic of the next
chapter.

¹ In December 2023, Greg Brockman, an OpenAI cofounder, tweeted that
“evals are surprisingly often all you need.”

² A 2023 study by a16z showed that 6 out of 70 decision makers evaluated
models by word of mouth.

³ Also known as vibe check.

⁴ When OpenAI’s GPT-o1 came out in September 2024, the Fields medalist
Terrence Tao compared the experience of working with this model to
working with “a mediocre, but not completely incompetent, graduate
student.” He speculated that it may only take one or two further
iterations until AI reaches the level of a “competent graduate student.”
In response to his assessment, many people joked that if we’re already
at the point where we need the brightest human minds to evaluate AI
models, we’ll have no one qualified to evaluate future models.

⁵ I searched for all repositories with at least 500 stars using the
keywords “LLM”, “GPT”, “generative”, and “transformer”. I also
crowdsourced for missing repositories through my website
https://huyenchip.com.

⁶ While there’s a strong correlation, language modeling performance
doesn’t fully explain downstream performance. This is an active area of
research.

⁷ As discussed in Chapter 1, a token can be a character, a word, or part
of a word. When Claude Shannon introduced entropy in 1951, the tokens he
worked with were characters. Here’s entropy in his own words: “The
entropy is a statistical parameter which measures, in a certain sense,
how much information is produced on the average for each letter of a
text in the language. If the language is translated into binary digits
(0 or 1) in the most efficient way, the entropy is the average number of
binary digits required per letter of the original language.”

⁸ One reason many people might prefer natural log over log base 2 is
because natural log has certain properties that makes its math easier.
For example, the derivative of natural log ln(x) is 1/x.

⁹ If you’re unsure what SFT (supervised finetuning) and RLHF
(reinforcement learning from human feedback) mean, revisit Chapter 2.

¹⁰ Quantization is discussed in Chapter 7.

¹¹ The challenge is that while many complex tasks have measurable
objectives, AI isn’t quite good enough to perform complex tasks
end-to-end, so AI might be used to do part of the solution. Sometimes,
evaluating a part of a solution is harder than evaluating the end
outcome. Imagine you want to evaluate someone’s ability to play chess.
It’s easier to evaluate the end game outcome (win/lose/draw) than to
evaluate just one move.

¹² You might also want to do some processing depending on whether you
want “cats” and “cat” or “will not” and “won’t” to be considered two
separate tokens.

¹³ While a 10,000-element vector space seems high-dimensional, it’s much
lower than the dimensionality of the raw data. An embedding is,
therefore, considered a representation of complex data in a
lower-dimensional space.

¹⁴ There are also models that generate word embeddings, as opposed to
documentation embeddings, such as word2vec (Mikolov et al., “Efficient
Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space”, arXiv, v3,
September 7, 2013) and GloVe (Pennington et al., “GloVe: Global Vectors
for Word Representation”, the Stanford University Natural Language
Processing Group (blog), 2014.

¹⁵ The term AI judge is not to be confused with the use case where AI is
used as a judge in court.

¹⁶ In 2017, I presented at a NeurIPS workshop MEWR (Machine translation
Evaluation metric Without Reference text), an evaluation method that
leverages stronger language models to automatically evaluate machine
translations. Sadly, I never pursued this line of research because life
got in the way.

¹⁷ In some cases, evaluation can take up the majority of the budget,
even more than response generation.

¹⁸ Spot-checking is the same as sampling.

¹⁹ Saito et al. (2023) found that humans tend to favor longer responses
too, but to a much lesser extent.

²⁰ This technique is sometimes referred to as self-critique or self-ask.

²¹ The BLEURT score range is confusing. It’s approximately between -2.5
and 1.0. This highlights the challenge of criteria ambiguity with AI
judges: the score range can be arbitrary.

²² Such as using a Likert scale.

²³ Even though Chatbot Arena stopped using the Elo rating algorithm, its
developers, for a while, continued referring to their model ratings “Elo
scores”. They scaled the resulting Bradley-Terry scores to make them
look like Elo scores. The scaling is fairly complicated. Each score is
multiplied by 400 (the scale used in Elo) and added to 1,000 (the
initial Elo score). Then this score is rescaled so that the model
Llama-13b has a score of 800.

²⁴ As Chatbot Arena becomes more popular, attempts to game it have
become more common. While no one has admitted to me that they tried to
game the ranking, several model developers have told me that they’re
convinced their competitors try to game it.

