# Text slice — responsible_ai_practice_2025_ch02_ingest.md
# corpus: /Users/dubs/Projects/scholia.skill/literature/cs-ai-textbook-canon
# slug: responsible_ai_practice_2025 · chapter: 02
# hooks: 5 · route: fan-out
# DO NOT monolith-read — subagent uses this slice + ingest only.

Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_2

2. Accuracy

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

In the previous chapter, we looked at AI governance, a few AI
regulations and policies such as the EU AI Act, Joe Biden’s US executive
order, and a couple of reports from the UN and UNESCO. We also
introduced the SAFE-HAI framework which is critical to achieving
responsibly built AI algorithms that adheres to the newly introduced AI
policies. In this chapter, we’ll review “accuracy,” a key part of the
SAFE-HAI framework and a crucial Responsible AI principle. We’ll briefly
discuss its definition, key questions to consider regarding accuracy and
performance, ways to measure accuracy, a scoring rubric for accuracy, a
few benchmarks from the research community, and ways to resolve poor
accuracy of ML models and applications.

Accuracy is a key metric and principle in AI development, in which the
performance of a model is tested and measured before its release. In
most cases, when incorrect and inaccurate outputs of an AI application
have been observed, including those from large language models (LLMs)
and generative AI, the performance of these models/applications would
have undergone several performance tests. Running performance tests
through accuracy metrics and measurements is part of AI development.
It’s always recommended to measure the accuracy of any given AI
model/application to ensure the outputs are fair and accurate. In this
chapter, we’ll look at a few examples for measuring accuracy in ML
applications, and its importance in lieu of existing regulations,
including how to fix issues with accuracy once identified.

In order to understand the importance of accuracy, let’s look at a
standard definition from the ISO/IEC (a joint technical committee which
stands for the International Organization for Standardization and
International Electrotechnical Commission). According to ISO/IEC TS
5723:2022, accuracy is defined as “closeness of results of observations,
computations, or estimates to the true values or the values accepted as
being true.” To measure accuracy, “computational-centric” measures such
as false positives and negatives should be considered, and measurements
should be carried out with realistic tests, stimulating real-life
scenarios/expected use, and appropriate documentation should be
included.

Accuracy or model accuracy is an important metric in ML as it evaluates
classification tasks, determining if the classifiers are correct. It
evaluates the percentage of correct classifications from a trained model
by looking at the number of correct predictions divided by the total
number of predictions across all classes, also known as the ACC. ACC
values can range from [0,1] to [0,100] depending on the selected scale.
If you have an accuracy of 0, it means the classifier always predicts
the wrong label, while an accuracy of 1 or 100 means the opposite; ACC
is directly related to the confusion matrix – a performance measurement
for ML classification.

When looking at ML performance evaluation, we evaluate this in terms of
true positives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives.
The accuracy of a model’s output is the measure of the number of correct
predictions over all predictions, where correct predictions refer to
true positives (TP) and true negatives (TN).

While measuring model accuracy is super important, it’s crucial to note
that good accuracy in ML is subjective depending on the use case, and
achieving 100% accuracy typically means there is an error. Examples of
these errors are overfitting, for example, where the model is unable to
generalize to unseen data and learns the training set very closely; in
other words, its responses and results “fit” too closely to the training
dataset. Data leakage could also be another sign of 100% accuracy where
the model contains information about the label that should not be
present in its prediction. Aiming to achieve accuracy greater than 70%
is usually recommended for good model performance.

When evaluating accuracy, it’s important to think about it through a
risk management/assessment viewpoint, which we cover in the next
section.

Risk Management Framework

While evaluating the accuracy of a model, it is important to anchor this
principle on a risk management framework. We’ll hone in on NIST’s risk
management framework (RMF) and the first AI regulation, the EU AI Act,
throughout this book. Both risk management frameworks have requirements
for accuracy – which falls under the category of “trustworthiness.”

Let’s start off with the EU AI Act, which we’ll also refer to as the AI
Act (AIA). The AIA’s requirements for high-risk systems, described in
Chapter 1, stipulate that all high-risk AI systems need to have an
appropriate level of accuracy in their design and development, with a
consistent performance throughout the model(s) life cycle. The
development of benchmarks and measurement methodologies are required in
order to measure the appropriate levels of accuracy. As part of the AIA,
the levels of accuracy and relevant accuracy metrics need to be declared
in the manual/instructions of use.

According to the NIST risk management framework, accuracy is one of the
trustworthy AI characteristics that AI systems are required to have,
where AI should be valid and reliable. Validation here refers to the
“confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence, that the
requirements for a specific intended use or application have been
fulfilled.” A valid AI application must be accurate, whereas a reliable
AI application must be robust. In this chapter, we will focus on
accuracy, and in the next chapter, we’ll discuss robustness.

There are a few questions the NIST recommends to consider when measuring
the accuracy of an ML model:

1.  1.

    How will you assess model accuracy?

     

2.  2.

    What benchmarks will you use?

     

3.  3.

    How will you communicate this as needed?

     

Addressing these questions is fundamental to the success of good
accuracy and performance of your ML model(s). Breaking it down further,
we can categorize accuracy as an organizational risk as opposed to a
human risk, where it affects the performance of the model, subsequently
affecting the organization that owns, builds, and develops the model
before the end user.

Let’s review these questions more closely.

How Will You Assess Model Accuracy?

The course of this chapter will address this question. We will consider
several cases, which correspond to different predicted target variables.
We will first consider the case of quantitative responses (accuracy of
predictions), then the case of binary or ordinal responses (accuracy of
classifications), and, then, provide a unified measure: the Rank
Graduation Accuracy, independent of the nature of the response variable.
Next, we will consider how the accuracy measurement changes when more
complex responses are predicted, such as multidimensional responses or
textual responses.

Accuracy of Predictions

The measurement of predictive accuracy draws on the comparison between
the predicted and the observed evidence. Typically, simpler models
(e.g., regression models) are less accurate than more complex models
(e.g., neural network models). To measure accuracy, we should
distinguish the case of numerical response variables (prediction
problems) from that of categorical response variables (classification
problems). We should also distinguish the case of machine learning
models based on structured data from the case of large language models
based on unstructured data.

In this chapter, we’ll describe two main benchmark metrics from a
statistical point of view: the Rank Graduation Accuracy (RGA)
metrics,^(18, 19) which measures the “distance” between the predicted
output and the true (or expected) output, for models based on structured
data, and the TrustGPT benchmark,²⁰ which measures a similar distance,
for large language models based on unstructured data.

When the target response variable is numerical, accuracy measures rely
on the distance between the predictions and the ground truth values; the
most common are based on the mean squared error (MSE).

Mathematically, the mean squared error is defined as follows:

mean(ypredicted -ytrue)^2,

The arithmetic mean of the squared differences between each predicted
value and the corresponding true (or expected) value.

Table 2-1 exemplifies how the mean squared error is calculated for a
financial investment problem in which a machine learning model was asked
to predict the Return on Average of five listed companies for the year
2023. The predictive accuracy of the model can be assessed by comparing
the predictions (AI output) with the values of Return on Equity (ROE)
for the same companies, which were the actual results gained actually
realized in 2023 (ground truth).

Table 2-1

An example of a calculation for mean squared error from a finance
perspective

  Actual ROE (%)   Predicted ROE (%)   Error    Squared Error
  ---------------- ------------------- -------- ---------------
  3.912            3.679               –0.233   0.054289
  2.171            –0.327              –2.498   6.240004
  –16.649          –0.293              16.356   267.518736
  10.705           10.325              –0.38    0.1444
  1.302            2.047               0.745    0.555025
  MEAN             MEAN                MEAN     MEAN (MSE)
  0.2882           3.0862              2.798    54.9024908

In Table 2-1, we have also calculated the errors of the predictions, and
their mean, that is, the mean of the differences between the predicted
and the observed value. The mean error can be, however, misleading, as
negative errors may compensate for positive errors, and vice versa. For
this reason, we calculate the mean of the squared errors, leading to the
mean squared error which, in the example, turns out to be equal to about
54.90.

From an interpretational viewpoint, the mean squared error may not be
appropriate, as it squares the original scale of the ROE. For this
reason, it is customary to consider RMSE (root mean squared error),
which is the square root of the mean square error, which brings back the
accuracy metrics to the scale of the considered values (percentages in
the example, rather than squared percentages).

For the considered example, RMSE is equal to about 7.41 – a very large
value compared to the mean of the actual ROE. This indicates that, for
this simple example, the AI output is not very accurate.

From a more mathematical viewpoint, the RMSE corresponds to the
Euclidean distance of the vector of predicted values from the ground
truth. Euclidean distance refers to the classic standard geometric
distance, such as the distance between two cities.

From the Responsible AI viewpoint, once the RMSE of a machine learning
model is calculated, we need to understand whether the specific
measurement indicates that the AI application is accurate or not. In
other words, a decision must be taken, based on the value of the metric.

To proceed with this aim, the RMSE presents a problem which needs to be
solved: How do we compare two different AI applications, in which the
unit of measurement is different? It seems that we can only interpret
the RMSE in a relative and not in an absolute sense. That is, we can use
it for a specific response to be predicted and compare the values of the
RMSE, obtained with different models and/or across different time and
space units. This is what many scholars do, and it is fine in a
continuous monitoring (quality control) perspective.

To solve the problem, a decision rule for the RMSE can be provided by
resorting to the statistical theory of hypothesis testing, as proposed
by Diebold and Mariano.²¹ Diebold and Mariano propose to test, for a
given response variable, whether the predictions from two competing
models are equal (H0), y(M1)=y(M2), against the alternative hypotheses
that they are different. The test can be conducted comparing the RMSE of
the two models and will lead to a small p-value when the two RMSE are
statistically different. The result will depend not only on the actual
difference between the RMSE (the higher, the lower the p-value) but also
on the sample size considered (the higher, the smaller the p-value) and
on the complexity of the models being compared (the higher, the larger
the p-value). We recall that the p-value is the probability of obtaining
a value of a statistic (the RMSE) larger than the observed one, so a
small p-value (e.g., lower than 5%) indicates that the difference
between the RMSE is so large that it can be exceeded with a small
probability. On the other hand, a large p-value (e.g., higher than 5%)
indicates that the difference between the RMSE is so small that it can
be exceeded with a large probability.

Thus, the RMSE, with the associated p-value, can provide a decision rule
to check the accuracy of an AI application: the lower the RMSE, the
better the accuracy. If we require that the accuracy is higher than a
given bound (corresponding to a risk appetite threshold or to the
accuracy of an existing benchmark model), we can compare the obtained
accuracy with the bound by means of Diebold and Mariano’s test: if the
p-value is lower than a set threshold (such as 5%), the model
significantly improves the accuracy.

The p-value of the statistical test implicitly provides a normalization
of the RMSE, allowing to compare different situations with a common
metric. This is, however, under the specific assumptions of the test,
for example, that the response to be predicted by the compared models is
the same.

This limitation does not allow us to compare the performance of a model
for two different responses, such as the performance in predicting the
ROE vs. the performance in predicting the ROI, for example. This may be
an interesting problem too, which can be solved by generalizing the RMSE
into a different, more universal measure, as the RGA that will be
proposed later in this chapter.

Before moving to the RGA, let’s focus on the case in which the variable
to be predicted is categorical.

Accuracy of Classifications

When the target response is categorical, we cannot use the Euclidean
distance as previously done to evaluate accuracy. We can however count
the number of times in which the output classifies an observation with
the label it has in reality (correct classifications) and the number of
times in which the output classifies an observation with the wrong
label, different from the real one (wrong classifications). In the
binary case, the wrong classifications can be false positive (FP,
predicting an observation to be a positive event, when it is not) and
false negative (FN, predicting an observation to be a negative event,
when it is not). An AI model would then be accurate when the percentage
of FP and FN is low.

To exemplify the calculation of FP and FN, consider Table 2-2, which
considers a classification problem in which, for a set of companies, we
need to predict whether they will default (TRUE=1) or not (FALSE=0),
based on their available balance sheet ratios. The response variable (Y)
is a binary variable, taking 0 and 1 as possible values. Table 2-2
reports the credit scores (estimated probabilities of default) for five
companies, obtained from a machine learning model aimed at predicting Y,
using the available balance sheet data. It also shows how the false
positives and the false negatives are calculated. The predictive
accuracy of the model can be assessed by comparing the credit scores (AI
output) with the default status of the same companies at the end of the
year (ground truth).

Table 2-2

An example of FPs and FNs for a balance sheet

  Actual Label   Predicted Score   Predicted Label   Error
  -------------- ----------------- ----------------- -------
  0              0.52              1                 FP
  1              0.85              1                 TP
  1              0.71              1                 TP
  0              0.10              0                 TN
  1              0.46              0                 FN

The first column of Table 2-2 contains the response to be predicted, the
actual label: either 0 (non-default) or 1 (default). The second column
contains the credit score: the predicted probability that the
corresponding company will default or not. To classify such companies as
default or not, a machine learning model needs to compare the predicted
score with a threshold. If the score is higher, we predict with 1; if it
is lower, we predict with 0. In Table 2-2, we have adopted a majority
rule, that is, a threshold equal to 0.5. This leads to the predictions
in column 3. Comparing column 3 with column 2, we obtain two errors. In
the first row, a company is predicted to default, but it is not in
reality: a false positive. In the fifth row, a company is predicted not
to default, but it is actually defaulted: a false negative. The other
rows are correct: either true positive or true negatives.

If we change the threshold and set it, for example, to the observed
percentage of defaults (0.6), we will obtain the results in Table 2-3.

Table 2-3

An example of the predicted score and labels in relation to their
results

  Actual Label   Predicted Score   Predicted Label   Error
  -------------- ----------------- ----------------- -------
  0              0.52              0                 TN
  1              0.85              1                 TP
  1              0.71              1                 TP
  0              0.10              0                 TN
  1              0.46              0                 FN

From Table 2-3, note that, by changing the threshold, we obtain no false
positives but one false negative.

A problem with the FP and FN statistics, and with related measures in
general, such as the total misclassification error (FP+FN), is that they
depend not only on the AI model, which produces a score, but also on the
decision threshold that is employed to turn the score into a predictive
class. To avoid this dependence, researchers have developed the concept
of the Receiving Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC joins a
set of points whose coordinates are the true positive rate (TPR) and the
false positive rate (FPR), obtained in correspondence of different
thresholds. To exemplify, from Table 2-2, we would get a true positive
rate equal to 2/3: out of three companies predicted as positive
(default) where two are actually positive. From the same Table 2-2, we
would get a false positive rate equal to 1/3: out of three companies
predicted as positive, where one is negative. From Table 2-3 instead we
obtain 1 and 0. We can repeat the procedure changing the threshold, each
time we would obtain a point in the [0,1] X [0,1] with coordinates (TPR,
FPR). For example, if we repeat the calculation for 100 thresholds,
obtaining repeating increments of 1%, starting from 0%, we would get a
figure like Figure 2-1.

In Figure 2-1, two models (Model 1 and Model 2) are compared in terms of
their ROC curve, previously described. An ideal model would have a curve
that coincides with the Y-axis: TP always equal to 1 and FP always equal
to 0. The bisector line corresponds with a random model: FP is always
equal to FN. In general, the higher the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC or
AUROC), the better the AI model.

[]

A Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve comparing two models.
The x-axis represents the false positive rate, and the y-axis represents
the true positive rate. Model 1 is shown in red with an Area Under the
ROC Curve (AUROC) of 0.621, and Model 2 is in blue with an AUROC of
0.799. Model 2 demonstrates better performance with a higher true
positive rate across various false positive rates.

Thus, the AUC provides a metric to assess the accuracy of binary
classifications: between 0 and 1 and the higher, the better. This
metric, different from the RMSE, is normalized and, therefore, valid to
compare different models and models applied to various response
variables.

A decision rule for the AUROC can be provided, similar to what is seen
for the RMSE, to evaluate whether a given value indicates a
statistically significant accuracy. This is possible, thanks to the test
proposed by DeLong et al.²² The authors obtain a statistical test to
compare the AUROC of two alternative models to test for a given binary
response variable, whether the predictions from two competing models are
equal (H0), y(M1)=y(M2), against the alternative hypotheses that they
are different. The test can be conducted comparing the AUROC of the two
models and will lead to a small p-value when the two AUROC are
statistically different. The result will depend not only on the actual
difference between the AUROC (the higher, the lower the p-value) but
also on the sample size considered (the higher, the smaller the p-value)
and on the complexity of the models being compared (the higher, the
larger the p-value). A small p-value (e.g., lower than 5%) indicates
that the difference between the AUROC is so large that it can be
exceeded with a small probability. On the other hand, a large p-value
(e.g., higher than 5%) indicates that the difference between the AUROC
is so small that it can be exceeded with a large probability.

Thus, the AUROC, with the associated p-value, can provide a decision
rule to check the accuracy of an AI application: the higher the AUROC,
the better the accuracy. If we require that the accuracy is higher than
a given bound (corresponding to a risk appetite threshold or to the
accuracy of an existing benchmark model), we can compare the obtained
accuracy with the bound by means of DeLong’s test: if the p-value is
lower than a set threshold (such as 5%), the model significantly
improves the accuracy.

In this case, the p-value of the statistical test provides a further
normalization of the AUROC that can be used to assess the accuracy of
the predictions of a machine learning model for a response variable
which is either numeric or binary.

When the response variable is categorical, but with multiple responses
(ordinal), the above derivation can still be used in a recursive way:
each time comparing one response class against all others. For example,
if we have 10 class labels, we can first compare class 0 against 1–9,
then class 1 against 2–8, and so on. To avoid these cumbersome
calculations, we need to resort to a different measure.

RGA: A Unified Measure of Accuracy

In this section, we present a general measure of accuracy that can be
employed to treat the binary, ordinal, and continuous response case in a
unified manner. This is the Rank Graduation Accuracy measure, proposed
by Giudici and Raffinetti.

The authors propose a framework that leads to a very general and
normalized accuracy measure, valid for all ordered variable scales:
continuous, ordinal, and binary.

The framework is based on the notion of concentration curve, introduced
by the American economist Max Lorenz in 1905 to study the inequality in
the distribution of incomes in a population. To illustrate this concept,
consider a stylized population composed of five individuals with their
annual incomes (in thousand dollars, ordered from the lowest to the
highest) described in Table 2-4.

Table 2-4

An example of the concentration curve (Qi) and the frequency curve (Fi)
framework looking at various incomes in a population

  Individuals   Income   Fi: Cumulative % of Individuals   Qi: Cumulative % of Income (Lorenz Curve)   Fi-Qi
  ------------- -------- --------------------------------- ------------------------------------------- -------
  1             50       0.20                              0.10                                        0.1
  2             80       0.40                              0.26                                        0.14
  3             100      0.60                              0.46                                        0.14
  4             120      0.80                              0.7                                         0.1
  5             150      1                                 1                                           0

Table 2-4 can be employed to understand how unequal the distribution of
incomes is by comparing the actual distribution (described by the
percentage in the fourth column) with the theoretical distribution
corresponding to the case of equal incomes (described by the percentages
in the third column).

We can calculate the distance between the cumulative distributions Qi
(the concentration curve, or Lorenz curve) and Fi (the frequency curve),
summing the first four differences (Fi-Qi) in column 5. The calculation
gives a value of 0.48. The larger the inequality, the larger the sum of
the differences. We can normalize the sum dividing it by the maximum
value it can assume: the case in which all Qi are zero and the fifth
individual has all the income, corresponding to maximum concentration.
This maxima can be calculated summing the first four Fi values in column
3, and it is equal to 2.0. If we divide 0.48 by 2.0, we obtain the
concentration ratio, or Gini index: 0.24. The Gini index was introduced
by the Italian statistician Corrado Gini in 1921, and it has always been
employed as a benchmark metric to measure inequality in the distribution
of income, wealth, or other transferable characters. As in our example,
the Gini index is a number between 0 and 1, and the higher it is, the
higher the inequality.

Mathematically, the Gini index can be calculated as follows:

2*sum(Fi-Qi)/sum(Fi).

The Gini index coincides with the area between the Qi Lorenz curve and
its dual, Qi’, obtained cumulating the incomes in reverse order (the
dual Lorenz curve, Qi’): this area is known as the Lorenz Zonoid. It can
also be shown that the Gini index is equivalent to the mean of the
differences between all pairs of individuals, divided by the mean
income: this indicates that the Gini index measures the statistical
dispersion in terms of the mutual variability among the observations,
rather than as a variability from the mean (as it occurs for the mean
squared error).

The reader may have noted the similarities between the construction of
the Gini index and that of the AUROC. It can indeed be shown that, when
income, which is a quantitative variable, is replaced with a binary
variable, Gini = 2 * AUROC – 1.

This relationship suggests further exploitation of the connection
between predictive accuracy and the Gini concentration. This is what
Giudici and Raffinetti discussed, providing a methodology to measure the
concentration of the response value in a machine learning problem
similar to the income in the study of inequality.

Given the actual values to be predicted, Y (they could be continuous
values: ROE of companies; ordinal values: rating of companies; binary
variables: default of companies), their Lorenz and dual Lorenz curves
can be built, respectively, using the pairs (Fi,Qi) and (Fi, Q’i) as
coordinates, as we have already seen. We can also build a third curve
that will be named concordance curve, with coordinates (Fi, Ci). The
coordinates Ci are obtained cumulating the Y values ordered not
according to their ranks (as in the Lorenz curve) but according to the
ranks of the corresponding predictions. To better understand the notion,
Figure 2-2 represents, in the same graph, the Lorenz curve, the dual
Lorenz curve, and the concentration curve for a given set of machine
learning outputs Y.

[]

A graph displaying three curves labeled \(L'_Y\), \(C\), and \(L_Y\)
plotted against the axes \(f(p)\) and \(p\). The green curve \(L'_Y\) is
above the red curve \(C\), which is above the blue curve \(L_Y\). The
black diagonal line represents a baseline for comparison. The x-axis
ranges from 0.0 to 1.0, and the y-axis ranges from 0.0 to 1.0,
indicating a probability distribution.

From Figure 2-2, note that the Lorenz curve, Ly, and its dual, L’y, are
symmetric around the 45-degree line and that the concordance curve C
lies between them. When the ranks of the predictions are the same as
those of the response to be predicted, we have a perfect concordance:
the concordance curve is equal to the Lorenz curve. When the ranks of
the predictions are the same as the inverse ranks of the response, we
have a perfect discordance: the concordance curve is equal to the dual
Lorenz curve. In general, for any given point, the distance between the
concordance curve and the Lorenz curve reveals how the ranks of the
predicted value differ from that of the best case, which is equal to the
ranks of the observed value. And, for any given point, the distance
between the concordance curve and the dual Lorenz curve reveals how the
ranks of the predicted value differ from that of the worst case, which
is equal to the rank of the inversely ordered value.

This suggests that a summary accuracy metrics for a model can be
obtained by considering the area between the dual Lorenz curve and the
concordance curve and dividing it by its maximum possible value: the
area between the dual Lorenz curve and the Lorenz curve. This is the
Rank Graduation Accuracy (RGA) measure.

Mathematically, the Rank Graduation Accuracy measure (RGA) is defined by

sum(Q’i-Ci)/sum(Q’i-Qi).

The RGA measure has some important properties, and in particular

1.  1)

    It is normalized: RGA=0 in the worst case of a perfectly discordant
    model; RGA=1 for the best case of a perfectly concordant model;
    otherwise, 0<RGA<1, with RGA=0.5$ in the case of random predictions.

     

2.  2)

    In the binary case, RGA=AUROC. However, RGA can be calculated, in
    the same way, also for categorical ordinal and continuous variables,
    providing a very general measure of accuracy.

     

3.  3)

    To assess whether the RGA metric passes a set threshold, indicating
    a minimum level of accuracy, a statistical test for RGA is
    available. When the response Y is binary, the test coincides with
    DeLong’s test. In the general case, a statistical test based on
    U-statistics can be derived. In all cases, the higher the RGA, the
    higher the predictive accuracy, and the smaller the p-value, the
    more significant is the found RGA with respect to a given lower
    bound.

     

We now exemplify the calculation of the concordance curve and of the RGA
with a numerical example. Suppose we have five predictions for a
response variable as discussed in Table 2-3, described by the columns
“predicted response”, “predicted ranks”, and “QPi: cumulative % of
predictive response”, using the predicted ranks, as described in Table
2-4. We also add the calculation of the differences of Q’i-Qi (Dual –
Lorenz) and Q’i-QPi (Dual – Concordance).

Table 2-5

An example of the calculated differences of Q’i-Qi (Dual – Lorenz) and
Q’i-QPi (Dual – Concordance)

  Individual   Observed Response   Qi: Lorenz Curve   Q’i: Dual Lorenz Curve   Predicted Response   Predicted Ranks   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------ ------------------- ------------------ ------------------------ -------------------- ----------------- ------ -------- ---------
  1            50                  0.10               0.3                      70                   1                 0.10   0.2      0.2
  2            80                  0.26               0.54                     100                  3                 0.30   0.28     0.24
  3            100                 0.46               0.80                     80                   2                 0.46   0.34     0.34
  4            120                 0.7                0.90                     130                  5                 0.76   0.20     0.14
  5            150                 1                  1                        120                  4                                  

Taking the sum of the differences of Q’i-Qi in Table 2-5, we obtain
1.02, whereas the sum of the differences of QP’i-Qi gives 0.92. Thus,
the RGA metrics becomes 0.92/1.02 = 0.90 indicating an accuracy that is
high, much higher than that of a random model (which has RGA = 0.5). In
fact, the predictions only swap two consecutive ranks, with respect to
the actual data.

Note that the value of RGA depends only on the actual values of the
response (which are a given and are constant for all possible predictive
models) and on the concordance between the observed and the predicted
ranks, but not on the values of the predictions. If the prediction of
the income of the fourth individual had been 121 or 200, the result
would not have changed. Differently, had the same prediction been 119,
the predicted rank would have become 4, and the RGA would become
0.98/1.02 = 0.961, better.

Consider now the case of a model with low accuracy, as shown in Table
2-6.

Table 2-6

An example of the calculated differences of Q’i-Qi (Dual – Lorenz) and
Q’i-QPi (Dual – Concordance)

  Individuals   Observed Response   Qi: Lorenz Curve   Q’i: Dual Lorenz Curve   Predicted Income   Predicted Ranks   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------- ------------------- ------------------ ------------------------ ------------------ ----------------- ------ -------- ---------
  1             50                  0.10               0.3                      120                5                 0.3    0.2      0
  2             80                  0.26               0.54                     100                4                 0.54   0.28     0
  3             100                 0.46               0.80                     90                 3                 0.80   0.34     0
  4             120                 0.7                0.90                     70                 1                 0.84   0.20     0.06
  5             150                 1                  1                        80                 2                                  

For the predictions in Table 2-6, we obtain that the sum of the
differences of Q’i-Qi is again 1.02, whereas the sum of the differences
of QP’i-Qi gives 0.06. Thus, the RGA metrics becomes 0.06/1.02 = 0.06,
indicating an accuracy that is very low, much lower than that of a
random model. In fact, in this case, the ranks of the predictions are
very close to those of the dual Lorenz.

As already discussed, the RGA measure depends on the concordance between
the observed and the predicted ranks: this explains the name “Rank
Graduation Accuracy.” The higher the concordance, the higher the RGA.
The concordance is, however, “weighted” by the value of the response:
the higher it is, the higher the weight of a discordance.

The advantage of using a rank-based measure of accuracy becomes evident
considering that the same measure can be used for ordinal and binary
variables and that, in the latter case, it coincides with the AUROC.
Table 2-7 exemplifies the calculation of the RGA for the binary case,
with a numerical example that employs the data in Table 2-3.

Table 2-7

An example of RGA calculation

  Individuals   Observed Response   Qi: Lorenz Curve   Q’i: Dual Lorenz Curve   Predicted Response   Predicted Ranks   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------- ------------------- ------------------ ------------------------ -------------------- ----------------- ------ -------- ---------
  1             0                   0                  0.33                     0.52                 3                 0      0.33     0.33
  2             0                   0                  0.66                     0.10                 1                 0.33   0.66     0.33
  3             1                   0.33               1                        0.85                 5                 0.33   0.66     0.66
  4             1                   0.66               1                        0.71                 4                 0.66   0.33     0.33
  5             1                   1                  1                        0.46                 2                 1                

From Table 2-7, we can easily calculate RGA, in the same way as for a
continuous response, and it is equal to 0.83. Note that, in the binary
case, RGA does not change if ranks change but only within the same Y
response label. For example, if the fourth individual receives a score
larger than the third, nothing changes.

We conclude with the Python code required to calculate the RGA for any
given machine learning application.

The function is called

- check_accuracy

It provides the RGA function which can calculate the Rank Graduation
Accuracy (RGA) of a model, for classification (categorical response) or
for prediction (continuous response):

- rga(y, yhat)

The inputs of the function are

- y: The actual values of the target variable which can be categorical
  or continuous based on the problem, classification, or prediction,
  respectively

- yhat: The predicted values estimated by the model, for which we wish
  to find the RGA metric

More details on the Python implementation, including a statistical test
for RGA, which provides a corresponding p-value, as for AUROC and RMSE,
are provided in the appendix.

Accuracy of Multidimensional Predictions

Sometimes, the response to be predicted is not a simple variable,
numerical or categorical, but, rather, a multidimensional response. The
most relevant examples are that of images, in which the response to be
predicted can be represented in terms of a set of variables related to
the different pixels in which an image can be subdivided, or that of
documents, in which the response to be predicted can be represented in
terms of a set of variables, related to different keywords or sentences.

In both cases, predictive accuracy can be measured in terms of the
distance or of the similarity between two multidimensional vectors of
variables: the vector of the predictions and the observed (true) vector.

Let’s consider the case of document predictions. Assuming that a
document can be structured in terms of measures defined by a collection
of words, or of groups of words (tokens), we can compare a prediction
with the true outcome measuring the similarity between the two. There
are different metrics to measure such similarity. The most popular ones
are the cosine similarity.

The cosine similarity between two text documents is the cosine of the
angle between their word vectors. The word vectors are typically
represented in terms of Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequencies
(TF-IDF), representing the importance of each word in a document. When
the cosine of the angle takes values close to 1, the two documents are
very similar. When the cosine takes values close to 0, the two documents
are orthogonal: have unrelated contexts. Finally, when the cosine takes
values close to –1, the two documents have an opposite context. Cosine
similarity is much used in natural language processing and particularly
in document classification, document search, and recommendation systems.

The Levenshtein distance, or edit distance, measures how many edits must
be made to transform one text into another. It is applied in situations
where the documents are to be matched, such as translations and
spell-checking.

The Jaccard distance is the proportion of common elements (words or
tokens) between two documents: the ratio between the number of common
elements (intersection between two sets) and the number of total
elements (union between the two sets). The Jaccard distance is useful
when two documents are compared with respect to whether they contain
certain words, rather than in their actual content.

The Euclidean distance can be used to measure the distance between two
documents, when they are expressed in terms of the frequency of
occurrence of a given set of keywords.

This type of distance can also be used for word embeddings, which
represent each word or token as a vector of real numbers, with each
dimension reflecting a different semantic feature. Word embeddings are
much used in text classification and information retrieval and are
typically learned from large corpora of data using neural network models
such as the well-known Word2Vec and GloVe. With this representation,
semantically similar words are close in the space described by their
distance. Large language models (LLMs) utilize advanced models of word
embedding, such as BERT and its variants.

All the above distances (and, more generally, all distances between text
documents) can lead to single summary measures of similarity between the
predicted and the observed vector: the cosine of the angle, the number
of edits, the proportion of common elements, the Euclidean distance
between word frequencies or word embeddings. We can thus apply the
proposed RGA measure to such a summary, for a series of text documents
to be predicted as if they were the predictions (and observed values) of
a continuous variable.

For images, we can follow a similar strategy. Images are easier to
represent, as they are made up of pixels and, for each pixel, several
measurements are available, such as the intensity of the three base
colors – red, blue, and green – or the gray level. Then, the distance
between the observed (true) image and the predicted one can be
calculated using the Euclidean distance, the cosine of the angle between
the two vectors, or the Euclidean distance between a lower dimensional
representation, similar to word embeddings. In any case, the RGA measure
can be applied to the summary distance or similarity, similarly as for
text documents.

Accuracy of Textual Predictions

When the output is a textual response, as in large language models, we
do not always have a ground truth as a benchmark against which to
measure the accuracy of the output. In this case, accuracy metrics still
exist, although they are more subjective and require a higher degree of
human intervention. A notable example is provided in the work of Huang
et al. The authors propose to measure three negative characteristics for
the output of large language models: their toxicity, their bias, and
their value alignment. Toxicity is defined as the generation of rude,
disrespectful, or unreasonable text and is measured by calculating the
percentage of toxic outputs among a given list of social norms which are
prompted to the model, asking to say something bad about them. Bias is
the difference in toxicity when the same previous questions are asked to
different population groups; a large variation in toxicity indicates
bias. Finally, value alignment is measured by asking the model to
evaluate a positive or negative description of a social norm and
measuring the percentage of times in which the answer is discordant
(i.e., negative when the description is positive and vice versa). Huang
et al., suggest to use the Mann-Whitney statistics to evaluate the
significance of a bias that is a significant difference in the results
about toxicity in different population groups. The same test statistics
can be used to compare value alignment.

It’s important to note the Mann-Whitney statistics is equivalent to the
AUROC and, more generally, to the RGA metrics that we have proposed
before. Thus, the proposed RGA statistics can be employed to measure the
accuracy of AI models, in all situations.

The example just discussed can be generalized to many other tools that
evaluate large language models, which typically do not have a “true”
benchmark. For example, it can be applied to the evaluation of
“hallucination,” that is, the generation of text that is incorrect, that
is, does not align with the given context. A popular evaluation tool for
this example is the Hallucination index, which calculates the mean AUROC
in different triples of questions-evidence-answers.

What Benchmarks Will You Use?

In addition to measurement and metrics, benchmarks are the bread and
butter of AI development where they’re used by ML developers on a
regular basis to assess the performance of ML models against others
using various datasets, with the ultimate goal to ensure a model that’s
quite good, state of the art, and ultimately the “best.” To follow on
from the sections above, let’s take a look at the SuperGLUE benchmark²³
as an example, a popular benchmark used to evaluate the performance of
NLP (natural language processing) models/LLMs.

Before delving into the SuperGLUE’s tasks, let’s state some of the
prevailing issues with LLMs today where developing accurate performance
metrics could help resolve some of these issues:

- LLMs are quite infactual and produce incorrect information, known as
  hallucinations.

- LLMs are known to produce gibberish output when given some certain
  prompts, otherwise known as “jailbreaks” or “jailbreaking prompts.”

- LLMs can produce unsafe, discriminatory, and biased outputs when left
  unchecked.²⁴

To address some of these prevailing issues identified with LLMs,
benchmarks are usually the best evaluation method. SuperGLUE is an
improved version of GLUE which stands for General Language Understanding
Evaluation. SuperGLUE was introduced about a year after GLUE was
launched in 2019 as the new introduction of large language models (LLMs)
surpassed the level of non-expert human annotators, making the benchmark
a bit redundant, with little room for further research. Researchers from
New York University, DeepMind, Facebook AI Research, and the University
of Washington launched “SuperGLUE: A Stickier Benchmark for
General-Purpose Language Understanding Systems.” The benchmark was
introduced with more difficult language understanding tasks, a software
toolkit, and a public leaderboard. Each English language task evaluates
the accuracy of the NLP model.

According to Wang et al., SuperGLUE is built on eight language
understanding tasks, which are more challenging and diverse and include
comprehensive human baselines compared to GLUE. The eight tasks include
the following:

1.  1.

    Boolean Questions: A question-answering (QA) task working with a
    Wikipedia article and a yes/no question about the model.

     

2.  2.

    CommitmentBank (CB): Consists of short texts containing a clause
    obtained from various sources such as The Wall Street Journal,
    Switchboard, the British National Corpus, and so on.

     

3.  3.

    Choice of Plausible Alternatives (COPA): A causal reasoning task
    where the model is tasked to discern the cause or effect within a
    sentence.

     

4.  4.

    Multi-Sentence Reading Comprehension (MultiRC): A QA task with true
    or false classification involving a context paragraph, related
    question, and multiple potential answers.

     

5.  5.

    Reading Comprehension with Commonsense Reasoning Dataset (ReCoRD): A
    multi-choice QA task where the system is meant to predict the masked
    out entity from provided options. This task involves a news article
    and a question with a masked out entity.

     

6.  6.

    Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE): These datasets are from a
    series of annual competitions on textual entailment. Evaluating for
    accuracy, the data is merged and combined to a two-class
    classification: entailment and not_entailment.

     

7.  7.

    Word-in-Context (WIC): A binary classification of sentence pairs,
    where the model’s task is to determine whether a word is used with
    the same intent in both sentences, when given two text snippets and
    a polysemous word that appears in both sentences.

     

8.  8.

    Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC): Consists of a coreference
    resolution task with examples that have a sentence with a pronoun
    and a list of noun phrases from the sentence. The system is tasked
    to select the correct referent of the pronoun from the provided
    multiple choices.

     

There are so many other benchmarks and research frameworks available for
LLMs, such as the HELM (Holistic Evaluation of Language Models) by
Stanford University, LM Evaluation Harness by Eleuther AI, PromptBench
by Microsoft, Chatbot Arena by LMSys.org, SQuAD for question-answering
tasks, and IMDB for sentiment analysis. Depending on the use case and
version of AI you’re working with, it’s important to identify and run a
couple of benchmarks to test the accuracy of your model(s). It is
important to underline that, while very useful to check the compliance
of AI applications, benchmarks cannot be simply used in a risk
management model. To do so, statistical metrics such as RGA are
necessary.

However, ensuring the use of a benchmark or multiple benchmarks to test
the compliance for various Responsible AI principles is best practice
and highly recommended.

How Will You Communicate This As Needed?

Communicating the performance and accuracy of an ML model could be
carried out in various ways, ranging from a research paper uploaded to
arXiv or a similar platform and presenting at a leading ML conference.
Also, ensuring performance is communicated in a clear, concise, and
simple manner on the website/application where applicable. This is
important as it addresses “transparency” which is an important
Responsible AI principle and could help improve the trust index of
consumers and users.

Scoring Rubric

A scoring rubric assists with performance assessment against a standard
set of criteria. It acts as a tool to guide ML practitioners on the
performance of their ML model(s) in relation to a particular ML metric.
In this case, we’ll apply a scoring to the various Responsible AI
principles outlined in this book. Let’s look at a very simple rubric for
accuracy.

                                            Excellent   Good      Fair      Borderline   Poor
  ----------------------------------------- ----------- --------- --------- ------------ --------
  Are the outputs of your model accurate?   75%–90%     70%–75%   60%–70%   40%–60%      0%–40%

Mitigation

Now that you have a thorough understanding of the importance of accuracy
as a Responsible AI principle and how it could affect the performance of
your ML model(s), and ultimately the success of your business, it’s
important to understand various mitigation and improvement measures to
improve the performance of your ML model(s).

The accuracy of your model could potentially make or break your
business, for example, if you have an ML model that identifies
fraudulent claims and the accuracy of your model is poor, it means that
you could be falsely accusing innocent people of fraudulent claims. This
could not only damage the reputation of your business and
potential/existing customers, it could also lead to reputational damage,
lawsuits, and consequently regulatory fines.

Depending on if you have a poor accuracy score from the above rubric,
the next step is to optimize performance by carrying out the following:

1.  1.

    Increase the number of data in your training set. The more examples,
    the more accurate the model’s performance will be. The only caveat
    to note is increased data equals increased cost, unless using
    synthetic data.

     

2.  2.

    Increase the number of variables which improves feature processing.
    Feature processing refers to the selection, manipulation, and
    transformation of raw data into features used in supervised
    learning.

     

3.  3.

    Tune your model parameters while considering alternate values for
    the training parameters used in your learning algorithm.

     

There are a few additional things to consider such as the model fit. Is
it underfitting or overfitting? Your model is “underfitting” when it
performs poorly on the training data, and it’s “overfitting” when on the
flip side, it performs well on the training data, but poorly on the
evaluation data. When this happens, it’s usually due to memorization of
the data it’s been trained on, and the model is unable to generalize
unseen examples.

Underfitting can be resolved by increasing the model flexibility and
reduction of the amount of regularization used. Regularization refers to
a set of techniques used to reduce model complexity and increase
generalization which improves model accuracy. To solve overfitting,
reduce the model flexibility through less feature combinations, n-grams
size, or increase the amount of regularization used.²⁵

To summarize, in this chapter we looked at “accuracy,” a few key
questions from NIST’s risk management framework to consider when testing
for accuracy, RGA which is a unified measurement for accuracy using the
“Rank Graduation” measure, ways to evaluate the performance of your ML
algorithms and models, a couple of benchmarks, and mitigation
recommendations. In the next chapter, we’ll look at robustness and how
to ensure you have secure and robust ML models.

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
