[]

[Cover Image]

Introduction to Algorithms

Fourth Edition

Thomas H. Cormen

Charles E. Leiserson

Ronald L. Rivest

Clifford Stein

Introduction to Algorithms

Fourth Edition

The MIT Press

Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England

© 2022 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form
or by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying,
recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in
writing from the publisher.

The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who
provided comments on drafts of this book. The generous work of academic
experts is essential for establishing the authority and quality of our
publications. We acknowledge with gratitude the contributions of these
otherwise uncredited readers.

Names: Cormen, Thomas H., author. | Leiserson, Charles Eric, author. |
Rivest, Ronald L., author. | Stein, Clifford, author.

Title: Introduction to algorithms / Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E.
Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, Clifford Stein.

Description: Fourth edition. | Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press,
[2022] | Includes bibliographical references and index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2021037260 | ISBN 9780262367509

Subjects: LCSH: Computer programming. | Computer algorithms.

Classification: LCC QA76.6 .C662 2022 | DDC 005.13--dc23

LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2021037260

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

d_r0

Contents

Copyright

Preface

I        Foundations

Introduction

1      The Role of Algorithms in Computing

1.1      Algorithms

1.2      Algorithms as a technology

2      Getting Started

2.1      Insertion sort

2.2      Analyzing algorithms

2.3      Designing algorithms

3      Characterizing Running Times

3.1      O-notation, Ω-notation, and Θ-notation

3.2      Asymptotic notation: formal definitions

3.3      Standard notations and common functions

4      Divide-and-Conquer

4.1      Multiplying square matrices

4.2      Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication

4.3      The substitution method for solving recurrences

4.4      The recursion-tree method for solving recurrences

4.5      The master method for solving recurrences

 ★     4.6      Proof of the continuous master theorem

 ★     4.7      Akra-Bazzi recurrences

5      Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms

5.1      The hiring problem

5.2      Indicator random variables

5.3      Randomized algorithms

 ★     5.4      Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator
random variables

II      Sorting and Order Statistics

Introduction

6      Heapsort

6.1      Heaps

6.2      Maintaining the heap property

6.3      Building a heap

6.4      The heapsort algorithm

6.5      Priority queues

7      Quicksort

7.1      Description of quicksort

7.2      Performance of quicksort

7.3      A randomized version of quicksort

7.4      Analysis of quicksort

8      Sorting in Linear Time

8.1      Lower bounds for sorting

8.2      Counting sort

8.3      Radix sort

8.4      Bucket sort

9      Medians and Order Statistics

9.1      Minimum and maximum

9.2      Selection in expected linear time

9.3      Selection in worst-case linear time

III     Data Structures

Introduction

10    Elementary Data Structures

10.1    Simple array-based data structures: arrays, matrices, stacks,
queues

10.2    Linked lists

10.3    Representing rooted trees

11    Hash Tables

11.1    Direct-address tables

11.2    Hash tables

11.3    Hash functions

11.4    Open addressing

11.5    Practical considerations

12    Binary Search Trees

12.1    What is a binary search tree?

12.2    Querying a binary search tree

12.3    Insertion and deletion

13    Red-Black Trees

13.1    Properties of red-black trees

13.2    Rotations

13.3    Insertion

13.4    Deletion

IV     Advanced Design and Analysis Techniques

Introduction

14    Dynamic Programming

14.1    Rod cutting

14.2    Matrix-chain multiplication

14.3    Elements of dynamic programming

14.4    Longest common subsequence

14.5    Optimal binary search trees

15    Greedy Algorithms

15.1    An activity-selection problem

15.2    Elements of the greedy strategy

15.3    Huffman codes

15.4    Offline caching

16    Amortized Analysis

16.1    Aggregate analysis

16.2    The accounting method

16.3    The potential method

16.4    Dynamic tables

V      Advanced Data Structures

Introduction

17    Augmenting Data Structures

17.1    Dynamic order statistics

17.2    How to augment a data structure

17.3    Interval trees

18    B-Trees

18.1    Definition of B-trees

18.2    Basic operations on B-trees

18.3    Deleting a key from a B-tree

19    Data Structures for Disjoint Sets

19.1    Disjoint-set operations

19.2    Linked-list representation of disjoint sets

19.3    Disjoint-set forests

 ★     19.4    Analysis of union by rank with path compression

VI     Graph Algorithms

Introduction

20    Elementary Graph Algorithms

20.1    Representations of graphs

20.2    Breadth-first search

20.3    Depth-first search

20.4    Topological sort

20.5    Strongly connected components

21    Minimum Spanning Trees

21.1    Growing a minimum spanning tree

21.2    The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim

22    Single-Source Shortest Paths

22.1    The Bellman-Ford algorithm

22.2    Single-source shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs

22.3    Dijkstra’s algorithm

22.4    Difference constraints and shortest paths

22.5    Proofs of shortest-paths properties

23    All-Pairs Shortest Paths

23.1    Shortest paths and matrix multiplication

23.2    The Floyd-Warshall algorithm

23.3    Johnson’s algorithm for sparse graphs

24    Maximum Flow

24.1    Flow networks

24.2    The Ford-Fulkerson method

24.3    Maximum bipartite matching

25    Matchings in Bipartite Graphs

25.1    Maximum bipartite matching (revisited)

25.2    The stable-marriage problem

25.3    The Hungarian algorithm for the assignment problem

VII   Selected Topics

Introduction

26    Parallel Algorithms

26.1    The basics of fork-join parallelism

26.2    Parallel matrix multiplication

26.3    Parallel merge sort

27    Online Algorithms

27.1    Waiting for an elevator

27.2    Maintaining a search list

27.3    Online caching

28    Matrix Operations

28.1    Solving systems of linear equations

28.2    Inverting matrices

28.3    Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squares
approximation

29    Linear Programming

29.1    Linear programming formulations and algorithms

29.2    Formulating problems as linear programs

29.3    Duality

30    Polynomials and the FFT

30.1    Representing polynomials

30.2    The DFT and FFT

30.3    FFT circuits

31    Number-Theoretic Algorithms

31.1    Elementary number-theoretic notions

31.2    Greatest common divisor

31.3    Modular arithmetic

31.4    Solving modular linear equations

31.5    The Chinese remainder theorem

31.6    Powers of an element

31.7    The RSA public-key cryptosystem

 ★     31.8    Primality testing

32    String Matching

32.1    The naive string-matching algorithm

32.2    The Rabin-Karp algorithm

32.3    String matching with finite automata

 ★     32.4    The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm

32.5    Suffix arrays

33    Machine-Learning Algorithms

33.1    Clustering

33.2    Multiplicative-weights algorithms

33.3    Gradient descent

34    NP-Completeness

34.1    Polynomial time

34.2    Polynomial-time verification

34.3    NP-completeness and reducibility

34.4    NP-completeness proofs

34.5    NP-complete problems

35    Approximation Algorithms

35.1    The vertex-cover problem

35.2    The traveling-salesperson problem

35.3    The set-covering problem

35.4    Randomization and linear programming

35.5    The subset-sum problem

VIII  Appendix: Mathematical Background

Introduction

A     Summations

A.1     Summation formulas and properties

A.2 Bounding summations

B     Sets, Etc.

B.1     Sets

B.2     Relations

B.3     Functions

B.4     Graphs

B.5     Trees

C     Counting and Probability

C.1     Counting

C.2     Probability

C.3     Discrete random variables

C.4     The geometric and binomial distributions

★     C.5      The tails of the binomial distribution

D     Matrices

D.1     Matrices and matrix operations

D.2     Basic matrix properties

Bibliography

Index

Preface

Not so long ago, anyone who had heard the word “algorithm” was almost
certainly a computer scientist or mathematician. With computers having
become prevalent in our modern lives, however, the term is no longer
esoteric. If you look around your home, you’ll find algorithms running
in the most mundane places: your microwave oven, your washing machine,
and, of course, your computer. You ask algorithms to make
recommendations to you: what music you might like or what route to take
when driving. Our society, for better or for worse, asks algorithms to
suggest sentences for convicted criminals. You even rely on algorithms
to keep you alive, or at least not to kill you: the control systems in
your car or in medical equipment.¹ The word “algorithm” appears
somewhere in the news seemingly every day.

Therefore, it behooves you to understand algorithms not just as a
student or practitioner of computer science, but as a citizen of the
world. Once you understand algorithms, you can educate others about what
algorithms are, how they operate, and what their limitations are.

This book provides a comprehensive introduction to the modern study of
computer algorithms. It presents many algorithms and covers them in
considerable depth, yet makes their design accessible to all levels of
readers. All the analyses are laid out, some simple, some more involved.
We have tried to keep explanations clear without sacrificing depth of
coverage or mathematical rigor.

Each chapter presents an algorithm, a design technique, an application
area, or a related topic. Algorithms are described in English and in a
pseudocode designed to be readable by anyone who has done a little
programming. The book contains 231 figures—many with multiple
parts—illustrating how the algorithms work. Since we emphasize
efficiency as a design criterion, we include careful analyses of the
running times of the algorithms.

The text is intended primarily for use in undergraduate or graduate
courses in algorithms or data structures. Because it discusses
engineering issues in algorithm design, as well as mathematical aspects,
it is equally well suited for self-study by technical professionals.

In this, the fourth edition, we have once again updated the entire book.
The changes cover a broad spectrum, including new chapters and sections,
color illustrations, and what we hope you’ll find to be a more engaging
writing style.

To the teacher

We have designed this book to be both versatile and complete. You should
find it useful for a variety of courses, from an undergraduate course in
data structures up through a graduate course in algorithms. Because we
have provided considerably more material than can fit in a typical
one-term course, you can select the material that best supports the
course you wish to teach.

You should find it easy to organize your course around just the chapters
you need. We have made chapters relatively self-contained, so that you
need not worry about an unexpected and unnecessary dependence of one
chapter on another. Whereas in an undergraduate course, you might use
only some sections from a chapter, in a graduate course, you might cover
the entire chapter.

We have included 931 exercises and 162 problems. Each section ends with
exercises, and each chapter ends with problems. The exercises are
generally short questions that test basic mastery of the material. Some
are simple self-check thought exercises, but many are substantial and
suitable as assigned homework. The problems include more elaborate case
studies which often introduce new material. They often consist of
several parts that lead the student through the steps required to arrive
at a solution.

As with the third edition of this book, we have made publicly available
solutions to some, but by no means all, of the problems and exercises.
You can find these solutions on our website,
http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/. You will want to check this site to
see whether it contains the solution to an exercise or problem that you
plan to assign. Since the set of solutions that we post might grow over
time, we recommend that you check the site each time you teach the
course.

We have starred (★) the sections and exercises that are more suitable
for graduate students than for undergraduates. A starred section is not
necessarily more difficult than an unstarred one, but it may require an
understanding of more advanced mathematics. Likewise, starred exercises
may require an advanced background or more than average creativity.

To the student

We hope that this textbook provides you with an enjoyable introduction
to the field of algorithms. We have attempted to make every algorithm
accessible and interesting. To help you when you encounter unfamiliar or
difficult algorithms, we describe each one in a step-by-step manner. We
also provide careful explanations of the mathematics needed to
understand the analysis of the algorithms and supporting figures to help
you visualize what is going on.

Since this book is large, your class will probably cover only a portion
of its material. Although we hope that you will find this book helpful
to you as a course textbook now, we have also tried to make it
comprehensive enough to warrant space on your future professional
bookshelf.

What are the prerequisites for reading this book?

- You need some programming experience. In particular, you should
  understand recursive procedures and simple data structures, such as
  arrays and linked lists (although Section 10.2 covers linked lists and
  a variant that you may find new).
- You should have some facility with mathematical proofs, and especially
  proofs by mathematical induction. A few portions of the book rely on
  some knowledge of elementary calculus. Although this book uses
  mathematics throughout, Part I and Appendices A–D teach you all the
  mathematical techniques you will need.

Our website, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, links to solutions for
some of the problems and exercises. Feel free to check your solutions
against ours. We ask, however, that you not send your solutions to us.

To the professional

The wide range of topics in this book makes it an excellent handbook on
algorithms. Because each chapter is relatively self-contained, you can
focus on the topics most relevant to you.

Since most of the algorithms we discuss have great practical utility, we
address implementation concerns and other engineering issues. We often
provide practical alternatives to the few algorithms that are primarily
of theoretical interest.

If you wish to implement any of the algorithms, you should find the
translation of our pseudocode into your favorite programming language to
be a fairly straightforward task. We have designed the pseudocode to
present each algorithm clearly and succinctly. Consequently, we do not
address error handling and other software-engineering issues that
require specific assumptions about your programming environment. We
attempt to present each algorithm simply and directly without allowing
the idiosyncrasies of a particular programming language to obscure its
essence. If you are used to 0-origin arrays, you might find our frequent
practice of indexing arrays from 1 a minor stumbling block. You can
always either subtract 1 from our indices or just overallocate the array
and leave position 0 unused.

We understand that if you are using this book outside of a course, then
you might be unable to check your solutions to problems and exercises
against solutions provided by an instructor. Our website,
http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, links to solutions for some of the
problems and exercises so that you can check your work. Please do not
send your solutions to us.

To our colleagues

We have supplied an extensive bibliography and pointers to the current
literature. Each chapter ends with a set of chapter notes that give
historical details and references. The chapter notes do not provide a
complete reference to the whole field of algorithms, however. Though it
may be hard to believe for a book of this size, space constraints
prevented us from including many interesting algorithms.

Despite myriad requests from students for solutions to problems and
exercises, we have adopted the policy of not citing references for them,
removing the temptation for students to look up a solution rather than
to discover it themselves.

Changes for the fourth edition

As we said about the changes for the second and third editions,
depending on how you look at it, the book changed either not much or
quite a bit. A quick look at the table of contents shows that most of
the third-edition chapters and sections appear in the fourth edition. We
removed three chapters and several sections, but we have added three new
chapters and several new sections apart from these new chapters.

We kept the hybrid organization from the first three editions. Rather
than organizing chapters only by problem domains or only according to
techniques, this book incorporates elements of both. It contains
technique-based chapters on divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming,
greedy algorithms, amortized analysis, augmenting data structures,
NP-completeness, and approximation algorithms. But it also has entire
parts on sorting, on data structures for dynamic sets, and on algorithms
for graph problems. We find that although you need to know how to apply
techniques for designing and analyzing algorithms, problems seldom
announce to you which techniques are most amenable to solving them.

Some of the changes in the fourth edition apply generally across the
book, and some are specific to particular chapters or sections. Here is
a summary of the most significant general changes:

- We added 140 new exercises and 22 new problems. We also improved many
  of the old exercises and problems, often as the result of reader
  feedback. (Thanks to all readers who made suggestions.)
- We have color! With designers from the MIT Press, we selected a
  limited palette, devised to convey information and to be pleasing to
  the eye. (We are delighted to display red-black trees in—get this—red
  and black!) To enhance readability, defined terms, pseudocode
  comments, and page numbers in the index are in color.
- Pseudocode procedures appear on a tan background to make them easier
  to spot, and they do not necessarily appear on the page of their first
  reference. When they don’t, the text directs you to the relevant page.
  In the same vein, nonlocal references to numbered equations, theorems,
  lemmas, and corollaries include the page number.
- We removed topics that were rarely taught. We dropped in their
  entirety the chapters on Fibonacci heaps, van Emde Boas trees, and
  computational geometry. In addition, the following material was
  excised: the maximum-subarray problem, implementing pointers and
  objects, perfect hashing, randomly built binary search trees,
  matroids, push-relabel algorithms for maximum flow, the iterative fast
  Fourier transform method, the details of the simplex algorithm for
  linear programming, and integer factorization. You can find all the
  removed material on our website, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/.
- We reviewed the entire book and rewrote sentences, paragraphs, and
  sections to make the writing clearer, more personal, and gender
  neutral. For example, the “traveling-salesman problem” in the previous
  editions is now called the “traveling-salesperson problem.” We believe
  that it is critically important for engineering and science, including
  our own field of computer science, to be welcoming to everyone. (The
  one place that stumped us is in Chapter 13, which requires a term for
  a parent’s sibling. Because the English language has no such
  gender-neutral term, we regretfully stuck with “uncle.”)
- The chapter notes, bibliography, and index were updated, reflecting
  the dramatic growth of the field of algorithms since the third
  edition.
- We corrected errors, posting most corrections on our website of
  third-edition errata. Those that were reported while we were in full
  swing preparing this edition were not posted, but were corrected in
  this edition. (Thanks again to all readers who helped us identify
  issues.)

The specific changes for the fourth edition include the following:

- We renamed Chapter 3 and added a section giving an overview of
  asymptotic notation before delving into the formal definitions.
- Chapter 4 underwent substantial changes to improve its mathematical
  foundation and make it more robust and intuitive. The notion of an
  algorithmic recurrence was introduced, and the topic of ignoring
  floors and ceilings in recurrences was addressed more rigorously. The
  second case of the master theorem incorporates polylogarithmic
  factors, and a rigorous proof of a “continuous” version of the master
  theorem is now provided. We also present the powerful and general
  Akra-Bazzi method (without proof).
- The deterministic order-statistic algorithm in Chapter 9 is slightly
  different, and the analyses of both the randomized and deterministic
  order-statistic algorithms have been revamped.
- In addition to stacks and queues, Section 10.1 discusses ways to store
  arrays and matrices.
- Chapter 11 on hash tables includes a modern treatment of hash
  functions. It also emphasizes linear probing as an efficient method
  for resolving collisions when the underlying hardware implements
  caching to favor local searches.
- To replace the sections on matroids in Chapter 15, we converted a
  problem in the third edition about offline caching into a full
  section.
- Section 16.4 now contains a more intuitive explanation of the
  potential functions to analyze table doubling and halving.
- Chapter 17 on augmenting data structures was relocated from Part III
  to Part V, reflecting our view that this technique goes beyond basic
  material.
- Chapter 25 is a new chapter about matchings in bipartite graphs. It
  presents algorithms to find a matching of maximum cardinality, to
  solve the stable-marriage problem, and to find a maximum-weight
  matching (known as the “assignment problem”).
- Chapter 26, on task-parallel computing, has been updated with modern
  terminology, including the name of the chapter.
- Chapter 27, which covers online algorithms, is another new chapter. In
  an online algorithm, the input arrives over time, rather than being
  available in its entirety at the start of the algorithm. The chapter
  describes several examples of online algorithms, including determining
  how long to wait for an elevator before taking the stairs, maintaining
  a linked list via the move-to-front heuristic, and evaluating
  replacement policies for caches.
- In Chapter 29, we removed the detailed presentation of the simplex
  algorithm, as it was math heavy without really conveying many
  algorithmic ideas. The chapter now focuses on the key aspect of how to
  model problems as linear programs, along with the essential duality
  property of linear programming.
- Section 32.5 adds to the chapter on string matching the simple, yet
  powerful, structure of suffix arrays.
- Chapter 33, on machine learning, is the third new chapter. It
  introduces several basic methods used in machine learning: clustering
  to group similar items together, weighted-majority algorithms, and
  gradient descent to find the minimizer of a function.
- Section 34.5.6 summarizes strategies for polynomial-time reductions to
  show that problems are NP-hard.
- The proof of the approximation algorithm for the set-covering problem
  in Section 35.3 has been revised.

Website

You can use our website, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, to obtain
supplementary information and to communicate with us. The website links
to a list of known errors, material from the third edition that is not
included in the fourth edition, solutions to selected exercises and
problems, Python implementations of many of the algorithms in this book,
a list explaining the corny professor jokes (of course), as well as
other content, which we may add to. The website also tells you how to
report errors or make suggestions.

How we produced this book

Like the previous three editions, the fourth edition was produced in
L^(A)T_(E)X 2_(ε). We used the Times font with mathematics typeset using
the MathTime Professional II fonts. As in all previous editions, we
compiled the index using Windex, a C program that we wrote, and produced
the bibliography using BIBT_(E)X. The PDF files for this book were
created on a MacBook Pro running macOS 10.14.

Our plea to Apple in the preface of the third edition to update MacDraw
Pro for macOS 10 went for naught, and so we continued to draw
illustrations on pre-Intel Macs running MacDraw Pro under the Classic
environment of older versions of macOS 10. Many of the mathematical
expressions appearing in illustrations were laid in with the psfrag
package for L^(A)T_(E)X 2_(ε).

Acknowledgments for the fourth edition

We have been working with the MIT Press since we started writing the
first edition in 1987, collaborating with several directors, editors,
and production staff. Throughout our association with the MIT Press,
their support has always been outstanding. Special thanks to our editors
Marie Lee, who put up with us for far too long, and Elizabeth Swayze,
who pushed us over the finish line. Thanks also to Director Amy Brand
and to Alex Hoopes.

As in the third edition, we were geographically distributed while
producing the fourth edition, working in the Dartmouth College
Department of Computer Science; the MIT Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory and the MIT Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science; and the Columbia University Department of
Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Department of Computer
Science, and Data Science Institute. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we
worked largely from home. We thank our respective universities and
colleagues for providing such supportive and stimulating environments.
As we complete this book, those of us who are not retired are eager to
return to our respective universities now that the pandemic seems to be
abating.

Julie Sussman, P.P.A., came to our rescue once again with her technical
copy-editing under tremendous time pressure. If not for Julie, this book
would be riddled with errors (or, let’s say, many more errors than it
has) and would be far less readable. Julie, we will be forever indebted
to you. Errors that remain are the responsibility of the authors (and
probably were inserted after Julie read the material).

Dozens of errors in previous editions were corrected in the process of
creating this edition. We thank our readers—too many to list them
all—who have reported errors and suggested improvements over the years.

We received considerable help in preparing some of the new material in
this edition. Neville Campbell (unaffiliated), Bill Kuszmaul of MIT, and
Chee Yap of NYU provided valuable advice regarding the treatment of
recurrences in Chapter 4. Yan Gu of the University of California,
Riverside, provided feedback on parallel algorithms in Chapter 26. Rob
Shapire of Microsoft Research altered our approach to the material on
machine learning with his detailed comments on Chapter 33. Qi Qi of MIT
helped with the analysis of the Monty Hall problem (Problem C-1).

Molly Seaman and Mary Reilly of the MIT Press helped us select the color
palette in the illustrations, and Wojciech Jarosz of Dartmouth College
suggested design improvements to our newly colored figures. Yichen
(Annie) Ke and Linda Xiao, who have since graduated from Dartmouth,
aided in colorizing the illustrations, and Linda also produced many of
the Python implementations that are available on the book’s website.

Finally, we thank our wives—Wendy Leiserson, Gail Rivest, Rebecca Ivry,
and the late Nicole Cormen—and our families. The patience and
encouragement of those who love us made this project possible. We
affectionately dedicate this book to them.

 

  ---------------------- --------------------------
  THOMAS H. CORMEN       Lebanon, New Hampshire
  CHARLES E. LEISERSON   Cambridge, Massachusetts
  RONALD L. RIVEST       Cambridge, Massachusetts
  CLIFFORD STEIN         New York, New York
  June, 2021             
  ---------------------- --------------------------

¹ To understand many of the ways in which algorithms influence our daily
lives, see the book by Fry [162].

Part I    Foundations

 

 

Introduction

When you design and analyze algorithms, you need to be able to describe
how they operate and how to design them. You also need some mathematical
tools to show that your algorithms do the right thing and do it
efficiently. This part will get you started. Later parts of this book
will build upon this base.

Chapter 1 provides an overview of algorithms and their place in modern
computing systems. This chapter defines what an algorithm is and lists
some examples. It also makes a case for considering algorithms as a
technology, alongside technologies such as fast hardware, graphical user
interfaces, object-oriented systems, and networks.

In Chapter 2, we see our first algorithms, which solve the problem of
sorting a sequence of n numbers. They are written in a pseudocode which,
although not directly translatable to any conventional programming
language, conveys the structure of the algorithm clearly enough that you
should be able to implement it in the language of your choice. The
sorting algorithms we examine are insertion sort, which uses an
incremental approach, and merge sort, which uses a recursive technique
known as “divide-and-conquer.” Although the time each requires increases
with the value of n, the rate of increase differs between the two
algorithms. We determine these running times in Chapter 2, and we
develop a useful “asymptotic” notation to express them.

Chapter 3 precisely defines asymptotic notation. We’ll use asymptotic
notation to bound the growth of functions—most often, functions that
describe the running time of algorithms—from above and below. The
chapter starts by informally defining the most commonly used asymptotic
notations and giving an example of how to apply them. It then formally
defines five asymptotic notations and presents conventions for how to
put them together. The rest of Chapter 3 is primarily a presentation of
mathematical notation, more to ensure that your use of notation matches
that in this book than to teach you new mathematical concepts.

Chapter 4 delves further into the divide-and-conquer method introduced
in Chapter 2. It provides two additional examples of divide-and-conquer
algorithms for multiplying square matrices, including Strassen’s
surprising method. Chapter 4 contains methods for solving recurrences,
which are useful for describing the running times of recursive
algorithms. In the substitution method, you guess an answer and prove it
correct. Recursion trees provide one way to generate a guess. Chapter 4
also presents the powerful technique of the “master method,” which you
can often use to solve recurrences that arise from divide-and-conquer
algorithms. Although the chapter provides a proof of a foundational
theorem on which the master theorem depends, you should feel free to
employ the master method without delving into the proof. Chapter 4
concludes with some advanced topics.

Chapter 5 introduces probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms.
You typically use probabilistic analysis to determine the running time
of an algorithm in cases in which, due to the presence of an inherent
probability distribution, the running time may differ on different
inputs of the same size. In some cases, you might assume that the inputs
conform to a known probability distribution, so that you are averaging
the running time over all possible inputs. In other cases, the
probability distribution comes not from the inputs but from random
choices made during the course of the algorithm. An algorithm whose
behavior is determined not only by its input but by the values produced
by a random-number generator is a randomized algorithm. You can use
randomized algorithms to enforce a probability distribution on the
inputs—thereby ensuring that no particular input always causes poor
performance—or even to bound the error rate of algorithms that are
allowed to produce incorrect results on a limited basis.

Appendices A–D contain other mathematical material that you will find
helpful as you read this book. You might have seen much of the material
in the appendix chapters before having read this book (although the
specific definitions and notational conventions we use may differ in
some cases from what you have seen in the past), and so you should think
of the appendices as reference material. On the other hand, you probably
have not already seen most of the material in Part I. All the chapters
in Part I and the appendices are written with a tutorial flavor.

1          The Role of Algorithms in Computing

What are algorithms? Why is the study of algorithms worthwhile? What is
the role of algorithms relative to other technologies used in computers?
This chapter will answer these questions.

1.1      Algorithms

Informally, an algorithm is any well-defined computational procedure
that takes some value, or set of values, as input and produces some
value, or set of values, as output in a finite amount of time. An
algorithm is thus a sequence of computational steps that transform the
input into the output.

You can also view an algorithm as a tool for solving a well-specified
computational problem. The statement of the problem specifies in general
terms the desired input/output relationship for problem instances,
typically of arbitrarily large size. The algorithm describes a specific
computational procedure for achieving that input/output relationship for
all problem instances.

As an example, suppose that you need to sort a sequence of numbers into
monotonically increasing order. This problem arises frequently in
practice and provides fertile ground for introducing many standard
design techniques and analysis tools. Here is how we formally define the
sorting problem:

Input: A sequence of n numbers 〈a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)〉.

Output: A permutation (reordering) [art] of the input sequence such that
[art].

Thus, given the input sequence 〈31, 41, 59, 26, 41, 58〉, a correct
sorting algorithm returns as output the sequence 〈26, 31, 41, 41, 58,
59〉. Such an input sequence is called an instance of the sorting
problem. In general, an instance of a problem¹ consists of the input
(satisfying whatever constraints are imposed in the problem statement)
needed to compute a solution to the problem.

Because many programs use it as an intermediate step, sorting is a
fundamental operation in computer science. As a result, you have a large
number of good sorting algorithms at your disposal. Which algorithm is
best for a given application depends on—among other factors—the number
of items to be sorted, the extent to which the items are already
somewhat sorted, possible restrictions on the item values, the
architecture of the computer, and the kind of storage devices to be
used: main memory, disks, or even—archaically—tapes.

An algorithm for a computational problem is correct if, for every
problem instance provided as input, it halts—finishes its computing in
finite time—and outputs the correct solution to the problem instance. A
correct algorithm solves the given computational problem. An incorrect
algorithm might not halt at all on some input instances, or it might
halt with an incorrect answer. Contrary to what you might expect,
incorrect algorithms can sometimes be useful, if you can control their
error rate. We’ll see an example of an algorithm with a controllable
error rate in Chapter 31 when we study algorithms for finding large
prime numbers. Ordinarily, however, we’ll concern ourselves only with
correct algorithms.

An algorithm can be specified in English, as a computer program, or even
as a hardware design. The only requirement is that the specification
must provide a precise description of the computational procedure to be
followed.

What kinds of problems are solved by algorithms?

Sorting is by no means the only computational problem for which
algorithms have been developed. (You probably suspected as much when you
saw the size of this book.) Practical applications of algorithms are
ubiquitous and include the following examples:

- The Human Genome Project has made great progress toward the goals of
  identifying all the roughly 30,000 genes in human DNA, determining the
  sequences of the roughly 3 billion chemical base pairs that make up
  human DNA, storing this information in databases, and developing tools
  for data analysis. Each of these steps requires sophisticated
  algorithms. Although the solutions to the various problems involved
  are beyond the scope of this book, many methods to solve these
  biological problems use ideas presented here, enabling scientists to
  accomplish tasks while using resources efficiently. Dynamic
  programming, as in Chapter 14, is an important technique for solving
  several of these biological problems, particularly ones that involve
  determining similarity between DNA sequences. The savings realized are
  in time, both human and machine, and in money, as more information can
  be extracted by laboratory techniques.
- The internet enables people all around the world to quickly access and
  retrieve large amounts of information. With the aid of clever
  algorithms, sites on the internet are able to manage and manipulate
  this large volume of data. Examples of problems that make essential
  use of algorithms include finding good routes on which the data
  travels (techniques for solving such problems appear in Chapter 22),
  and using a search engine to quickly find pages on which particular
  information resides (related techniques are in Chapters 11 and 32).
- Electronic commerce enables goods and services to be negotiated and
  exchanged electronically, and it depends on the privacy of personal
  information such as credit card numbers, passwords, and bank
  statements. The core technologies used in electronic commerce include
  public-key cryptography and digital signatures (covered in Chapter
  31), which are based on numerical algorithms and number theory.
- Manufacturing and other commercial enterprises often need to allocate
  scarce resources in the most beneficial way. An oil company might wish
  to know where to place its wells in order to maximize its expected
  profit. A political candidate might want to determine where to spend
  money buying campaign advertising in order to maximize the chances of
  winning an election. An airline might wish to assign crews to flights
  in the least expensive way possible, making sure that each flight is
  covered and that government regulations regarding crew scheduling are
  met. An internet service provider might wish to determine where to
  place additional resources in order to serve its customers more
  effectively. All of these are examples of problems that can be solved
  by modeling them as linear programs, which Chapter 29 explores.

Although some of the details of these examples are beyond the scope of
this book, we do give underlying techniques that apply to these problems
and problem areas. We also show how to solve many specific problems,
including the following:

- You have a road map on which the distance between each pair of
  adjacent intersections is marked, and you wish to determine the
  shortest route from one intersection to another. The number of
  possible routes can be huge, even if you disallow routes that cross
  over themselves. How can you choose which of all possible routes is
  the shortest? You can start by modeling the road map (which is itself
  a model of the actual roads) as a graph (which we will meet in Part VI
  and Appendix B). In this graph, you wish to find the shortest path
  from one vertex to another. Chapter 22 shows how to solve this problem
  efficiently.
- Given a mechanical design in terms of a library of parts, where each
  part may include instances of other parts, list the parts in order so
  that each part appears before any part that uses it. If the design
  comprises n parts, then there are n! possible orders, where n! denotes
  the factorial function. Because the factorial function grows faster
  than even an exponential function, you cannot feasibly generate each
  possible order and then verify that, within that order, each part
  appears before the parts using it (unless you have only a few parts).
  This problem is an instance of topological sorting, and Chapter 20
  shows how to solve this problem efficiently.
- A doctor needs to determine whether an image represents a cancerous
  tumor or a benign one. The doctor has available images of many other
  tumors, some of which are known to be cancerous and some of which are
  known to be benign. A cancerous tumor is likely to be more similar to
  other cancerous tumors than to benign tumors, and a benign tumor is
  more likely to be similar to other benign tumors. By using a
  clustering algorithm, as in Chapter 33, the doctor can identify which
  outcome is more likely.
- You need to compress a large file containing text so that it occupies
  less space. Many ways to do so are known, including “LZW compression,”
  which looks for repeating character sequences. Chapter 15 studies a
  different approach, “Huffman coding,” which encodes characters by bit
  sequences of various lengths, with characters occurring more
  frequently encoded by shorter bit sequences.

These lists are far from exhaustive (as you again have probably surmised
from this book’s heft), but they exhibit two characteristics common to
many interesting algorithmic problems:

1.  They have many candidate solutions, the overwhelming majority of
    which do not solve the problem at hand. Finding one that does, or
    one that is “best,” without explicitly examining each possible
    solution, can present quite a challenge.
2.  They have practical applications. Of the problems in the above list,
    finding the shortest path provides the easiest examples. A
    transportation firm, such as a trucking or railroad company, has a
    financial interest in finding shortest paths through a road or rail
    network because taking shorter paths results in lower labor and fuel
    costs. Or a routing node on the internet might need to find the
    shortest path through the network in order to route a message
    quickly. Or a person wishing to drive from New York to Boston might
    want to find driving directions using a navigation app.

Not every problem solved by algorithms has an easily identified set of
candidate solutions. For example, given a set of numerical values
representing samples of a signal taken at regular time intervals, the
discrete Fourier transform converts the time domain to the frequency
domain. That is, it approximates the signal as a weighted sum of
sinusoids, producing the strength of various frequencies which, when
summed, approximate the sampled signal. In addition to lying at the
heart of signal processing, discrete Fourier transforms have
applications in data compression and multiplying large polynomials and
integers. Chapter 30 gives an efficient algorithm, the fast Fourier
transform (commonly called the FFT), for this problem. The chapter also
sketches out the design of a hardware FFT circuit.

Data structures

This book also presents several data structures. A data structure is a
way to store and organize data in order to facilitate access and
modifications. Using the appropriate data structure or structures is an
important part of algorithm design. No single data structure works well
for all purposes, and so you should know the strengths and limitations
of several of them.

Technique

Although you can use this book as a “cookbook” for algorithms, you might
someday encounter a problem for which you cannot readily find a
published algorithm (many of the exercises and problems in this book,
for example). This book will teach you techniques of algorithm design
and analysis so that you can develop algorithms on your own, show that
they give the correct answer, and analyze their efficiency. Different
chapters address different aspects of algorithmic problem solving. Some
chapters address specific problems, such as finding medians and order
statistics in Chapter 9, computing minimum spanning trees in Chapter 21,
and determining a maximum flow in a network in Chapter 24. Other
chapters introduce techniques, such as divide-and-conquer in Chapters 2
and 4, dynamic programming in Chapter 14, and amortized analysis in
Chapter 16.

Hard problems

Most of this book is about efficient algorithms. Our usual measure of
efficiency is speed: how long does an algorithm take to produce its
result? There are some problems, however, for which we know of no
algorithm that runs in a reasonable amount of time. Chapter 34 studies
an interesting subset of these problems, which are known as NP-complete.

Why are NP-complete problems interesting? First, although no efficient
algorithm for an NP-complete problem has ever been found, nobody has
ever proven that an efficient algorithm for one cannot exist. In other
words, no one knows whether efficient algorithms exist for NP-complete
problems. Second, the set of NP-complete problems has the remarkable
property that if an efficient algorithm exists for any one of them, then
efficient algorithms exist for all of them. This relationship among the
NP-complete problems makes the lack of efficient solutions all the more
tantalizing. Third, several NP-complete problems are similar, but not
identical, to problems for which we do know of efficient algorithms.
Computer scientists are intrigued by how a small change to the problem
statement can cause a big change to the efficiency of the best known
algorithm.

You should know about NP-complete problems because some of them arise
surprisingly often in real applications. If you are called upon to
produce an efficient algorithm for an NP-complete problem, you are
likely to spend a lot of time in a fruitless search. If, instead, you
can show that the problem is NP-complete, you can spend your time
developing an efficient approximation algorithm, that is, an algorithm
that gives a good, but not necessarily the best possible, solution.

As a concrete example, consider a delivery company with a central depot.
Each day, it loads up delivery trucks at the depot and sends them around
to deliver goods to several addresses. At the end of the day, each truck
must end up back at the depot so that it is ready to be loaded for the
next day. To reduce costs, the company wants to select an order of
delivery stops that yields the lowest overall distance traveled by each
truck. This problem is the well-known “traveling-salesperson problem,”
and it is NP-complete.² It has no known efficient algorithm. Under
certain assumptions, however, we know of efficient algorithms that
compute overall distances close to the smallest possible. Chapter 35
discusses such “approximation algorithms.”

Alternative computing models

For many years, we could count on processor clock speeds increasing at a
steady rate. Physical limitations present a fundamental roadblock to
ever-increasing clock speeds, however: because power density increases
superlinearly with clock speed, chips run the risk of melting once their
clock speeds become high enough. In order to perform more computations
per second, therefore, chips are being designed to contain not just one
but several processing “cores.” We can liken these multicore computers
to several sequential computers on a single chip. In other words, they
are a type of “parallel computer.” In order to elicit the best
performance from multicore computers, we need to design algorithms with
parallelism in mind. Chapter 26 presents a model for “task-parallel”
algorithms, which take advantage of multiple processing cores. This
model has advantages from both theoretical and practical standpoints,
and many modern parallel-programming platforms embrace something similar
to this model of parallelism.

Most of the examples in this book assume that all of the input data are
available when an algorithm begins running. Much of the work in
algorithm design makes the same assumption. For many important
real-world examples, however, the input actually arrives over time, and
the algorithm must decide how to proceed without knowing what data will
arrive in the future. In a data center, jobs are constantly arriving and
departing, and a scheduling algorithm must decide when and where to run
a job, without knowing what jobs will be arriving in the future. Traffic
must be routed in the internet based on the current state, without
knowing about where traffic will arrive in the future. Hospital
emergency rooms make triage decisions about which patients to treat
first without knowing when other patients will be arriving in the future
and what treatments they will need. Algorithms that receive their input
over time, rather than having all the input present at the start, are
online algorithms, which Chapter 27 examines.

Exercises

1.1-1

Describe your own real-world example that requires sorting. Describe one
that requires finding the shortest distance between two points.

1.1-2

Other than speed, what other measures of efficiency might you need to
consider in a real-world setting?

1.1-3

Select a data structure that you have seen, and discuss its strengths
and limitations.

1.1-4

How are the shortest-path and traveling-salesperson problems given above
similar? How are they different?

1.1-5

Suggest a real-world problem in which only the best solution will do.
Then come up with one in which “approximately” the best solution is good
enough.

1.1-6

Describe a real-world problem in which sometimes the entire input is
available before you need to solve the problem, but other times the
input is not entirely available in advance and arrives over time.

1.2      Algorithms as a technology

If computers were infinitely fast and computer memory were free, would
you have any reason to study algorithms? The answer is yes, if for no
other reason than that you would still like to be certain that your
solution method terminates and does so with the correct answer.

If computers were infinitely fast, any correct method for solving a
problem would do. You would probably want your implementation to be
within the bounds of good software engineering practice (for example,
your implementation should be well designed and documented), but you
would most often use whichever method was the easiest to implement.

Of course, computers may be fast, but they are not infinitely fast.
Computing time is therefore a bounded resource, which makes it precious.
Although the saying goes, “Time is money,” time is even more valuable
than money: you can get back money after you spend it, but once time is
spent, you can never get it back. Memory may be inexpensive, but it is
neither infinite nor free. You should choose algorithms that use the
resources of time and space efficiently.

Efficiency

Different algorithms devised to solve the same problem often differ
dramatically in their efficiency. These differences can be much more
significant than differences due to hardware and software.

As an example, Chapter 2 introduces two algorithms for sorting. The
first, known as insertion sort, takes time roughly equal to c₁n² to sort
n items, where c₁ is a constant that does not depend on n. That is, it
takes time roughly proportional to n². The second, merge sort, takes
time roughly equal to c₂n lg n, where lg n stands for log₂ n and c₂ is
another constant that also does not depend on n. Insertion sort
typically has a smaller constant factor than merge sort, so that c₁ <
c₂. We’ll see that the constant factors can have far less of an impact
on the running time than the dependence on the input size n. Let’s write
insertion sort’s running time as c₁n · n and merge sort’s running time
as c₂n · lg n. Then we see that where insertion sort has a factor of n
in its running time, merge sort has a factor of lg n, which is much
smaller. For example, when n is 1000, lg n is approximately 10, and when
n is 1,000,000, lg n is approximately only 20. Although insertion sort
usually runs faster than merge sort for small input sizes, once the
input size n becomes large enough, merge sort’s advantage of lg n versus
n more than compensates for the difference in constant factors. No
matter how much smaller c₁ is than c₂, there is always a crossover point
beyond which merge sort is faster.

For a concrete example, let us pit a faster computer (computer A)
running insertion sort against a slower computer (computer B) running
merge sort. They each must sort an array of 10 million numbers.
(Although 10 million numbers might seem like a lot, if the numbers are
eight-byte integers, then the input occupies about 80 megabytes, which
fits in the memory of even an inexpensive laptop computer many times
over.) Suppose that computer A executes 10 billion instructions per
second (faster than any single sequential computer at the time of this
writing) and computer B executes only 10 million instructions per second
(much slower than most contemporary computers), so that computer A is
1000 times faster than computer B in raw computing power. To make the
difference even more dramatic, suppose that the world’s craftiest
programmer codes insertion sort in machine language for computer A, and
the resulting code requires 2n² instructions to sort n numbers. Suppose
further that just an average programmer implements merge sort, using a
high-level language with an inefficient compiler, with the resulting
code taking 50 n lg n instructions. To sort 10 million numbers, computer
A takes

[art]

while computer B takes

[art]

By using an algorithm whose running time grows more slowly, even with a
poor compiler, computer B runs more than 17 times faster than computer
A! The advantage of merge sort is even more pronounced when sorting 100
million numbers: where insertion sort takes more than 23 days, merge
sort takes under four hours. Although 100 million might seem like a
large number, there are more than 100 million web searches every half
hour, more than 100 million emails sent every minute, and some of the
smallest galaxies (known as ultra-compact dwarf galaxies) contain about
100 million stars. In general, as the problem size increases, so does
the relative advantage of merge sort.

Algorithms and other technologies

The example above shows that you should consider algorithms, like
computer hardware, as a technology. Total system performance depends on
choosing efficient algorithms as much as on choosing fast hardware. Just
as rapid advances are being made in other computer technologies, they
are being made in algorithms as well.

You might wonder whether algorithms are truly that important on
contemporary computers in light of other advanced technologies, such as

- advanced computer architectures and fabrication technologies,
- easy-to-use, intuitive, graphical user interfaces (GUIs),
- object-oriented systems,
- integrated web technologies,
- fast networking, both wired and wireless,
- machine learning,
- and mobile devices.

The answer is yes. Although some applications do not explicitly require
algorithmic content at the application level (such as some simple,
web-based applications), many do. For example, consider a web-based
service that determines how to travel from one location to another. Its
implementation would rely on fast hardware, a graphical user interface,
wide-area networking, and also possibly on object orientation. It would
also require algorithms for operations such as finding routes (probably
using a shortest-path algorithm), rendering maps, and interpolating
addresses.

Moreover, even an application that does not require algorithmic content
at the application level relies heavily upon algorithms. Does the
application rely on fast hardware? The hardware design used algorithms.
Does the application rely on graphical user interfaces? The design of
any GUI relies on algorithms. Does the application rely on networking?
Routing in networks relies heavily on algorithms. Was the application
written in a language other than machine code? Then it was processed by
a compiler, interpreter, or assembler, all of which make extensive use
of algorithms. Algorithms are at the core of most technologies used in
contemporary computers.

Machine learning can be thought of as a method for performing
algorithmic tasks without explicitly designing an algorithm, but instead
inferring patterns from data and thereby automatically learning a
solution. At first glance, machine learning, which automates the process
of algorithmic design, may seem to make learning about algorithms
obsolete. The opposite is true, however. Machine learning is itself a
collection of algorithms, just under a different name. Furthermore, it
currently seems that the successes of machine learning are mainly for
problems for which we, as humans, do not really understand what the
right algorithm is. Prominent examples include computer vision and
automatic language translation. For algorithmic problems that humans
understand well, such as most of the problems in this book, efficient
algorithms designed to solve a specific problem are typically more
successful than machine-learning approaches.

Data science is an interdisciplinary field with the goal of extracting
knowledge and insights from structured and unstructured data. Data
science uses methods from statistics, computer science, and
optimization. The design and analysis of algorithms is fundamental to
the field. The core techniques of data science, which overlap
significantly with those in machine learning, include many of the
algorithms in this book.

Furthermore, with the ever-increasing capacities of computers, we use
them to solve larger problems than ever before. As we saw in the above
comparison between insertion sort and merge sort, it is at larger
problem sizes that the differences in efficiency between algorithms
become particularly prominent.

Having a solid base of algorithmic knowledge and technique is one
characteristic that defines the truly skilled programmer. With modern
computing technology, you can accomplish some tasks without knowing much
about algorithms, but with a good background in algorithms, you can do
much, much more.

Exercises

1.2-1

Give an example of an application that requires algorithmic content at
the application level, and discuss the function of the algorithms
involved.

1.2-2

Suppose that for inputs of size n on a particular computer, insertion
sort runs in 8n² steps and merge sort runs in 64 n lg n steps. For which
values of n does insertion sort beat merge sort?

1.2-3

What is the smallest value of n such that an algorithm whose running
time is 100n² runs faster than an algorithm whose running time is 2^(n)
on the same machine?

Problems

1-1     Comparison of running times

For each function f (n) and time t in the following table, determine the
largest size n of a problem that can be solved in time t, assuming that
the algorithm to solve the problem takes f (n) microseconds.

[art]

Chapter notes

There are many excellent texts on the general topic of algorithms,
including those by Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5, 6], Dasgupta,
Papadimitriou, and Vazirani [107], Edmonds [133], Erickson [135],
Goodrich and Tamassia [195, 196], Kleinberg and Tardos [257], Knuth
[259, 260, 261, 262, 263], Levitin [298], Louridas [305], Mehlhorn and
Sanders [325], Mitzenmacher and Upfal [331], Neapolitan [342],
Roughgarden [385, 386, 387, 388], Sanders, Mehlhorn, Dietzfelbinger, and
Dementiev [393], Sedgewick and Wayne [402], Skiena [414],
Soltys-Kulinicz [419], Wilf [455], and Williamson and Shmoys [459]. Some
of the more practical aspects of algorithm design are discussed by
Bentley [49, 50, 51], Bhargava [54], Kochenderfer and Wheeler [268], and
McGeoch [321]. Surveys of the field of algorithms can also be found in
books by Atallah and Blanton [27, 28] and Mehta and Sahhi [326]. For
less technical material, see the books by Christian and Griffiths [92],
Cormen [104], Erwig [136], MacCormick [307], and Vöcking et al. [448].
Overviews of the algorithms used in computational biology can be found
in books by Jones and Pevzner [240], Elloumi and Zomaya [134], and
Marchisio [315].

¹ Sometimes, when the problem context is known, problem instances are
themselves simply called “problems.”

² To be precise, only decision problems—those with a “yes/no” answer—can
be NP-complete. The decision version of the traveling salesperson
problem asks whether there exists an order of stops whose distance
totals at most a given amount.

2          Getting Started

This chapter will familiarize you with the framework we’ll use
throughout the book to think about the design and analysis of
algorithms. It is self-contained, but it does include several references
to material that will be introduced in Chapters 3 and 4. (It also
contains several summations, which Appendix A shows how to solve.)

We’ll begin by examining the insertion sort algorithm to solve the
sorting problem introduced in Chapter 1. We’ll specify algorithms using
a pseudocode that should be understandable to you if you have done
computer programming. We’ll see why insertion sort correctly sorts and
analyze its running time. The analysis introduces a notation that
describes how running time increases with the number of items to be
sorted. Following a discussion of insertion sort, we’ll use a method
called divide-and-conquer to develop a sorting algorithm called merge
sort. We’ll end with an analysis of merge sort’s running time.

2.1      Insertion sort

Our first algorithm, insertion sort, solves the sorting problem
introduced in Chapter 1:

Input: A sequence of n numbers 〈a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)〉.

Output: A permutation (reordering) [art] of the input sequence such that
[art].

The numbers to be sorted are also known as the keys. Although the
problem is conceptually about sorting a sequence, the input comes in the
form of an array with n elements. When we want to sort numbers, it’s
often because they are the keys associated with other data, which we
call satellite data. Together, a key and satellite data form a record.
For example, consider a spreadsheet containing student records with many
associated pieces of data such as age, grade-point average, and number
of courses taken. Any one of these quantities could be a key, but when
the spreadsheet sorts, it moves the associated record (the satellite
data) with the key. When describing a sorting algorithm, we focus on the
keys, but it is important to remember that there usually is associated
satellite data.

In this book, we’ll typically describe algorithms as procedures written
in a pseudocode that is similar in many respects to C, C++, Java,
Python,¹ or JavaScript. (Apologies if we’ve omitted your favorite
programming language. We can’t list them all.) If you have been
introduced to any of these languages, you should have little trouble
understanding algorithms “coded” in pseudocode. What separates
pseudocode from real code is that in pseudocode, we employ whatever
expressive method is most clear and concise to specify a given
algorithm. Sometimes the clearest method is English, so do not be
surprised if you come across an English phrase or sentence embedded
within a section that looks more like real code. Another difference
between pseudocode and real code is that pseudocode often ignores
aspects of software engineering—such as data abstraction, modularity,
and error handling—in order to convey the essence of the algorithm more
concisely.

We start with insertion sort, which is an efficient algorithm for
sorting a small number of elements. Insertion sort works the way you
might sort a hand of playing cards. Start with an empty left hand and
the cards in a pile on the table. Pick up the first card in the pile and
hold it with your left hand. Then, with your right hand, remove one card
at a time from the pile, and insert it into the correct position in your
left hand. As Figure 2.1 illustrates, you find the correct position for
a card by comparing it with each of the cards already in your left hand,
starting at the right and moving left. As soon as you see a card in your
left hand whose value is less than or equal to the card you’re holding
in your right hand, insert the card that you’re holding in your right
hand just to the right of this card in your left hand. If all the cards
in your left hand have values greater than the card in your right hand,
then place this card as the leftmost card in your left hand. At all
times, the cards held in your left hand are sorted, and these cards were
originally the top cards of the pile on the table.

The pseudocode for insertion sort is given as the procedure
INSERTION-SORT on the facing page. It takes two parameters: an array A
containing the values to be sorted and the number n of values of sort.
The values occupy positions A[1] through A[n] of the array, which we
denote by A[1 : n]. When the INSERTION-SORT procedure is finished, array
A[1 : n] contains the original values, but in sorted order.

[art]

Figure 2.1 Sorting a hand of cards using insertion sort.

INSERTION-SORT(A, n)

  --- -------------------------------------------------------
  1   for i = 2 to n
  2   key = A[i]
  3   // Insert A[i] into the sorted subarray A[1 : i – 1].
  4   j = i – 1
  5   while j > 0 and A[j] > key
  6   A[j + 1] = A[j]
  7   j = j – 1
  8   A[j + 1] = key
  --- -------------------------------------------------------

Loop invariants and the correctness of insertion sort

Figure 2.2 shows how this algorithm works for an array A that starts out
with the sequence 〈5, 2, 4, 6, 1, 3〉. The index i indicates the
“current card” being inserted into the hand. At the beginning of each
iteration of the for loop, which is indexed by i, the subarray (a
contiguous portion of the array) consisting of elements A[1 : i – 1]
(that is, A[1] through A[i – 1]) constitutes the currently sorted hand,
and the remaining subarray A[i + 1 : n] (elements A[i + 1] through A[n])
corresponds to the pile of cards still on the table. In fact, elements
A[1 : i – 1] are the elements originally in positions 1 through i – 1,
but now in sorted order. We state these properties of A[1 : i – 1]
formally as a loop invariant:

[art]

Figure 2.2 The operation of INSERTION-SORT(A, n), where A initially
contains the sequence 〈5, 2, 4, 6, 1, 3〉 and n = 6. Array indices
appear above the rectangles, and values stored in the array positions
appear within the rectangles. (a)–(e) The iterations of the for loop of
lines 1–8. In each iteration, the blue rectangle holds the key taken
from A[i], which is compared with the values in tan rectangles to its
left in the test of line 5. Orange arrows show array values moved one
position to the right in line 6, and blue arrows indicate where the key
moves to in line 8. (f) The final sorted array.

At the start of each iteration of the for loop of lines 1–8, the
subarray A[1 : i – 1] consists of the elements originally in A[1 : i –
1], but in sorted order.

Loop invariants help us understand why an algorithm is correct. When
you’re using a loop invariant, you need to show three things:

Initialization: It is true prior to the first iteration of the loop.

Maintenance: If it is true before an iteration of the loop, it remains
true before the next iteration.

Termination: The loop terminates, and when it terminates, the
invariant—usually along with the reason that the loop terminated—gives
us a useful property that helps show that the algorithm is correct.

When the first two properties hold, the loop invariant is true prior to
every iteration of the loop. (Of course, you are free to use established
facts other than the loop invariant itself to prove that the loop
invariant remains true before each iteration.) A loop-invariant proof is
a form of mathematical induction, where to prove that a property holds,
you prove a base case and an inductive step. Here, showing that the
invariant holds before the first iteration corresponds to the base case,
and showing that the invariant holds from iteration to iteration
corresponds to the inductive step.

The third property is perhaps the most important one, since you are
using the loop invariant to show correctness. Typically, you use the
loop invariant along with the condition that caused the loop to
terminate. Mathematical induction typically applies the inductive step
infinitely, but in a loop invariant the “induction” stops when the loop
terminates.

Let’s see how these properties hold for insertion sort.

Initialization: We start by showing that the loop invariant holds before
the first loop iteration, when i = 2.² The subarray A[1 : i – 1]
consists of just the single element A[1], which is in fact the original
element in A[1]. Moreover, this subarray is sorted (after all, how could
a subarray with just one value not be sorted?), which shows that the
loop invariant holds prior to the first iteration of the loop.

Maintenance: Next, we tackle the second property: showing that each
iteration maintains the loop invariant. Informally, the body of the for
loop works by moving the values in A[i – 1], A[i – 2], A[i – 3], and so
on by one position to the right until it finds the proper position for
A[i] (lines 4–7), at which point it inserts the value of A[i] (line 8).
The subarray A[1 : i] then consists of the elements originally in A[1 :
i], but in sorted order. Incrementing i (increasing its value by 1) for
the next iteration of the for loop then preserves the loop invariant.

A more formal treatment of the second property would require us to state
and show a loop invariant for the while loop of lines 5–7. Let’s not get
bogged down in such formalism just yet. Instead, we’ll rely on our
informal analysis to show that the second property holds for the outer
loop.

Termination: Finally, we examine loop termination. The loop variable i
starts at 2 and increases by 1 in each iteration. Once i’s value exceeds
n in line 1, the loop terminates. That is, the loop terminates once i
equals n + 1. Substituting n + 1 for i in the wording of the loop
invariant yields that the subarray A[1 : n] consists of the elements
originally in A[1 : n], but in sorted order. Hence, the algorithm is
correct.

This method of loop invariants is used to show correctness in various
places throughout this book.

Pseudocode conventions

We use the following conventions in our pseudocode.

- Indentation indicates block structure. For example, the body of the
  for loop that begins on line 1 consists of lines 2–8, and the body of
  the while loop that begins on line 5 contains lines 6–7 but not
  line 8. Our indentation style applies to if-else statements³ as well.
  Using indentation instead of textual indicators of block structure,
  such as begin and end statements or curly braces, reduces clutter
  while preserving, or even enhancing, clarity.⁴

- The looping constructs while, for, and repeat-until and the if-else
  conditional construct have interpretations similar to those in C, C++,
  Java, Python, and JavaScript.⁵ In this book, the loop counter retains
  its value after the loop is exited, unlike some situations that arise
  in C++ and Java. Thus, immediately after a for loop, the loop
  counter’s value is the value that first exceeded the for loop bound.⁶
  We used this property in our correctness argument for insertion sort.
  The for loop header in line 1 is for i = 2 to n, and so when this loop
  terminates, i equals n + 1. We use the keyword to when a for loop
  increments its loop counter in each iteration, and we use the keyword
  downto when a for loop decrements its loop counter (reduces its value
  by 1 in each iteration). When the loop counter changes by an amount
  greater than 1, the amount of change follows the optional keyword by.

- The symbol “//” indicates that the remainder of the line is a comment.

- Variables (such as i, j, and key) are local to the given procedure. We
  won’t use global variables without explicit indication.

- We access array elements by specifying the array name followed by the
  index in square brackets. For example, A[i] indicates the ith element
  of the array A.

  Although many programming languages enforce 0-origin indexing for
  arrays (0 is the smallest valid index), we choose whichever indexing
  scheme is clearest for human readers to understand. Because people
  usually start counting at 1, not 0, most—but not all—of the arrays in
  this book use 1-origin indexing. To be clear about whether a
  particular algorithm assumes 0-origin or 1-origin indexing, we’ll
  specify the bounds of the arrays explicitly. If you are implementing
  an algorithm that we specify using 1-origin indexing, but you’re
  writing in a programming language that enforces 0-origin indexing
  (such as C, C++, Java, Python, or JavaScript), then give yourself
  credit for being able to adjust. You can either always subtract 1 from
  each index or allocate each array with one extra position and just
  ignore position 0.

  The notation “:” denotes a subarray. Thus, A[i : j] indicates the
  subarray of A consisting of the elements A[i], A[i + 1], … , A[j].⁷ We
  also use this notation to indicate the bounds of an array, as we did
  earlier when discussing the array A[1 : n].

- We typically organize compound data into objects, which are composed
  of attributes. We access a particular attribute using the syntax found
  in many object-oriented programming languages: the object name,
  followed by a dot, followed by the attribute name. For example, if an
  object x has attribute f, we denote this attribute by x.f.

  We treat a variable representing an array or object as a pointer
  (known as a reference in some programming languages) to the data
  representing the array or object. For all attributes f of an object x,
  setting y = x causes y.f to equal x.f. Moreover, if we now set x.f =
  3, then afterward not only does x.f equal 3, but y.f equals 3 as well.
  In other words, x and y point to the same object after the assignment
  y = x. This way of treating arrays and objects is consistent with most
  contemporary programming languages.

  Our attribute notation can “cascade.” For example, suppose that the
  attribute f is itself a pointer to some type of object that has an
  attribute g. Then the notation x.f.g is implicitly parenthesized as
  (x.f).g. In other words, if we had assigned y = x.f, then x.f.g is the
  same as y.g.

  Sometimes a pointer refers to no object at all. In this case, we give
  it the special value NIL.

- We pass parameters to a procedure by value: the called procedure
  receives its own copy of the parameters, and if it assigns a value to
  a parameter, the change is not seen by the calling procedure. When
  objects are passed, the pointer to the data representing the object is
  copied, but the object’s attributes are not. For example, if x is a
  parameter of a called procedure, the assignment x = y within the
  called procedure is not visible to the calling procedure. The
  assignment x.f = 3, however, is visible if the calling procedure has a
  pointer to the same object as x. Similarly, arrays are passed by
  pointer, so that a pointer to the array is passed, rather than the
  entire array, and changes to individual array elements are visible to
  the calling procedure. Again, most contemporary programming languages
  work this way.

- A return statement immediately transfers control back to the point of
  call in the calling procedure. Most return statements also take a
  value to pass back to the caller. Our pseudocode differs from many
  programming languages in that we allow multiple values to be returned
  in a single return statement without having to create objects to
  package them together.⁸

- The boolean operators “and” and “or” are short circuiting. That is,
  evaluate the expression “x and y” by first evaluating x. If x
  evaluates to FALSE, then the entire expression cannot evaluate to
  TRUE, and therefore y is not evaluated. If, on the other hand, x
  evaluates to TRUE, y must be evaluated to determine the value of the
  entire expression. Similarly, in the expression “x or y” the
  expression y is evaluated only if x evaluates to FALSE.
  Short-circuiting operators allow us to write boolean expressions such
  as “x ≠ NIL and x.f = y” without worrying about what happens upon
  evaluating x.f when x is NIL.

- The keyword error indicates that an error occurred because conditions
  were wrong for the procedure to have been called, and the procedure
  immediately terminates. The calling procedure is responsible for
  handling the error, and so we do not specify what action to take.

Exercises

2.1-1

Using Figure 2.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of INSERTION-SORT
on an array initially containing the sequence 〈31, 41, 59, 26, 41,
58〉.

2.1-2

Consider the procedure SUM-ARRAY on the facing page. It computes the sum
of the n numbers in array A[1 : n]. State a loop invariant for this
procedure, and use its initialization, maintenance, and termination
properties to show that the SUM-ARRAY procedure returns the sum of the
numbers in A[1 : n].

SUM-ARRAY(A, n)

  --- ------------------
  1   sum = 0
  2   for i = 1 to n
  3   sum = sum + A[i]
  4   return sum
  --- ------------------

2.1-3

Rewrite the INSERTION-SORT procedure to sort into monotonically
decreasing instead of monotonically increasing order.

2.1-4

Consider the searching problem:

Input: A sequence of n numbers 〈a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)〉 stored in array A[1
: n] and a value x.

Output: An index i such that x equals A[i] or the special value NIL if x
does not appear in A.

Write pseudocode for linear search, which scans through the array from
beginning to end, looking for x. Using a loop invariant, prove that your
algorithm is correct. Make sure that your loop invariant fulfills the
three necessary properties.

2.1-5

Consider the problem of adding two n-bit binary integers a and b, stored
in two n-element arrays A[0 : n – 1] and B[0 : n – 1], where each
element is either 0 or 1, [art], and [art]. The sum c = a + b of the two
integers should be stored in binary form in an (n + 1)-element array C
[0 : n], where [art]. Write a procedure ADD-BINARY-INTEGERS that takes
as input arrays A and B, along with the length n, and returns array C
holding the sum.

2.2      Analyzing algorithms

Analyzing an algorithm has come to mean predicting the resources that
the algorithm requires. You might consider resources such as memory,
communication bandwidth, or energy consumption. Most often, however,
you’ll want to measure computational time. If you analyze several
candidate algorithms for a problem, you can identify the most efficient
one. There might be more than just one viable candidate, but you can
often rule out several inferior algorithms in the process.

Before you can analyze an algorithm, you need a model of the technology
that it runs on, including the resources of that technology and a way to
express their costs. Most of this book assumes a generic one-processor,
random-access machine (RAM) model of computation as the implementation
technology, with the understanding that algorithms are implemented as
computer programs. In the RAM model, instructions execute one after
another, with no concurrent operations. The RAM model assumes that each
instruction takes the same amount of time as any other instruction and
that each data access—using the value of a variable or storing into a
variable—takes the same amount of time as any other data access. In
other words, in the RAM model each instruction or data access takes a
constant amount of time—even indexing into an array.⁹

Strictly speaking, we should precisely define the instructions of the
RAM model and their costs. To do so, however, would be tedious and yield
little insight into algorithm design and analysis. Yet we must be
careful not to abuse the RAM model. For example, what if a RAM had an
instruction that sorts? Then you could sort in just one step. Such a RAM
would be unrealistic, since such instructions do not appear in real
computers. Our guide, therefore, is how real computers are designed. The
RAM model contains instructions commonly found in real computers:
arithmetic (such as add, subtract, multiply, divide, remainder, floor,
ceiling), data movement (load, store, copy), and control (conditional
and unconditional branch, subroutine call and return).

The data types in the RAM model are integer, floating point (for storing
real-number approximations), and character. Real computers do not
usually have a separate data type for the boolean values TRUE and FALSE.
Instead, they often test whether an integer value is 0 (FALSE) or
nonzero (TRUE), as in C. Although we typically do not concern ourselves
with precision for floating-point values in this book (many numbers
cannot be represented exactly in floating point), precision is crucial
for most applications. We also assume that each word of data has a limit
on the number of bits. For example, when working with inputs of size n,
we typically assume that integers are represented by c log₂ n bits for
some constant c ≥ 1. We require c ≥ 1 so that each word can hold the
value of n, enabling us to index the individual input elements, and we
restrict c to be a constant so that the word size does not grow
arbitrarily. (If the word size could grow arbitrarily, we could store
huge amounts of data in one word and operate on it all in constant
time—an unrealistic scenario.)

Real computers contain instructions not listed above, and such
instructions represent a gray area in the RAM model. For example, is
exponentiation a constant-time instruction? In the general case, no: to
compute x^(n) when x and n are general integers typically takes time
logarithmic in n (see equation (31.34) on page 934), and you must worry
about whether the result fits into a computer word. If n is an exact
power of 2, however, exponentiation can usually be viewed as a
constant-time operation. Many computers have a “shift left” instruction,
which in constant time shifts the bits of an integer by n positions to
the left. In most computers, shifting the bits of an integer by 1
position to the left is equivalent to multiplying by 2, so that shifting
the bits by n positions to the left is equivalent to multiplying by
2^(n). Therefore, such computers can compute 2^(n) in 1 constant-time
instruction by shifting the integer 1 by n positions to the left, as
long as n is no more than the number of bits in a computer word. We’ll
try to avoid such gray areas in the RAM model and treat computing 2^(n)
and multiplying by 2^(n) as constant-time operations when the result is
small enough to fit in a computer word.

The RAM model does not account for the memory hierarchy that is common
in contemporary computers. It models neither caches nor virtual memory.
Several other computational models attempt to account for
memory-hierarchy effects, which are sometimes significant in real
programs on real machines. Section 11.5 and a handful of problems in
this book examine memory-hierarchy effects, but for the most part, the
analyses in this book do not consider them. Models that include the
memory hierarchy are quite a bit more complex than the RAM model, and so
they can be difficult to work with. Moreover, RAM-model analyses are
usually excellent predictors of performance on actual machines.

Although it is often straightforward to analyze an algorithm in the RAM
model, sometimes it can be quite a challenge. You might need to employ
mathematical tools such as combinatorics, probability theory, algebraic
dexterity, and the ability to identify the most significant terms in a
formula. Because an algorithm might behave differently for each possible
input, we need a means for summarizing that behavior in simple, easily
understood formulas.

Analysis of insertion sort

How long does the INSERTION-SORT procedure take? One way to tell would
be for you to run it on your computer and time how long it takes to run.
Of course, you’d first have to implement it in a real programming
language, since you cannot run our pseudocode directly. What would such
a timing test tell you? You would find out how long insertion sort takes
to run on your particular computer, on that particular input, under the
particular implementation that you created, with the particular compiler
or interpreter that you ran, with the particular libraries that you
linked in, and with the particular background tasks that were running on
your computer concurrently with your timing test (such as checking for
incoming information over a network). If you run insertion sort again on
your computer with the same input, you might even get a different timing
result. From running just one implementation of insertion sort on just
one computer and on just one input, what would you be able to determine
about insertion sort’s running time if you were to give it a different
input, if you were to run it on a different computer, or if you were to
implement it in a different programming language? Not much. We need a
way to predict, given a new input, how long insertion sort will take.

Instead of timing a run, or even several runs, of insertion sort, we can
determine how long it takes by analyzing the algorithm itself. We’ll
examine how many times it executes each line of pseudocode and how long
each line of pseudocode takes to run. We’ll first come up with a precise
but complicated formula for the running time. Then, we’ll distill the
important part of the formula using a convenient notation that can help
us compare the running times of different algorithms for the same
problem.

How do we analyze insertion sort? First, let’s acknowledge that the
running time depends on the input. You shouldn’t be terribly surprised
that sorting a thousand numbers takes longer than sorting three numbers.
Moreover, insertion sort can take different amounts of time to sort two
input arrays of the same size, depending on how nearly sorted they
already are. Even though the running time can depend on many features of
the input, we’ll focus on the one that has been shown to have the
greatest effect, namely the size of the input, and describe the running
time of a program as a function of the size of its input. To do so, we
need to define the terms “running time” and “input size” more carefully.
We also need to be clear about whether we are discussing the running
time for an input that elicits the worst-case behavior, the best-case
behavior, or some other case.

The best notion for input size depends on the problem being studied. For
many problems, such as sorting or computing discrete Fourier transforms,
the most natural measure is the number of items in the input—for
example, the number n of items being sorted. For many other problems,
such as multiplying two integers, the best measure of input size is the
total number of bits needed to represent the input in ordinary binary
notation. Sometimes it is more appropriate to describe the size of the
input with more than just one number. For example, if the input to an
algorithm is a graph, we usually characterize the input size by both the
number of vertices and the number of edges in the graph. We’ll indicate
which input size measure is being used with each problem we study.

The running time of an algorithm on a particular input is the number of
instructions and data accesses executed. How we account for these costs
should be independent of any particular computer, but within the
framework of the RAM model. For the moment, let us adopt the following
view. A constant amount of time is required to execute each line of our
pseudocode. One line might take more or less time than another line, but
we’ll assume that each execution of the kth line takes c_(k) time, where
c_(k) is a constant. This viewpoint is in keeping with the RAM model,
and it also reflects how the pseudocode would be implemented on most
actual computers.¹⁰

Let’s analyze the INSERTION-SORT procedure. As promised, we’ll start by
devising a precise formula that uses the input size and all the
statement costs c_(k). This formula turns out to be messy, however.
We’ll then switch to a simpler notation that is more concise and easier
to use. This simpler notation makes clear how to compare the running
times of algorithms, especially as the size of the input increases.

To analyze the INSERTION-SORT procedure, let’s view it on the following
page with the time cost of each statement and the number of times each
statement is executed. For each i = 2, 3, … , n, let t_(i) denote the
number of times the while loop test in line 5 is executed for that value
of i. When a for or while loop exits in the usual way—because the test
in the loop header comes up FALSE—the test is executed one time more
than the loop body. Because comments are not executable statements,
assume that they take no time.

The running time of the algorithm is the sum of running times for each
statement executed. A statement that takes c_(k) steps to execute and
executes m times contributes c_(k)m to the total running time.¹¹ We
usually denote the running time of an algorithm on an input of size n by
T (n). To compute T (n), the running time of INSERTION-SORT on an input
of n values, we sum the products of the cost and times columns,
obtaining

+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+
| INSERTION-SORT(A, n)                                  | cost | times |
+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+
| 1          | for i = 2 to n                           | c₁   | n     |
+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+
| 2          | key = A[i]                               | c₂   | n – 1 |
+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+
| 3          | // Insert A[i] into the sorted subarray  | 0    | n – 1 |
|            | A[1 : i – 1].                            |      |       |
+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+
| 4          | j = i – 1                                | c₄   | n – 1 |
+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+
| 5          | while j > 0 and A[j] > key               | c₅   | [art] |
+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+
| 6          | A[j + 1] = A[j]                          | c₆   | [art] |
+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+
| 7          | j = j – 1                                | c₇   | [art] |
+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+
| 8          | A[j + 1] = key                           | c₈   | n – 1 |
+------------+------------------------------------------+------+-------+

[art]

Even for inputs of a given size, an algorithm’s running time may depend
on which input of that size is given. For example, in INSERTION-SORT,
the best case occurs when the array is already sorted. In this case,
each time that line 5 executes, the value of key—the value originally in
A[i]—is already greater than or equal to all values in A[1 : i – 1], so
that the while loop of lines 5–7 always exits upon the first test in
line 5. Therefore, we have that t_(i) = 1 for i = 2, 3, … , n, and the
best-case running time is given by

[art]

We can express this running time as an + b for constants a and b that
depend on the statement costs c_(k) (where a = c₁ + c₂ + c₄ + c₅ + c₈
and b = c₂ + c₄ + c₅ + c₈). The running time is thus a linear function
of n.

The worst case arises when the array is in reverse sorted order—that is,
it starts out in decreasing order. The procedure must compare each
element A[i] with each element in the entire sorted subarray A[1 : i –
1], and so t_(i) = i for i = 2, 3, … , n. (The procedure finds that
A[j] > key every time in line 5, and the while loop exits only when j
reaches 0.) Noting that

[art]

and

[art]

we find that in the worst case, the running time of INSERTION-SORT is

[art]

We can express this worst-case running time as an² + bn + c for
constants a, b, and c that again depend on the statement costs c_(k)
(now, a = c₅/2 + c₆/2 + c₇/2, b = c₁ + c₂ + c₄ + c₅/2 – c₆/2 – c₇/2 +
c₈, and c = –(c₂ + c₄ + c₅ + c₈)). The running time is thus a quadratic
function of n.

Typically, as in insertion sort, the running time of an algorithm is
fixed for a given input, although we’ll also see some interesting
“randomized” algorithms whose behavior can vary even for a fixed input.

Worst-case and average-case analysis

Our analysis of insertion sort looked at both the best case, in which
the input array was already sorted, and the worst case, in which the
input array was reverse sorted. For the remainder of this book, though,
we’ll usually (but not always) concentrate on finding only the
worst-case running time, that is, the longest running time for any input
of size n. Why? Here are three reasons:

- The worst-case running time of an algorithm gives an upper bound on
  the running time for any input. If you know it, then you have a
  guarantee that the algorithm never takes any longer. You need not make
  some educated guess about the running time and hope that it never gets
  much worse. This feature is especially important for real-time
  computing, in which operations must complete by a deadline.
- For some algorithms, the worst case occurs fairly often. For example,
  in searching a database for a particular piece of information, the
  searching algorithm’s worst case often occurs when the information is
  not present in the database. In some applications, searches for absent
  information may be frequent.
- The “average case” is often roughly as bad as the worst case. Suppose
  that you run insertion sort on an array of n randomly chosen numbers.
  How long does it take to determine where in subarray A[1 : i – 1] to
  insert element A[i]? On average, half the elements in A[1 : i – 1] are
  less than A[i], and half the elements are greater. On average,
  therefore, A[i] is compared with just half of the subarray A[1 : i –
  1], and so t_(i) is about i/2. The resulting average-case running time
  turns out to be a quadratic function of the input size, just like the
  worst-case running time.

In some particular cases, we’ll be interested in the average-case
running time of an algorithm. We’ll see the technique of probabilistic
analysis applied to various algorithms throughout this book. The scope
of average-case analysis is limited, because it may not be apparent what
constitutes an “average” input for a particular problem. Often, we’ll
assume that all inputs of a given size are equally likely. In practice,
this assumption may be violated, but we can sometimes use a randomized
algorithm, which makes random choices, to allow a probabilistic analysis
and yield an expected running time. We explore randomized algorithms
more in Chapter 5 and in several other subsequent chapters.

Order of growth

In order to ease our analysis of the INSERTION-SORT procedure, we used
some simplifying abstractions. First, we ignored the actual cost of each
statement, using the constants c_(k) to represent these costs. Still,
the best-case and worst-case running times in equations (2.1) and (2.2)
are rather unwieldy. The constants in these expressions give us more
detail than we really need. That’s why we also expressed the best-case
running time as an + b for constants a and b that depend on the
statement costs c_(k) and why we expressed the worst-case running time
as an² + bn + c for constants a, b, and c that depend on the statement
costs. We thus ignored not only the actual statement costs, but also the
abstract costs c_(k).

Let’s now make one more simplifying abstraction: it is the rate of
growth, or order of growth, of the running time that really interests
us. We therefore consider only the leading term of a formula (e.g.,
an²), since the lower-order terms are relatively insignificant for large
values of n. We also ignore the leading term’s constant coefficient,
since constant factors are less significant than the rate of growth in
determining computational efficiency for large inputs. For insertion
sort’s worst-case running time, when we ignore the lower-order terms and
the leading term’s constant coefficient, only the factor of n² from the
leading term remains. That factor, n², is by far the most important part
of the running time. For example, suppose that an algorithm implemented
on a particular machine takes n²/100 + 100n + 17 microseconds on an
input of size n. Although the coefficients of 1/100 for the n² term and
100 for the n term differ by four orders of magnitude, the n²/100 term
dominates the 100n term once n exceeds 10,000. Although 10,000 might
seem large, it is smaller than the population of an average town. Many
real-world problems have much larger input sizes.

To highlight the order of growth of the running time, we have a special
notation that uses the Greek letter Θ (theta). We write that insertion
sort has a worst-case running time of Θ(n²) (pronounced “theta of
n-squared” or just “theta n-squared”). We also write that insertion sort
has a best-case running time of Θ(n) (“theta of n” or “theta n”). For
now, think of Θ-notation as saying “roughly proportional when n is
large,” so that Θ(n²) means “roughly proportional to n² when n is large”
and Θ(n) means “roughly proportional to n when n is large” We’ll use
Θ-notation informally in this chapter and define it precisely in Chapter
3.

We usually consider one algorithm to be more efficient than another if
its worst-case running time has a lower order of growth. Due to constant
factors and lower-order terms, an algorithm whose running time has a
higher order of growth might take less time for small inputs than an
algorithm whose running time has a lower order of growth. But on large
enough inputs, an algorithm whose worst-case running time is Θ(n²), for
example, takes less time in the worst case than an algorithm whose
worst-case running time is Θ(n³). Regardless of the constants hidden by
the Θ-notation, there is always some number, say n₀, such that for all
input sizes n ≥ n₀, the Θ(n²) algorithm beats the Θ(n³) algorithm in the
worst case.

Exercises

2.2-1

Express the function n³/1000 + 100n² – 100n + 3 in terms of Θ-notation.

2.2-2

Consider sorting n numbers stored in array A[1 : n] by first finding the
smallest element of A[1 : n] and exchanging it with the element in A[1].
Then find the smallest element of A[2 : n], and exchange it with A[2].
Then find the smallest element of A[3 : n], and exchange it with A[3].
Continue in this manner for the first n – 1 elements of A. Write
pseudocode for this algorithm, which is known as selection sort. What
loop invariant does this algorithm maintain? Why does it need to run for
only the first n – 1 elements, rather than for all n elements? Give the
worst-case running time of selection sort in Θ-notation. Is the
best-case running time any better?

2.2-3

Consider linear search again (see Exercise 2.1-4). How many elements of
the input array need to be checked on the average, assuming that the
element being searched for is equally likely to be any element in the
array? How about in the worst case? Using Θ-notation, give the
average-case and worst-case running times of linear search. Justify your
answers.

2.2-4

How can you modify any sorting algorithm to have a good best-case
running time?

2.3      Designing algorithms

You can choose from a wide range of algorithm design techniques.
Insertion sort uses the incremental method: for each element A[i],
insert it into its proper place in the subarray A[1 : i], having already
sorted the subarray A[1 : i – 1].

This section examines another design method, known as
“divide-and-conquer,” which we explore in more detail in Chapter 4.
We’ll use divide-and-conquer to design a sorting algorithm whose
worst-case running time is much less than that of insertion sort. One
advantage of using an algorithm that follows the divide-and-conquer
method is that analyzing its running time is often straightforward,
using techniques that we’ll explore in Chapter 4.

2.3.1    The divide-and-conquer method

Many useful algorithms are recursive in structure: to solve a given
problem, they recurse (call themselves) one or more times to handle
closely related subproblems. These algorithms typically follow the
divide-and-conquer method: they break the problem into several
subproblems that are similar to the original problem but smaller in
size, solve the subproblems recursively, and then combine these
solutions to create a solution to the original problem.

In the divide-and-conquer method, if the problem is small enough—the
base case—you just solve it directly without recursing. Otherwise—the
recursive case—you perform three characteristic steps:

Divide the problem into one or more subproblems that are smaller
instances of the same problem.

Conquer the subproblems by solving them recursively.

Combine the subproblem solutions to form a solution to the original
problem.

The merge sort algorithm closely follows the divide-and-conquer method.
In each step, it sorts a subarray A[p : r], starting with the entire
array A[1 : n] and recursing down to smaller and smaller subarrays. Here
is how merge sort operates:

Divide the subarray A[p : r] to be sorted into two adjacent subarrays,
each of half the size. To do so, compute the midpoint q of A[p : r]
(taking the average of p and r), and divide A[p : r] into subarrays A[p
: q] and A[q + 1 : r].

Conquer by sorting each of the two subarrays A[p : q] and A[q + 1 : r]
recursively using merge sort.

Combine by merging the two sorted subarrays A[p : q] and A[q + 1 : r]
back into A[p : r], producing the sorted answer.

The recursion “bottoms out”—it reaches the base case—when the subarray
A[p : r] to be sorted has just 1 element, that is, when p equals r. As
we noted in the initialization argument for INSERTION-SORT’s loop
invariant, a subarray comprising just a single element is always sorted.

The key operation of the merge sort algorithm occurs in the “combine”
step, which merges two adjacent, sorted subarrays. The merge operation
is performed by the auxiliary procedure MERGE(A, p, q, r) on the
following page, where A is an array and p, q, and r are indices into the
array such that p ≤ q < r. The procedure assumes that the adjacent
subarrays A[p : q] and A[q + 1 : r] were already recursively sorted. It
merges the two sorted subarrays to form a single sorted subarray that
replaces the current subarray A[p : r].

To understand how the MERGE procedure works, let’s return to our
card-playing motif. Suppose that you have two piles of cards face up on
a table. Each pile is sorted, with the smallest-value cards on top. You
wish to merge the two piles into a single sorted output pile, which is
to be face down on the table. The basic step consists of choosing the
smaller of the two cards on top of the face-up piles, removing it from
its pile—which exposes a new top card—and placing this card face down
onto the output pile. Repeat this step until one input pile is empty, at
which time you can just take the remaining input pile and flip over the
entire pile, placing it face down onto the output pile.

Let’s think about how long it takes to merge two sorted piles of cards.
Each basic step takes constant time, since you are comparing just the
two top cards. If the two sorted piles that you start with each have n/2
cards, then the number of basic steps is at least n/2 (since in
whichever pile was emptied, every card was found to be smaller than some
card from the other pile) and at most n (actually, at most n – 1, since
after n – 1 basic steps, one of the piles must be empty). With each
basic step taking constant time and the total number of basic steps
being between n/2 and n, we can say that merging takes time roughly
proportional to n. That is, merging takes Θ(n) time.

In detail, the MERGE procedure works as follows. It copies the two
subarrays A[p : q] and A[q + 1 : r] into temporary arrays L and R
(“left” and “right”), and then it merges the values in L and R back into
A[p : r]. Lines 1 and 2 compute the lengths n_(L) and n_(R) of the
subarrays A[p : q] and A[q + 1 : r], respectively. Then line 3 creates
arrays L[0 : n_(L) – 1] and R[0 : n_(R) – 1] with respective lengths
n_(L) and n_(R).¹² The for loop of lines 4–5 copies the subarray A[p :
q] into L, and the for loop of lines 6–7 copies the subarray A[q + 1 :
r] into R.

MERGE(A, p, q, r)

+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|   1                   | n_(L) = q – p + 1       | // length of A[p : q]   |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|   2                   | n_(R) = r – q           | // length of A[q + 1 :  |
|                       |                         | r]                      |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|   3                   | let L[0 : n_(L) – 1] and R[0 : n_(R) – 1] be new  |
|                       | arrays                                            |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|   4                   | for i = 0 to n_(L) – 1  | // copy A[p : q] into   |
|                       |                         | L[0 : n_(L) – 1]        |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|   5                   | L[i] = A[p + i]                                   |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|   6                   | for j = 0 to n_(R) – 1  | // copy A[q + 1 : r]    |
|                       |                         | into R[0 : n_(R) – 1]   |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|   7                   | R[j] = A[q + j + 1]                               |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|   8                   | i = 0                   | // i indexes the        |
|                       |                         | smallest remaining      |
|                       |                         | element in L            |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|   9                   | j = 0                   | // j indexes the        |
|                       |                         | smallest remaining      |
|                       |                         | element in R            |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10                    | k = p                   | // k indexes the        |
|                       |                         | location in A to fill   |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11                    | // As long as each of the arrays L and R contains |
|                       | an unmerged element,                              |
|                       | //          copy the smallest unmerged element    |
|                       | back into A[p : r].                               |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 12                    | while i < n_(L) and j < n_(R)                     |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 13                    | if L[i] ≤ R[j]                                    |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 14                    | A[k] = L[i]                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 15                    | i = i + 1                                         |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 16                    | else A[k] = R[j]                                  |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 17                    | j = j + 1                                         |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 18                    | k = k + 1                                         |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 19                    | // Having gone through one of L and R entirely,   |
|                       | copy the                                          |
|                       | //          remainder of the other to the end of  |
|                       | A[p : r].                                         |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 20                    | while i < n_(L)                                   |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 21                    | A[k] = L[i]                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 22                    | i = i + 1                                         |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 23                    | k = k + 1                                         |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 24                    | while j < n_(R)                                   |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 25                    | A[k] = R[j]                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 26                    | j = j + 1                                         |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 27                    | k = k + 1                                         |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

Lines 8–18, illustrated in Figure 2.3, perform the basic steps. The
while loop of lines 12–18 repeatedly identifies the smallest value in L
and R that has yet to be copied back into A[p : r] and copies it back
in. As the comments indicate, the index k gives the position of A that
is being filled in, and the indices i and j give the positions in L and
R, respectively, of the smallest remaining values. Eventually, either
all of L or all of R is copied back into A[p : r], and this loop
terminates. If the loop terminates because all of R has been copied
back, that is, because j equals n_(R), then i is still less than n_(L),
so that some of L has yet to be copied back, and these values are the
greatest in both L and R. In this case, the while loop of lines 20–23
copies these remaining values of L into the last few positions of A[p :
r]. Because j equals n_(R), the while loop of lines 24–27 iterates 0
times. If instead the while loop of lines 12–18 terminates because i
equals n_(L), then all of L has already been copied back into A[p : r],
and the while loop of lines 24–27 copies the remaining values of R back
into the end of A[p : r].

[art]

Figure 2.3 The operation of the while loop in lines 8–18 in the call
MERGE(A, 9, 12, 16), when the subarray A[9 : 16] contains the values
〈2, 4, 6, 7, 1, 2, 3, 5〉. After allocating and copying into the arrays
L and R, the array L contains 〈2, 4, 6, 7〉, and the array R contains
〈1, 2, 3, 5〉. Tan positions in A contain their final values, and tan
positions in L and R contain values that have yet to be copied back into
A. Taken together, the tan positions always comprise the values
originally in A[9 : 16]. Blue positions in A contain values that will be
copied over, and dark positions in L and R contain values that have
already been copied back into A. (a)–(g) The arrays A, L, and R, and
their respective indices k, i, and j prior to each iteration of the loop
of lines 12–18. At the point in part (g), all values in R have been
copied back into A (indicated by j equaling the length of R), and so the
while loop in lines 12–18 terminates. (h) The arrays and indices at
termination. The while loops of lines 20–23 and 24–27 copied back into A
the remaining values in L and R, which are the largest values originally
in A[9 : 16]. Here, lines 20–23 copied L[2 : 3] into A[15 : 16], and
because all values in R had already been copied back into A, the while
loop of lines 24–27 iterated 0 times. At this point, the subarray in A[9
: 16] is sorted.

To see that the MERGE procedure runs in Θ(n) time, where n = r – p +
1,¹³ observe that each of lines 1–3 and 8–10 takes constant time, and
the for loops of lines 4–7 take Θ(n_(L) + n_(R)) = Θ(n) time.¹⁴ To
account for the three while loops of lines 12–18, 20–23, and 24–27,
observe that each iteration of these loops copies exactly one value from
L or R back into A and that every value is copied back into A exactly
once. Therefore, these three loops together make a total of n
iterations. Since each iteration of each of the three loops takes
constant time, the total time spent in these three loops is Θ(n).

We can now use the MERGE procedure as a subroutine in the merge sort
algorithm. The procedure MERGE-SORT(A, p, r) on the facing page sorts
the elements in the subarray A[p : r]. If p equals r, the subarray has
just 1 element and is therefore already sorted. Otherwise, we must have
p < r, and MERGE-SORT runs the divide, conquer, and combine steps. The
divide step simply computes an index q that partitions A[p : r] into two
adjacent subarrays: A[p : q], containing ⌈n/2⌉ elements, and A[q + 1 :
r], containing ⌊n/2⌋ elements.¹⁵ The initial call MERGE-SORT(A, 1, n)
sorts the entire array A[1 : n].

Figure 2.4 illustrates the operation of the procedure for n = 8, showing
also the sequence of divide and merge steps. The algorithm recursively
divides the array down to 1-element subarrays. The combine steps merge
pairs of 1-element subarrays to form sorted subarrays of length 2,
merges those to form sorted subarrays of length 4, and merges those to
form the final sorted subarray of length 8. If n is not an exact power
of 2, then some divide steps create subarrays whose lengths differ by 1.
(For example, when dividing a subarray of length 7, one subarray has
length 4 and the other has length 3.) Regardless of the lengths of the
two subarrays being merged, the time to merge a total of n items is
Θ(n).

MERGE-SORT(A, p, r)

+---+---------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 1 | if p ≥ r                  | // zero or one element?          |
+---+---------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 2 | return                    |                                  |
+---+---------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 3 | q = ⌊(p + r)/2⌋           | // midpoint of A[p : r]          |
+---+---------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 4 | MERGE-SORT(A, p, q)       | // recursively sort A[p : q]     |
+---+---------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 5 | MERGE-SORT(A, q + 1, r)   | // recursively sort A[q + 1 : r] |
+---+---------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 6 | // Merge A[p : q] and A[q + 1 : r] into A[p : r].            |
+---+---------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 7 | MERGE(A, p, q, r)         |                                  |
+---+---------------------------+----------------------------------+

2.3.2    Analyzing divide-and-conquer algorithms

When an algorithm contains a recursive call, you can often describe its
running time by a recurrence equation or recurrence, which describes the
overall running time on a problem of size n in terms of the running time
of the same algorithm on smaller inputs. You can then use mathematical
tools to solve the recurrence and provide bounds on the performance of
the algorithm.

A recurrence for the running time of a divide-and-conquer algorithm
falls out from the three steps of the basic method. As we did for
insertion sort, let T (n) be the worst-case running time on a problem of
size n. If the problem size is small enough, say n < n₀ for some
constant n₀ > 0, the straightforward solution takes constant time, which
we write as Θ(1).¹⁶ Suppose that the division of the problem yields a
subproblems, each with size n/b, that is, 1/b the size of the original.
For merge sort, both a and b are 2, but we’ll see other
divide-and-conquer algorithms in which a ≠ b. It takes T (n/b) time to
solve one subproblem of size n/b, and so it takes aT (n/b) time to solve
all a of them. If it takes D(n) time to divide the problem into
subproblems and C(n) time to combine the solutions to the subproblems
into the solution to the original problem, we get the recurrence

[art]

Chapter 4 shows how to solve common recurrences of this form.

[art]

Figure 2.4 The operation of merge sort on the array A with length 8 that
initially contains the sequence 〈12, 3, 7, 9, 14, 6, 11, 2〉. The
indices p, q, and r into each subarray appear above their values.
Numbers in italics indicate the order in which the MERGE-SORT and MERGE
procedures are called following the initial call of MERGE-SORT(A, 1, 8).

Sometimes, the n/b size of the divide step isn’t an integer. For
example, the MERGE-SORT procedure divides a problem of size n into
subproblems of sizes ⌈n/2⌉ and ⌊n/2⌋. Since the difference between ⌈n/2⌉
and ⌊n/2⌋ is at most 1, which for large n is much smaller than the
effect of dividing n by 2, we’ll squint a little and just call them both
size n/2. As Chapter 4 will discuss, this simplification of ignoring
floors and ceilings does not generally affect the order of growth of a
solution to a divide-and-conquer recurrence.

Another convention we’ll adopt is to omit a statement of the base cases
of the recurrence, which we’ll also discuss in more detail in Chapter 4.
The reason is that the base cases are pretty much always T (n) = Θ(1) if
n < n₀ for some constant n₀ > 0. That’s because the running time of an
algorithm on an input of constant size is constant. We save ourselves a
lot of extra writing by adopting this convention.

Analysis of merge sort

Here’s how to set up the recurrence for T (n), the worst-case running
time of merge sort on n numbers.

Divide: The divide step just computes the middle of the subarray, which
takes constant time. Thus, D(n) = Θ(1).

Conquer: Recursively solving two subproblems, each of size n/2,
contributes 2T (n/2) to the running time (ignoring the floors and
ceilings, as we discussed).

Combine: Since the MERGE procedure on an n-element subarray takes Θ(n)
time, we have C(n) = Θ(n).

When we add the functions D(n) and C(n) for the merge sort analysis, we
are adding a function that is Θ(n) and a function that is Θ(1). This sum
is a linear function of n. That is, it is roughly proportional to n when
n is large, and so merge sort’s dividing and combining times together
are Θ(n). Adding Θ(n) to the 2T (n/2) term from the conquer step gives
the recurrence for the worst-case running time T (n) of merge sort:

[art]

Chapter 4 presents the “master theorem,” which shows that T (n) = Θ(n lg
n).¹⁷ Compared with insertion sort, whose worst-case running time is
Θ(n²), merge sort trades away a factor of n for a factor of lg n.
Because the logarithm function grows more slowly than any linear
function, that’s a good trade. For large enough inputs, merge sort, with
its Θ(n lg n) worst-case running time, outperforms insertion sort, whose
worst-case running time is Θ(n²).

We do not need the master theorem, however, to understand intuitively
why the solution to recurrence (2.3) is T (n) = Θ(n lg n). For
simplicity, assume that n is an exact power of 2 and that the implicit
base case is n = 1. Then recurrence (2.3) is essentially

[art]

where the constant c₁ > 0 represents the time required to solve a
problem of size 1, and c₂ > 0 is the time per array element of the
divide and combine steps.¹⁸

Figure 2.5 illustrates one way of figuring out the solution to
recurrence (2.4). Part (a) of the figure shows T (n), which part (b)
expands into an equivalent tree representing the recurrence. The c₂n
term denotes the cost of dividing and combining at the top level of
recursion, and the two subtrees of the root are the two smaller
recurrences T (n/2). Part (c) shows this process carried one step
further by expanding T (n/2). The cost for dividing and combining at
each of the two nodes at the second level of recursion is c₂n/2.
Continue to expand each node in the tree by breaking it into its
constituent parts as determined by the recurrence, until the problem
sizes get down to 1, each with a cost of c₁. Part (d) shows the
resulting recursion tree.

Next, add the costs across each level of the tree. The top level has
total cost c₂n, the next level down has total cost c₂(n/2) + c₂(n/2) =
c₂n, the level after that has total cost c₂(n/4) + c₂(n/4) + c₂(n/4) +
c₂(n/4) = c₂n, and so on. Each level has twice as many nodes as the
level above, but each node contributes only half the cost of a node from
the level above. From one level to the next, doubling and halving cancel
each other out, so that the cost across each level is the same: c₂n. In
general, the level that is i levels below the top has 2^(i) nodes, each
contributing a cost of c₂(n/2^(i)), so that the ith level below the top
has total cost 2^(i) · c₂(n/2^(i)) = c₂n. The bottom level has n nodes,
each contributing a cost of c₁, for a total cost of c₁n.

The total number of levels of the recursion tree in Figure 2.5 is lg n +
1, where n is the number of leaves, corresponding to the input size. An
informal inductive argument justifies this claim. The base case occurs
when n = 1, in which case the tree has only 1 level. Since lg 1 = 0, we
have that lg n + 1 gives the correct number of levels. Now assume as an
inductive hypothesis that the number of levels of a recursion tree with
2^(i) leaves is lg 2^(i) + 1 = i + 1 (since for any value of i, we have
that lg 2^(i) = i). Because we assume that the input size is an exact
power of 2, the next input size to consider is 2^(i + 1). A tree with n
= 2^(i + 1) leaves has 1 more level than a tree with 2^(i) leaves, and
so the total number of levels is (i + 1) + 1 = lg 2^(i + 1) + 1.

[art]

Figure 2.5 How to construct a recursion tree for the recurrence (2.4).
Part (a) shows T (n), which progressively expands in (b)–(d) to form the
recursion tree. The fully expanded tree in part (d) has lg n + 1 levels.
Each level above the leaves contributes a total cost of c₂n, and the
leaf level contributes c₁n. The total cost, therefore, is c₂n lg n + c₁n
= Θ(n lg n).

To compute the total cost represented by the recurrence (2.4), simply
add up the costs of all the levels. The recursion tree has lg n + 1
levels. The levels above the leaves each cost c₂n, and the leaf level
costs c₁n, for a total cost of c₂n lg n + c₁n = Θ(n lg n).

Exercises

2.3-1

Using Figure 2.4 as a model, illustrate the operation of merge sort on
an array initially containing the sequence 〈3, 41, 52, 26, 38, 57, 9,
49〉.

2.3-2

The test in line 1 of the MERGE-SORT procedure reads “if p ≥ r” rather
than “if p ≠ r.” If MERGE-SORT is called with p > r, then the subarray
A[p : r] is empty. Argue that as long as the initial call of
MERGE-SORT(A, 1, n) has n ≥ 1, the test “if p ≠ r” suffices to ensure
that no recursive call has p > r.

2.3-3

State a loop invariant for the while loop of lines 12–18 of the MERGE
procedure. Show how to use it, along with the while loops of lines 20–23
and 24–27, to prove that the MERGE procedure is correct.

2.3-4

Use mathematical induction to show that when n ≥ 2 is an exact power of
2, the solution of the recurrence

[art]

is T(n) = n lg n.

2.3-5

You can also think of insertion sort as a recursive algorithm. In order
to sort A[1 : n], recursively sort the subarray A[1 : n – 1] and then
insert A[n] into the sorted subarray A[1 : n – 1]. Write pseudocode for
this recursive version of insertion sort. Give a recurrence for its
worst-case running time.

2.3-6

Referring back to the searching problem (see Exercise 2.1-4), observe
that if the subarray being searched is already sorted, the searching
algorithm can check the midpoint of the subarray against v and eliminate
half of the subarray from further consideration. The binary search
algorithm repeats this procedure, halving the size of the remaining
portion of the subarray each time. Write pseudocode, either iterative or
recursive, for binary search. Argue that the worst-case running time of
binary search is Θ(lg n).

2.3-7

The while loop of lines 5–7 of the INSERTION-SORT procedure in Section
2.1 uses a linear search to scan (backward) through the sorted subarray
A[1 : j – 1]. What if insertion sort used a binary search (see Exercise
2.3-6) instead of a linear search? Would that improve the overall
worst-case running time of insertion sort to Θ(n lg n)?

2.3-8

Describe an algorithm that, given a set S of n integers and another
integer x, determines whether S contains two elements that sum to
exactly x. Your algorithm should take Θ(n lg n) time in the worst case.

Problems

2-1     Insertion sort on small arrays in merge sort

Although merge sort runs in Θ(n lg n) worst-case time and insertion sort
runs in Θ(n²) worst-case time, the constant factors in insertion sort
can make it faster in practice for small problem sizes on many machines.
Thus it makes sense to coarsen the leaves of the recursion by using
insertion sort within merge sort when subproblems become sufficiently
small. Consider a modification to merge sort in which n/k sublists of
length k are sorted using insertion sort and then merged using the
standard merging mechanism, where k is a value to be determined.

a. Show that insertion sort can sort the n/k sublists, each of length k,
in Θ(nk) worst-case time.

b. Show how to merge the sublists in Θ(n lg(n/k)) worst-case time.

c. Given that the modified algorithm runs in Θ(nk + n lg(n/k))
worst-case time, what is the largest value of k as a function of n for
which the modified algorithm has the same running time as standard merge
sort, in terms of Θ-notation?

d. How should you choose k in practice?

2-2     Correctness of bubblesort

Bubblesort is a popular, but inefficient, sorting algorithm. It works by
repeatedly swapping adjacent elements that are out of order. The
procedure BUBBLESORT sorts array A[1 : n].

BUBBLESORT(A, n)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   for i = 1 to n – 1
  2   for j = n downto i + 1
  3   if A[j] < A[j – 1]
  4   exchange A[j] with A[j – 1]
  --- -----------------------------

a. Let A^(′) denote the array A after BUBBLESORT(A, n) is executed. To
prove that

[art]

In order to show that BUBBLESORT actually sorts, what else do you need
to prove?

The next two parts prove inequality (2.5).

b. State precisely a loop invariant for the for loop in lines 2–4, and
prove that this loop invariant holds. Your proof should use the
structure of the loop-invariant proof presented in this chapter.

c. Using the termination condition of the loop invariant proved in part
(b), state a loop invariant for the for loop in lines 1–4 that allows
you to prove inequality (2.5). Your proof should use the structure of
the loop-invariant proof presented in this chapter.

d. What is the worst-case running time of BUBBLESORT? How does it
compare with the running time of INSERTION-SORT?

2-3     Correctness of Horner’s rule

You are given the coefficents a₀, a₁, a₂, … , a_(n) of a polynomial

[art]

and you want to evaluate this polynomial for a given value of x.
Horner’s rule says to evaluate the polynomial according to this
parenthesization:

[art]

The procedure HORNER implements Horner’s rule to evaluate P(x), given
the coefficients a₀, a₁, a₂, … , a_(n) in an array A[0 : n] and the
value of x.

HORNER(A, n, x)

  --- --------------------
  1   p = 0
  2   for i = n downto 0
  3   p = A[i] + x · p
  4   return p
  --- --------------------

a. In terms of Θ-notation, what is the running time of this procedure?

b. Write pseudocode to implement the naive polynomial-evaluation
algorithm that computes each term of the polynomial from scratch. What
is the running time of this algorithm? How does it compare with HORNER?

c. Consider the following loop invariant for the procedure HORNER:

At the start of each iteration of the for loop of lines 2–3,

[art]

Interpret a summation with no terms as equaling 0. Following the
structure of the loop-invariant proof presented in this chapter, use
this loop invariant to show that, at termination, [art].

2-4     Inversions

Let A[1 : n] be an array of n distinct numbers. If i < j and A[i] >
A[j], then the pair (i, j) is called an inversion of A.

a. List the five inversions of the array 〈2, 3, 8, 6, 1〉.

b. What array with elements from the set {1, 2, … , n} has the most
inversions? How many does it have?

c. What is the relationship between the running time of insertion sort
and the number of inversions in the input array? Justify your answer.

d. Give an algorithm that determines the number of inversions in any
permutation on n elements in Θ(n lg n) worst-case time. (Hint: Modify
merge sort.)

Chapter notes

In 1968, Knuth published the first of three volumes with the general
title The Art of Computer Programming [259, 260, 261]. The first volume
ushered in the modern study of computer algorithms with a focus on the
analysis of running time. The full series remains an engaging and
worthwhile reference for many of the topics presented here. According to
Knuth, the word “algorithm” is derived from the name “al-Khowârizmî,” a
ninth-century Persian mathematician.

Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5] advocated the asymptotic analysis of
algorithms—using notations that Chapter 3 introduces, including
Θ-notation—as a means of comparing relative performance. They also
popularized the use of recurrence relations to describe the running
times of recursive algorithms.

Knuth [261] provides an encyclopedic treatment of many sorting
algorithms. His comparison of sorting algorithms (page 381) includes
exact step-counting analyses, like the one we performed here for
insertion sort. Knuth’s discussion of insertion sort encompasses several
variations of the algorithm. The most important of these is Shell’s
sort, introduced by D. L. Shell, which uses insertion sort on periodic
subarrays of the input to produce a faster sorting algorithm.

Merge sort is also described by Knuth. He mentions that a mechanical
collator capable of merging two decks of punched cards in a single pass
was invented in 1938. J. von Neumann, one of the pioneers of computer
science, apparently wrote a program for merge sort on the EDVAC computer
in 1945.

The early history of proving programs correct is described by Gries
[200], who credits P. Naur with the first article in this field. Gries
attributes loop invariants to R. W. Floyd. The textbook by Mitchell
[329] is a good reference on how to prove programs correct.

¹ If you’re familiar with only Python, you can think of arrays as
similar to Python lists.

² When the loop is a for loop, the loop-invariant check just prior to
the first iteration occurs immediately after the initial assignment to
the loop-counter variable and just before the first test in the loop
header. In the case of INSERTION-SORT, this time is after assigning 2 to
the variable i but before the first test of whether i ≤ n.

³ In an if-else statement, we indent else at the same level as its
matching if. The first executable line of an else clause appears on the
same line as the keyword else. For multiway tests, we use elseif for
tests after the first one. When it is the first line in an else clause,
an if statement appears on the line following else so that you do not
misconstrue it as elseif.

⁴ Each pseudocode procedure in this book appears on one page so that you
do not need to discern levels of indentation in pseudocode that is split
across pages.

⁵ Most block-structured languages have equivalent constructs, though the
exact syntax may differ. Python lacks repeat-until loops, and its for
loops operate differently from the for loops in this book. Think of the
pseudocode line “for i = 1 to n” as equivalent to “for i in range(1,
n+1)” in Python.

⁶ In Python, the loop counter retains its value after the loop is
exited, but the value it retains is the value it had during the final
iteration of the for loop, rather than the value that exceeded the loop
bound. That is because a Python for loop iterates through a list, which
may contain nonnumeric values.

⁷ If you’re used to programming in Python, bear in mind that in this
book, the subarray A[i : j] includes the element A[j]. In Python, the
last element of A[i : j] is A[j – 1]. Python allows negative indices,
which count from the back end of the list. This book does not use
negative array indices.

⁸ Python’s tuple notation allows return statements to return multiple
values without creating objects from a programmer-defined class.

⁹ We assume that each element of a given array occupies the same number
of bytes and that the elements of a given array are stored in contiguous
memory locations. For example, if array A[1 : n] starts at memory
address 1000 and each element occupies four bytes, then element A[i] is
at address 1000 + 4(i – 1). In general, computing the address in memory
of a particular array element requires at most one subtraction (no
subtraction for a 0-origin array), one multiplication (often implemented
as a shift operation if the element size is an exact power of 2), and
one addition. Furthermore, for code that iterates through the elements
of an array in order, an optimizing compiler can generate the address of
each element using just one addition, by adding the element size to the
address of the preceding element.

¹⁰ There are some subtleties here. Computational steps that we specify
in English are often variants of a procedure that requires more than
just a constant amount of time. For example, in the RADIX-SORT procedure
on page 213, one line reads “use a stable sort to sort array A on digit
i,” which, as we shall see, takes more than a constant amount of time.
Also, although a statement that calls a subroutine takes only constant
time, the subroutine itself, once invoked, may take more. That is, we
separate the process of calling the subroutine—passing parameters to it,
etc.—from the process of executing the subroutine.

¹¹ This characteristic does not necessarily hold for a resource such as
memory. A statement that references m words of memory and is executed n
times does not necessarily reference mn distinct words of memory.

¹² This procedure is the rare case that uses both 1-origin indexing (for
array A) and 0-origin indexing (for arrays L and R). Using 0-origin
indexing for L and R makes for a simpler loop invariant in Exercise
2.3-3.

¹³ If you’re wondering where the “+1” comes from, imagine that r =
p + 1. Then the subarray A[p : r] consists of two elements, and r – p +
1 = 2.

¹⁴ Chapter 3 shows how to formally interpret equations containing
Θ-notation.

¹⁵ The expression ⌈x⌉ denotes the least integer greater than or equal to
x, and ⌊x⌋ denotes the greatest integer less than or equal to x. These
notations are defined in Section 3.3. The easiest way to verify that
setting q to ⌊(p + r)/2⌋ yields subarrays A[p : q] and A[q + 1 : r] of
sizes ⌈n/2⌉ and ⌊n/2⌋, respectively, is to examine the four cases that
arise depending on whether each of p and r is odd or even.

¹⁶ If you’re wondering where Θ(1) comes from, think of it this way. When
we say that n²/100 is Θ(n²), we are ignoring the coefficient 1/100 of
the factor n². Likewise, when we say that a constant c is Θ(1), we are
ignoring the coefficient c of the factor 1 (which you can also think of
as n⁰).

¹⁷ The notation lg n stands for log₂ n, although the base of the
logarithm doesn’t matter here, but as computer scientists, we like
logarithms base 2. Section 3.3 discusses other standard notation.

¹⁸ It is unlikely that c₁ is exactly the time to solve problems of size
1 and that c₂n is exactly the time of the divide and combine steps.
We’ll look more closely at bounding recurrences in Chapter 4, where
we’ll be more careful about this kind of detail.

3          Characterizing Running Times

The order of growth of the running time of an algorithm, defined in
Chapter 2, gives a simple way to characterize the algorithm’s efficiency
and also allows us to compare it with alternative algorithms. Once the
input size n becomes large enough, merge sort, with its Θ(n lg n)
worst-case running time, beats insertion sort, whose worst-case running
time is Θ(n²). Although we can sometimes determine the exact running
time of an algorithm, as we did for insertion sort in Chapter 2, the
extra precision is rarely worth the effort of computing it. For large
enough inputs, the multiplicative constants and lower-order terms of an
exact running time are dominated by the effects of the input size
itself.

When we look at input sizes large enough to make relevant only the order
of growth of the running time, we are studying the asymptotic efficiency
of algorithms. That is, we are concerned with how the running time of an
algorithm increases with the size of the input in the limit, as the size
of the input increases without bound. Usually, an algorithm that is
asymptotically more efficient is the best choice for all but very small
inputs.

This chapter gives several standard methods for simplifying the
asymptotic analysis of algorithms. The next section presents informally
the three most commonly used types of “asymptotic notation,” of which we
have already seen an example in Θ-notation. It also shows one way to use
these asymptotic notations to reason about the worst-case running time
of insertion sort. Then we look at asymptotic notations more formally
and present several notational conventions used throughout this book.
The last section reviews the behavior of functions that commonly arise
when analyzing algorithms.

3.1      O-notation, Ω-notation, and Θ-notation

When we analyzed the worst-case running time of insertion sort in
Chapter 2, we started with the complicated expression

[art]

We then discarded the lower-order terms (c₁ + c₂ + c₄ + c₅/2 – c₆/2 –
c₇/2 + c₈)n and c₂ + c₄ + c₅ + c₈, and we also ignored the coefficient
c₅/2 + c₆/2 + c₇/2 of n². That left just the factor n², which we put
into Θ-notation as Θ(n²). We use this style to characterize running
times of algorithms: discard the lower-order terms and the coefficient
of the leading term, and use a notation that focuses on the rate of
growth of the running time.

Θ-notation is not the only such “asymptotic notation.” In this section,
we’ll see other forms of asymptotic notation as well. We start with
intuitive looks at these notations, revisiting insertion sort to see how
we can apply them. In the next section, we’ll see the formal definitions
of our asymptotic notations, along with conventions for using them.

Before we get into specifics, bear in mind that the asymptotic notations
we’ll see are designed so that they characterize functions in general.
It so happens that the functions we are most interested in denote the
running times of algorithms. But asymptotic notation can apply to
functions that characterize some other aspect of algorithms (the amount
of space they use, for example), or even to functions that have nothing
whatsoever to do with algorithms.

O-notation

O-notation characterizes an upper bound on the asymptotic behavior of a
function. In other words, it says that a function grows no faster than a
certain rate, based on the highest-order term. Consider, for example,
the function 7n³ + 100n² – 20n + 6. Its highest-order term is 7n³, and
so we say that this function’s rate of growth is n³. Because this
function grows no faster than n³, we can write that it is O(n³). You
might be surprised that we can also write that the function 7n³ + 100n²
– 20n + 6 is O(n⁴). Why? Because the function grows more slowly than n⁴,
we are correct in saying that it grows no faster. As you might have
guessed, this function is also O(n⁵), O(n⁶), and so on. More generally,
it is O(n^(c)) for any constant c ≥ 3.

Ω-notation

Ω-notation characterizes a lower bound on the asymptotic behavior of a
function. In other words, it says that a function grows at least as fast
as a certain rate, based — as in O-notation—on the highest-order term.
Because the highest-order term in the function 7n³ + 100n² – 20n + 6
grows at least as fast as n³, this function is Ω(n³). This function is
also Ω(n²) and Ω(n). More generally, it is Ω(n^(c)) for any constant c ≤
3.

Θ-notation

Θ-notation characterizes a tight bound on the asymptotic behavior of a
function. It says that a function grows precisely at a certain rate,
based—once again—on the highest-order term. Put another way, Θ-notation
characterizes the rate of growth of the function to within a constant
factor from above and to within a constant factor from below. These two
constant factors need not be equal.

If you can show that a function is both O(f (n)) and Ω(f (n)) for some
function f (n), then you have shown that the function is Θ(f (n)). (The
next section states this fact as a theorem.) For example, since the
function 7n³ + 100n² – 20n + 6 is both O(n³) and Ω(n³), it is also
Θ(n³).

Example: Insertion sort

Let’s revisit insertion sort and see how to work with asymptotic
notation to characterize its Θ(n²) worst-case running time without
evaluating summations as we did in Chapter 2. Here is the INSERTION-SORT
procedure once again:

INSERTION-SORT(A, n)

  --- -------------------------------------------------------
  1   for i = 2 to n
  2   key = A[i]
  3   // Insert A[i] into the sorted subarray A[1 : i – 1].
  4   j = i – 1
  5   while j > 0 and A[j] > key
  6   A[j + 1] = A[j]
  7   j = j – 1
  8   A[j + 1] = key
  --- -------------------------------------------------------

What can we observe about how the pseudocode operates? The procedure has
nested loops. The outer loop is a for loop that runs n – 1 times,
regardless of the values being sorted. The inner loop is a while loop,
but the number of iterations it makes depends on the values being
sorted. The loop variable j starts at i – 1 and decreases by 1 in each
iteration until either it reaches 0 or A[j] ≤ key. For a given value of
i, the while loop might iterate 0 times, i – 1 times, or anywhere in
between. The body of the while loop (lines 6–7) takes constant time per
iteration of the while loop.

[art]

Figure 3.1 The Ω(n²) lower bound for insertion sort. If the first n/3
positions contain the n/3 largest values, each of these values must move
through each of the middle n/3 positions, one position at a time, to end
up somewhere in the last n/3 positions. Since each of n/3 values moves
through at least each of n/3 positions, the time taken in this case is
at least proportional to (n/3)(n/3) = n²/9, or Ω(n²).

These observations suffice to deduce an O(n²) running time for any case
of INSERTION-SORT, giving us a blanket statement that covers all inputs.
The running time is dominated by the inner loop. Because each of the n –
1 iterations of the outer loop causes the inner loop to iterate at most
i – 1 times, and because i is at most n, the total number of iterations
of the inner loop is at most (n – 1)(n – 1), which is less than n².
Since each iteration of the inner loop takes constant time, the total
time spent in the inner loop is at most a constant times n², or O(n²).

With a little creativity, we can also see that the worst-case running
time of INSERTION-SORT is Ω(n²). By saying that the worst-case running
time of an algorithm is Ω(n²), we mean that for every input size n above
a certain threshold, there is at least one input of size n for which the
algorithm takes at least cn² time, for some positive constant c. It does
not necessarily mean that the algorithm takes at least cn² time for all
inputs.

Let’s now see why the worst-case running time of INSERTION-SORT is
Ω(n²). For a value to end up to the right of where it started, it must
have been moved in line 6. In fact, for a value to end up k positions to
the right of where it started, line 6 must have executed k times. As
Figure 3.1 shows, let’s assume that n is a multiple of 3 so that we can
divide the array A into groups of n/3 positions. Suppose that in the
input to INSERTION-SORT, the n/3 largest values occupy the first n/3
array positions A[1 : n/3]. (It does not matter what relative order they
have within the first n/3 positions.) Once the array has been sorted,
each of these n/3 values ends up somewhere in the last n/3 positions
A[2n/3 + 1 : n]. For that to happen, each of these n/3 values must pass
through each of the middle n/3 positions A[n/3 + 1 : 2n/3]. Each of
these n/3 values passes through these middle n/3 positions one position
at a time, by at least n/3 executions of line 6. Because at least n/3
values have to pass through at least n/3 positions, the time taken by
INSERTION-SORT in the worst case is at least proportional to (n/3)(n/3)
= n²/9, which is Ω(n²).

Because we have shown that INSERTION-SORT runs in O(n²) time in all
cases and that there is an input that makes it take Ω(n²) time, we can
conclude that the worst-case running time of INSERTION-SORT is Θ(n²). It
does not matter that the constant factors for upper and lower bounds
might differ. What matters is that we have characterized the worst-case
running time to within constant factors (discounting lower-order terms).
This argument does not show that INSERTION-SORT runs in Θ(n²) time in
all cases. Indeed, we saw in Chapter 2 that the best-case running time
is Θ(n).

Exercises

3.1-1

Modify the lower-bound argument for insertion sort to handle input sizes
that are not necessarily a multiple of 3.

3.1-2

Using reasoning similar to what we used for insertion sort, analyze the
running time of the selection sort algorithm from Exercise 2.2-2.

3.1-3

Suppose that α is a fraction in the range 0 < α < 1. Show how to
generalize the lower-bound argument for insertion sort to consider an
input in which the αn largest values start in the first αn positions.
What additional restriction do you need to put on α? What value of α
maximizes the number of times that the αn largest values must pass
through each of the middle (1 – 2α)n array positions?

3.2      Asymptotic notation: formal definitions

Having seen asymptotic notation informally, let’s get more formal. The
notations we use to describe the asymptotic running time of an algorithm
are defined in terms of functions whose domains are typically the set N
of natural numbers or the set R of real numbers. Such notations are
convenient for describing a running-time function T (n). This section
defines the basic asymptotic notations and also introduces some common
“proper” notational abuses.

[art]

Figure 3.2 Graphic examples of the O, Ω, and Θ notations. In each part,
the value of n₀ shown is the minimum possible value, but any greater
value also works. (a) O-notation gives an upper bound for a function to
within a constant factor. We write f (n) = O(g(n)) if there are positive
constants n₀ and c such that at and to the right of n₀, the value of f
(n) always lies on or below cg(n). (b) Ω-notation gives a lower bound
for a function to within a constant factor. We write f (n) = Ω(g(n)) if
there are positive constants n₀ and c such that at and to the right of
n₀, the value of f (n) always lies on or above cg(n). (c) Θ-notation
bounds a function to within constant factors. We write f (n) = Θ(g(n))
if there exist positive constants n₀, c₁, and c₂ such that at and to the
right of n₀, the value of f (n) always lies between c₁g(n) and c₂g(n)
inclusive.

O-notation

As we saw in Section 3.1, O-notation describes an asymptotic upper
bound. We use O-notation to give an upper bound on a function, to within
a constant factor.

Here is the formal definition of O-notation. For a given function g(n),
we denote by O(g(n)) (pronounced “big-oh of g of n” or sometimes just
“oh of g of n”) the set of functions

  ------------------ ----- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  O(g(n)) = {f (n)    :    there exist positive constants c and n₀ such that 0 ≤ f (n) ≤ cg(n) for all n ≥ n₀}.¹
  ------------------ ----- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A function f (n) belongs to the set O(g(n)) if there exists a positive
constant c such that f (n) ≤ cg(n) for sufficiently large n. Figure
3.2(a) shows the intuition behind O-notation. For all values n at and to
the right of n₀, the value of the function f (n) is on or below cg(n).

The definition of O(g(n)) requires that every function f (n) in the set
O(g(n)) be asymptotically nonnegative: f (n) must be nonnegative
whenever n is sufficiently large. (An asymptotically positive function
is one that is positive for all sufficiently large n.) Consequently, the
function g(n) itself must be asymptotically nonnegative, or else the set
O(g(n)) is empty. We therefore assume that every function used within
O-notation is asymptotically nonnegative. This assumption holds for the
other asymptotic notations defined in this chapter as well.

You might be surprised that we define O-notation in terms of sets.
Indeed, you might expect that we would write “f (n) ∈ O(g(n))” to
indicate that f (n) belongs to the set O(g(n)). Instead, we usually
write “f (n) = O(g(n))” and say “f (n) is big-oh of g(n)” to express the
same notion. Although it may seem confusing at first to abuse equality
in this way, we’ll see later in this section that doing so has its
advantages.

Let’s explore an example of how to use the formal definition of
O-notation to justify our practice of discarding lower-order terms and
ignoring the constant coefficient of the highest-order term. We’ll show
that 4n² + 100n + 500 = O(n²), even though the lower-order terms have
much larger coefficients than the leading term. We need to find positive
constants c and n₀ such that 4n² + 100n + 500 ≤ cn² for all n ≥ n₀.
Dividing both sides by n² gives 4 + 100/n + 500/n² ≤ c. This inequality
is satisfied for many choices of c and n₀. For example, if we choose n₀
= 1, then this inequality holds for c = 604. If we choose n₀ = 10, then
c = 19 works, and choosing n₀ = 100 allows us to use c = 5.05.

We can also use the formal definition of O-notation to show that the
function n³ – 100n² does not belong to the set O(n²), even though the
coefficient of n² is a large negative number. If we had n³ – 100n² =
O(n²), then there would be positive constants c and n₀ such that n³
–100n² ≤ cn² for all n ≥ n₀. Again, we divide both sides by n², giving n
– 100 ≤ c. Regardless of what value we choose for the constant c, this
inequality does not hold for any value of n > c + 100.

Ω-notation

Just as O-notation provides an asymptotic upper bound on a function,
Ω-notation provides an asymptotic lower bound. For a given function
g(n), we denote by Ω(g(n)) (pronounced “big-omega of g of n” or
sometimes just “omega of g of n”) the set of functions

  ------------------ ----- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Ω(g(n)) = {f (n)    :    there exist positive constants c and n₀ such that 0 ≤ cg(n) ≤ f (n) for all n ≥ n₀}.
  ------------------ ----- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure 3.2(b) shows the intuition behind Ω-notation. For all values n at
or to the right of n₀, the value of f (n) is on or above cg(n).

We’ve already shown that 4n² + 100n + 500 = O(n²). Now let’s show that
4n² + 100n + 500 = Ω(n²). We need to find positive constants c and n₀
such that 4n² + 100n + 500 ≥ cn² for all n ≥ n₀. As before, we divide
both sides by n², giving 4 + 100/n + 500/n² ≥ c. This inequality holds
when n₀ is any positive integer and c = 4.

What if we had subtracted the lower-order terms from the 4n² term
instead of adding them? What if we had a small coefficient for the n²
term? The function would still be Ω(n²). For example, let’s show that
n²/100 – 100n – 500 = Ω(n²). Dividing by n² gives 1/100 – 100/n – 500/n²
≥ c. We can choose any value for n₀ that is at least 10,005 and find a
positive value for c. For example, when n₀ = 10,005, we can choose c =
2.49 × 10^(–9). Yes, that’s a tiny value for c, but it is positive. If
we select a larger value for n₀, we can also increase c. For example, if
n₀ = 100,000, then we can choose c = 0.0089. The higher the value of n₀,
the closer to the coefficient 1/100 we can choose c.

Θ-notation

We use Θ-notation for asymptotically tight bounds. For a given function
g(n), we denote by Θ(g(n)) (“theta of g of n”) the set of functions

  ------------------ ----- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Θ(g(n)) = {f (n)    :    there exist positive constants c₁, c₂, and n₀ such that 0 ≤ c₁g(n) ≤ f (n) ≤ c₂g(n) for all n ≥ n₀}.
  ------------------ ----- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure 3.2(c) shows the intuition behind Θ-notation. For all values of n
at and to the right of n₀, the value of f (n) lies at or above c₁g(n)
and at or below c₂g(n). In other words, for all n ≥ n₀, the function f
(n) is equal to g(n) to within constant factors.

The definitions of O-, Ω-, and Θ-notations lead to the following
theorem, whose proof we leave as Exercise 3.2-4.

Theorem 3.1

For any two functions f (n) and g(n), we have f (n) = Θ(g(n)) if and
only if f (n) = O(g(n)) and f (n) = Ω(g(n)).

▪

We typically apply Theorem 3.1 to prove asymptotically tight bounds from
asymptotic upper and lower bounds.

Asymptotic notation and running times

When you use asymptotic notation to characterize an algorithm’s running
time, make sure that the asymptotic notation you use is as precise as
possible without overstating which running time it applies to. Here are
some examples of using asymptotic notation properly and improperly to
characterize running times.

Let’s start with insertion sort. We can correctly say that insertion
sort’s worst-case running time is O(n²), Ω(n²), and—due to Theorem
3.1—Θ(n²). Although all three ways to characterize the worst-case
running times are correct, the Θ(n²) bound is the most precise and hence
the most preferred. We can also correctly say that insertion sort’s
best-case running time is O(n), Ω(n), and Θ(n), again with Θ(n) the most
precise and therefore the most preferred.

Here is what we cannot correctly say: insertion sort’s running time is
Θ(n²). That is an overstatement because by omitting “worst-case” from
the statement, we’re left with a blanket statement covering all cases.
The error here is that insertion sort does not run in Θ(n²) time in all
cases since, as we’ve seen, it runs in Θ(n) time in the best case. We
can correctly say that insertion sort’s running time is O(n²), however,
because in all cases, its running time grows no faster than n². When we
say O(n²) instead of Θ(n²), there is no problem in having cases whose
running time grows more slowly than n². Likewise, we cannot correctly
say that insertion sort’s running time is Θ(n), but we can say that its
running time is Ω(n).

How about merge sort? Since merge sort runs in Θ(n lg n) time in all
cases, we can just say that its running time is Θ(n lg n) without
specifying worst-case, best-case, or any other case.

People occasionally conflate O-notation with Θ-notation by mistakenly
using O-notation to indicate an asymptotically tight bound. They say
things like “an O(n lg n)-time algorithm runs faster than an O(n²)-time
algorithm.” Maybe it does, maybe it doesn’t. Since O-notation denotes
only an asymptotic upper bound, that so-called O(n²)-time algorithm
might actually run in Θ(n) time. You should be careful to choose the
appropriate asymptotic notation. If you want to indicate an
asymptotically tight bound, use Θ-notation.

We typically use asymptotic notation to provide the simplest and most
precise bounds possible. For example, if an algorithm has a running time
of 3n² + 20n in all cases, we use asymptotic notation to write that its
running time is Θ(n²). Strictly speaking, we are also correct in writing
that the running time is O(n³) or Θ(3n² + 20n). Neither of these
expressions is as useful as writing Θ(n²) in this case, however: O(n³)
is less precise than Θ(n²) if the running time is 3n² + 20n, and Θ(3n² +
20n) introduces complexity that obscures the order of growth. By writing
the simplest and most precise bound, such as Θ(n²), we can categorize
and compare different algorithms. Throughout the book, you will see
asymptotic running times that are almost always based on polynomials and
logarithms: functions such as n, n lg² n, n² lg n, or n^(1/2). You will
also see some other functions, such as exponentials, lg lg n, and
lg^(*)n (see Section 3.3). It is usually fairly easy to compare the
rates of growth of these functions. Problem 3-3 gives you good practice.

Asymptotic notation in equations and inequalities

Although we formally define asymptotic notation in terms of sets, we use
the equal sign (=) instead of the set membership sign (∈) within
formulas. For example, we wrote that 4n² + 100n + 500 = O(n²). We might
also write 2n² + 3n + 1 = 2n² + Θ(n). How do we interpret such formulas?

When the asymptotic notation stands alone (that is, not within a larger
formula) on the right-hand side of an equation (or inequality), as in
4n² + 100n + 500 = O(n²), the equal sign means set membership: 4n² +
100n + 500 ∈ O(n²). In general, however, when asymptotic notation
appears in a formula, we interpret it as standing for some anonymous
function that we do not care to name. For example, the formula 2n² +
3n + 1 = 2n² + Θ(n) means that 2n² + 3n + 1 = 2n² + f (n), where f (n) ∈
Θ(n). In this case, we let f (n) = 3n + 1, which indeed belongs to Θ(n).

Using asymptotic notation in this manner can help eliminate inessential
detail and clutter in an equation. For example, in Chapter 2 we
expressed the worst-case running time of merge sort as the recurrence

T (n) = 2T (n/2) + Θ(n).

If we are interested only in the asymptotic behavior of T (n), there is
no point in specifying all the lower-order terms exactly, because they
are all understood to be included in the anonymous function denoted by
the term Θ(n).

The number of anonymous functions in an expression is understood to be
equal to the number of times the asymptotic notation appears. For
example, in the expression

[art]

there is only a single anonymous function (a function of i). This
expression is thus not the same as O(1) + O(2) + ⋯ + O(n), which doesn’t
really have a clean interpretation.

In some cases, asymptotic notation appears on the left-hand side of an
equation, as in

2n² + Θ(n) = Θ(n²).

Interpret such equations using the following rule: No matter how the
anonymous functions are chosen on the left of the equal sign, there is a
way to choose the anonymous functions on the right of the equal sign to
make the equation valid. Thus, our example means that for any function f
(n) ∈ Θ(n), there is some function g(n) ∈ Θ(n²) such that 2n² + f (n) =
g(n) for all n. In other words, the right-hand side of an equation
provides a coarser level of detail than the left-hand side.

We can chain together a number of such relationships, as in

  -------------- ----- ------------
  2n² + 3n + 1    =    2n² + Θ(n)
                  =    Θ(n²).
  -------------- ----- ------------

By the rules above, interpret each equation separately. The first
equation says that there is some function f (n) ∈ Θ(n) such that 2n² +
3n + 1 = 2n² + f (n) for all n. The second equation says that for any
function g(n) ∈ Θ(n) (such as the f (n) just mentioned), there is some
function h(n) ∈ Θ(n²) such that 2n² + g(n) = h(n) for all n. This
interpretation implies that 2n² + 3n + 1 = Θ(n²), which is what the
chaining of equations intuitively says.

Proper abuses of asymptotic notation

Besides the abuse of equality to mean set membership, which we now see
has a precise mathematical interpretation, another abuse of asymptotic
notation occurs when the variable tending toward ∞ must be inferred from
context. For example, when we say O(g(n)), we can assume that we’re
interested in the growth of g(n) as n grows, and if we say O(g(m)) we’re
talking about the growth of g(m) as m grows. The free variable in the
expression indicates what variable is going to ∞.

The most common situation requiring contextual knowledge of which
variable tends to ∞ occurs when the function inside the asymptotic
notation is a constant, as in the expression O(1). We cannot infer from
the expression which variable is going to ∞, because no variable appears
there. The context must disambiguate. For example, if the equation using
asymptotic notation is f (n) = O(1), it’s apparent that the variable
we’re interested in is n. Knowing from context that the variable of
interest is n, however, allows us to make perfect sense of the
expression by using the formal definition of O-notation: the expression
f (n) = O(1) means that the function f (n) is bounded from above by a
constant as n goes to ∞. Technically, it might be less ambiguous if we
explicitly indicated the variable tending to ∞ in the asymptotic
notation itself, but that would clutter the notation. Instead, we simply
ensure that the context makes it clear which variable (or variables)
tend to ∞.

When the function inside the asymptotic notation is bounded by a
positive constant, as in T (n) = O(1), we often abuse asymptotic
notation in yet another way, especially when stating recurrences. We may
write something like T (n) = O(1) for n < 3. According to the formal
definition of O-notation, this statement is meaningless, because the
definition only says that T (n) is bounded above by a positive constant
c for n ≥ n₀ for some n₀ > 0. The value of T (n) for n < n₀ need not be
so bounded. Thus, in the example T (n) = O(1) for n < 3, we cannot infer
any constraint on T (n) when n < 3, because it might be that n₀ > 3.

What is conventionally meant when we say T (n) = O(1) for n < 3 is that
there exists a positive constant c such that T (n) ≤ c for n < 3. This
convention saves us the trouble of naming the bounding constant,
allowing it to remain anonymous while we focus on more important
variables in an analysis. Similar abuses occur with the other asymptotic
notations. For example, T (n) = Θ(1) for n < 3 means that T (n) is
bounded above and below by positive constants when n < 3.

Occasionally, the function describing an algorithm’s running time may
not be defined for certain input sizes, for example, when an algorithm
assumes that the input size is an exact power of 2. We still use
asymptotic notation to describe the growth of the running time,
understanding that any constraints apply only when the function is
defined. For example, suppose that f (n) is defined only on a subset of
the natural or nonnegative real numbers. Then f (n) = O(g(n)) means that
the bound 0 ≤ T (n) ≤ cg(n) in the definition of O-notation holds for
all n ≥ n₀ over the domain of f (n), that is, where f (n) is defined.
This abuse is rarely pointed out, since what is meant is generally clear
from context.

In mathematics, it’s okay — and often desirable — to abuse a notation,
as long as we don’t misuse it. If we understand precisely what is meant
by the abuse and don’t draw incorrect conclusions, it can simplify our
mathematical language, contribute to our higher-level understanding, and
help us focus on what really matters.

o-notation

The asymptotic upper bound provided by O-notation may or may not be
asymptotically tight. The bound 2n² = O(n²) is asymptotically tight, but
the bound 2n = O(n²) is not. We use o-notation to denote an upper bound
that is not asymptotically tight. We formally define o(g(n)) (“little-oh
of g of n”) as the set

  ------------------ ----- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  o(g(n)) = {f (n)    :    for any positive constant c > 0, there exists a constant n₀ > 0 such that 0 ≤ f (n) < cg(n) for all n ≥ n₀}.
  ------------------ ----- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

For example, 2n = o(n²), but 2n² ≠ o(n²).

The definitions of O-notation and o-notation are similar. The main
difference is that in f (n) = O(g(n)), the bound 0 ≤ f (n) ≤ cg(n) holds
for some constant c > 0, but in f (n) = o(g(n)), the bound 0 ≤ f (n) <
cg(n) holds for all constants c > 0. Intuitively, in o-notation, the
function f (n) becomes insignificant relative to g(n) as n gets large:

[art]

Some authors use this limit as a definition of the o-notation, but the
definition in this book also restricts the anonymous functions to be
asymptotically nonnegative.

ω-notation

By analogy, ω-notation is to Ω-notation as o-notation is to O-notation.
We use ω-notation to denote a lower bound that is not asymptotically
tight. One way to define it is by

f (n) ∈ ω(g(n)) if and only if g(n) ∈ o(f (n)).

Formally, however, we define ω(g(n)) (“little-omega of g of n”) as the
set

  ------------------ ----- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ω(g(n)) = {f (n)    :    for any positive constant c > 0, there exists a constant n₀ > 0 such that 0 ≤ cg(n) < f (n) for all n ≥ n₀}.
  ------------------ ----- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Where the definition of o-notation says that f (n) < cg(n), the
definition of ω-notation says the opposite: that cg(n) < f (n). For
examples of ω-notation, we have n²/2 = ω(n), but n²/2 ≠ ω(n²). The
relation f (n) = ω(g(n)) implies that

[art]

if the limit exists. That is, f (n) becomes arbitrarily large relative
to g(n) as n gets large.

Comparing functions

Many of the relational properties of real numbers apply to asymptotic
comparisons as well. For the following, assume that f (n) and g(n) are
asymptotically positive.

Transitivity:

  ----------------- ----- ---------------- ------- ------------------
  f (n) = Θ(g(n))   and   g(n) = Θ(h(n))   imply   f (n) = Θ(h(n)),
  f (n) = O(g(n))   and   g(n) = O(h(n))   imply   f (n) = O(h(n)),
  f (n) = Ω(g(n))   and   g(n) = Ω(h(n))   imply   f (n) = Ω(h(n)),
  f (n) = o(g(n))   and   g(n) = o(h(n))   imply   f (n) = o(h(n)),
  f (n) = ω(g(n))   and   g(n) = ω(h(n))   imply   f (n) = ω(h(n)).
  ----------------- ----- ---------------- ------- ------------------

Reflexivity:

  -------------------
  f (n) = Θ(f (n)),
  f (n) = O(f (n)),
  f (n) = Ω(f (n)).
  -------------------

Symmetry:

f (n) = Θ(g(n)) if and only if g(n) = Θ(f (n)).

Transpose symmetry:

  ----------------- ---------------- ------------------
  f (n) = O(g(n))   if and only if   g(n) = Ω(f (n)),
  f (n) = o(g(n))   if and only if   g(n) = ω(f (n)).
  ----------------- ---------------- ------------------

Because these properties hold for asymptotic notations, we can draw an
analogy between the asymptotic comparison of two functions f and g and
the comparison of two real numbers a and b:

  ----------------- --------- --------
  f (n) = O(g(n))   is like   a ≤ b,
  f (n) = Ω(g(n))   is like   a ≥ b,
  f (n) = Θ(g(n))   is like   a = b,
  f (n) = o(g(n))   is like   a < b,
  f (n) = ω(g(n))   is like   a > b.
  ----------------- --------- --------

We say that f (n) is asymptotically smaller than g(n) if f (n) =
o(g(n)), and f (n) is asymptotically larger than g(n) if f (n) =
ω(g(n)).

One property of real numbers, however, does not carry over to asymptotic
notation:

Trichotomy: For any two real numbers a and b, exactly one of the
following must hold: a < b, a = b, or a > b.

Although any two real numbers can be compared, not all functions are
asymptotically comparable. That is, for two functions f (n) and g(n), it
may be the case that neither f (n) = O(g(n)) nor f (n) = Ω(g(n)) holds.
For example, we cannot compare the functions n and n^(1 + sin n) using
asymptotic notation, since the value of the exponent in n^(1 + sin n)
oscillates between 0 and 2, taking on all values in between.

Exercises

3.2-1

Let f (n) and g(n) be asymptotically nonnegative functions. Using the
basic definition of Θ-notation, prove that max {f (n), g(n)} = Θ(f (n) +
g(n)).

3.2-2

Explain why the statement, “The running time of algorithm A is at least
O(n²),” is meaningless.

3.2-3

Is 2^(n + 1) = O(2^(n))? Is 2^(2n) = O(2^(n))?

3.2-4

Prove Theorem 3.1.

3.2-5

Prove that the running time of an algorithm is Θ(g(n)) if and only if
its worst-case running time is O(g(n)) and its best-case running time is
Ω(g(n)).

3.2-6

Prove that o(g(n)) ∩ ω(g(n)) is the empty set.

3.2-7

We can extend our notation to the case of two parameters n and m that
can go to ∞ independently at different rates. For a given function g(n,
m), we denote by O(g(n, m)) the set of functions

  ------------------------ ----- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  O(g(n, m)) = {f (n, m)    :    there exist positive constants c, n₀, and m₀ such that 0 ≤ f (n, m) ≤ cg(n, m) for all n ≥ n₀ or m ≥ m₀}.
  ------------------------ ----- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Give corresponding definitions for Ω(g(n, m)) and Θ(g(n, m)).

3.3      Standard notations and common functions

This section reviews some standard mathematical functions and notations
and explores the relationships among them. It also illustrates the use
of the asymptotic notations.

Monotonicity

A function f (n) is monotonically increasing if m ≤ n implies f (m) ≤ f
(n). Similarly, it is monotonically decreasing if m ≤ n implies f (m) ≥
f (n). A function f (n) is strictly increasing if m < n implies f (m) <
f (n) and strictly decreasing if m < n implies f (m) > f (n).

Floors and ceilings

For any real number x, we denote the greatest integer less than or equal
to x by ⌊x⌋ (read “the floor of x”) and the least integer greater than
or equal to x by ⌈x⌉ (read “the ceiling of x”). The floor function is
monotonically increasing, as is the ceiling function.

Floors and ceilings obey the following properties. For any integer n, we
have

[art]

For all real x, we have

[art]

We also have

[art]

or equivalently,

[art]

For any real number x ≥ 0 and integers a, b > 0, we have

[art]

For any integer n and real number x, we have

[art]

Modular arithmetic

For any integer a and any positive integer n, the value a mod n is the
remainder (or residue) of the quotient a/n:

[art]

It follows that

[art]

even when a is negative.

Given a well-defined notion of the remainder of one integer when divided
by another, it is convenient to provide special notation to indicate
equality of remainders. If (a mod n) = (b mod n), we write a = b (mod n)
and say that a is equivalent to b, modulo n. In other words, a = b (mod
n) if a and b have the same remainder when divided by n. Equivalently, a
= b (mod n) if and only if n is a divisor of b – a. We write a ≠ b (mod
n) if a is not equivalent to b, modulo n.

Polynomials

Given a nonnegative integer d, a polynomial in n of degree d is a
function p(n) of the form

[art]

where the constants a₀, a₁, … , a_(d) are the coefficients of the
polynomial and a_(d) ≠ 0. A polynomial is asymptotically positive if and
only if a_(d) > 0. For an asymptotically positive polynomial p(n) of
degree d, we have p(n) = Θ(n^(d)). For any real constant a ≥ 0, the
function n^(a) is monotonically increasing, and for any real constant a
≤ 0, the function n^(a) is monotonically decreasing. We say that a
function f (n) is polynomially bounded if f (n) = O(n^(k)) for some
constant k.

Exponentials

For all real a > 0, m, and n, we have the following identities:

  ------------- --- --------------
  a⁰            =   1,
  a¹            =   a,
  a^(–1)        =   1/a,
  (a^(m))^(n)   =   a^(mn),
  (a^(m))^(n)   =   (a^(n))^(m),
  a^(m)a^(n)    =   a^(m+n).
  ------------- --- --------------

For all n and a ≥ 1, the function a^(n) is monotonically increasing in
n. When convenient, we assume that 0⁰ = 1.

We can relate the rates of growth of polynomials and exponentials by the
following fact. For all real constants a > 1 and b, we have

[art]

from which we can conclude that

[art]

Thus, any exponential function with a base strictly greater than 1 grows
faster than any polynomial function.

Using e to denote 2.71828 …, the base of the natural-logarithm function,
we have for all real x,

[art]

where “!” denotes the factorial function defined later in this section.
For all real x, we have the inequality

[art]

where equality holds only when x = 0. When |x| ≤ 1, we have the
approximation

[art]

When x → 0, the approximation of e^(x) by 1 + x is quite good:

e^(x) = 1 + x + Θ(x²).

(In this equation, the asymptotic notation is used to describe the
limiting behavior as x → 0 rather than as x → ∞.) We have for all x,

[art]

Logarithms

We use the following notations:

  ---------- --- ------------ ----------------------
  lg n       =   log₂ n       (binary logarithm),
  ln n       =   log_(e) n    (natural logarithm),
  lg^(k) n   =   (lg n)^(k)   (exponentiation),
  lg lg n    =   lg(lg n)     (composition).
  ---------- --- ------------ ----------------------

We adopt the following notational convention: in the absence of
parentheses, a logarithm function applies only to the next term in the
formula, so that lg n + 1 means (lg n) + 1 and not lg(n + 1).

For any constant b > 1, the function log_(b) n is undefined if n ≤ 0,
strictly increasing if n > 0, negative if 0 < n < 1, positive if n > 1,
and 0 if n = 1. For all real a > 0, b > 0, c > 0, and n, we have

[art]

where, in each equation above, logarithm bases are not 1.

By equation (3.19), changing the base of a logarithm from one constant
to another changes the value of the logarithm by only a constant factor.
Consequently, we often use the notation “lg n” when we don’t care about
constant factors, such as in O-notation. Computer scientists find 2 to
be the most natural base for logarithms because so many algorithms and
data structures involve splitting a problem into two parts.

There is a simple series expansion for ln(1 + x) when |x| < 1:

[art]

We also have the following inequalities for x > – 1:

[art]

where equality holds only for x = 0.

We say that a function f (n) is polylogarithmically bounded if f (n) =
O(lg^(k) n) for some constant k. We can relate the growth of polynomials
and polylogarithms by substituting lg n for n and 2^(a) for a in
equation (3.13). For all real constants a > 0 and b, we have

[art]

Thus, any positive polynomial function grows faster than any
polylogarithmic function.

Factorials

The notation n! (read “n factorial”) is defined for integers n ≥ 0 as

[art]

Thus, n! = 1 · 2 · 3 ⋯ n.

A weak upper bound on the factorial function is n! ≤ n^(n), since each
of the n terms in the factorial product is at most n. Stirling’s
approximation,

[art]

where e is the base of the natural logarithm, gives us a tighter upper
bound, and a lower bound as well. Exercise 3.3-4 asks you to prove the
three facts

[art]

where Stirling’s approximation is helpful in proving equation (3.28).
The following equation also holds for all n ≥ 1:

[art]

where

[art]

Functional iteration

We use the notation f^((i)) (n) to denote the function f (n) iteratively
applied i times to an initial value of n. Formally, let f (n) be a
function over the reals. For nonnegative integers i, we recursively
define

[art]

For example, if f (n) = 2n, then f^((i)) (n) = 2^(i)n.

The iterated logarithm function

We use the notation lg^(*)n (read “log star of n”) to denote the
iterated logarithm, defined as follows. Let lg^((i)) n be as defined
above, with f (n) = lg n. Because the logarithm of a nonpositive number
is undefined, lg^((i)) n is defined only if lg^((i–1)) n > 0. Be sure to
distinguish lg^((i)) n (the logarithm function applied i times in
succession, starting with argument n) from lg^(i) n (the logarithm of n
raised to the ith power). Then we define the iterated logarithm function
as

lg^(*)n = min {i ≥ 0 : lg^((i)) n ≤ 1}.

The iterated logarithm is a very slowly growing function:

  ----------------- --- ----
  lg^(*) 2          =   1,
  lg^(*) 4          =   2,
  lg^(*) 16         =   3,
  lg^(*) 65536      =   4,
  lg^(*) (2⁶⁵⁵³⁶)   =   5.
  ----------------- --- ----

Since the number of atoms in the observable universe is estimated to be
about 10⁸⁰, which is much less than 2⁶⁵⁵³⁶ = 10^(65536/lg 10) ≈
10^(19,728), we rarely encounter an input size n for which lg^(*) n > 5.

Fibonacci numbers

We define the Fibonacci numbers F_(i), for i ≥ 0, as follows:

[art]

Thus, after the first two, each Fibonacci number is the sum of the two
previous ones, yielding the sequence

0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, ….

Fibonacci numbers are related to the golden ratio ϕ and its conjugate
[art], which are the two roots of the equation

x² = x + 1.

As Exercise 3.3-7 asks you to prove, the golden ratio is given by

[art]

and its conjugate, by

[art]

Specifically, we have

[art]

which can be proved by induction (Exercise 3.3-8). Since [art], we have

[art]

which implies that

[art]

which is to say that the ith Fibonacci number F_(i) is equal to [art]
rounded to the nearest integer. Thus, Fibonacci numbers grow
exponentially.

Exercises

3.3-1

Show that if f (n) and g(n) are monotonically increasing functions, then
so are the functions f (n) + g(n) and f (g(n)), and if f (n) and g(n)
are in addition nonnegative, then f (n) · g(n) is monotonically
increasing.

3.3-2

Prove that ⌊αn⌋ + ⌈(1 – α)n⌉ = n for any integer n and real number α in
the range 0 ≤ α ≤ 1.

3.3-3

Use equation (3.14) or other means to show that (n + o(n))^(k) =
Θ(n^(k)) for any real constant k. Conclude that ⌈n⌉^(k) = Θ(n^(k)) and
⌊n⌋^(k) = Θ(n^(k)).

3.3-4

Prove the following:

a. Equation (3.21).

b. Equations (3.26)–(3.28).

c. lg(Θ(n)) = Θ(lg n).

★ 3.3-5

Is the function ⌈lg n⌉! polynomially bounded? Is the function ⌈lg lg n⌉!
polynomially bounded?

★ 3.3-6

Which is asymptotically larger: lg(lg^(*) n) or lg^(*)(lg n)?

3.3-7

Show that the golden ratio ϕ and its conjugate [art] both satisfy the
equation x² = x + 1.

3.3-8

Prove by induction that the ith Fibonacci number satisfies the equation

[art]

where ϕ is the golden ratio and [art] is its conjugate.

3.3-9

Show that k lg k = Θ(n) implies k = Θ(n/lg n).

Problems

3-1     Asymptotic behavior of polynomials

Let

[art]

where a_(d) > 0, be a degree-d polynomial in n, and let k be a constant.
Use the definitions of the asymptotic notations to prove the following
properties.

a. If k ≥ d, then p(n) = O(n^(k)).

b. If k ≤ d, then p(n) = Ω(n^(k)).

c. If k = d, then p(n) = Θ(n^(k)).

d. If k > d, then p(n) = o(n^(k)).

e. If k < d, then p(n) = ω(n^(k)).

3-2     Relative asymptotic growths

Indicate, for each pair of expressions (A, B) in the table below whether
A is O, o, Ω, ω, or Θ of B. Assume that k ≥ 1, ϵ > 0, and c > 1 are
constants. Write your answer in the form of the table with “yes” or “no”
written in each box.

[art]

3-3     Ordering by asymptotic growth rates

a. Rank the following functions by order of growth. That is, find an
arrangement g₁, g₂, … , g₃₀ of the functions satisfying g₁ = Ω(g₂), g₂ =
Ω(g₃), … , g₂₉ = Ω(g₃₀). Partition your list into equivalence classes
such that functions f (n) and g(n) belong to the same class if and only
if f (n) = Θ(g(n)).

  -------------- --------------- ----------- ------------- ---------- ------------
  lg(lg^(*) n)   2^(lg* n)       [art]       n²            n!         (lg n)!
  (3/2)^(n)      n³              lg² n       lg(n!)        [art]      n^(1/lg n)
  ln ln n        lg^(*) n        n · 2^(n)   n^(lg lg n)   ln n       1
  2^(lg n)       (lg n)^(lg n)   e^(n)       4^(lg n)      (n + 1)!   [art]
  lg^(*)(lg n)   [art]           n           2^(n)         n lg n     [art]
  -------------- --------------- ----------- ------------- ---------- ------------

b. Give an example of a single nonnegative function f (n) such that for
all functions g_(i)(n) in part (a), f (n) is neither O(g_(i)(n)) nor
Ω(g_(i)(n)).

3-4     Asymptotic notation properties

Let f (n) and g(n) be asymptotically positive functions. Prove or
disprove each of the following conjectures.

a. f (n) = O(g(n)) implies g(n) = O(f (n)).

b. f (n) + g(n) = Θ(min {f (n), g(n)}).

c. f (n) = O(g(n)) implies lg f (n) = O(lg g(n)), where lg g(n) ≥ 1 and
f (n) ≥ 1 for all sufficiently large n.

d. f (n) = O(g(n)) implies 2^(f(n)) = O (2^(g(n))).

e. f (n) = O ((f (n))²).

f. f (n) = O(g(n)) implies g(n) = Ω(f (n)).

g. f (n) = Θ(f (n/2)).

h. f (n) + o(f (n)) = Θ(f (n)).

3-5     Manipulating asymptotic notation

Let f (n) and g(n) be asymptotically positive functions. Prove the
following identities:

a. Θ(Θ(f (n))) = Θ(f (n)).

b. Θ(f (n)) + O(f (n)) = Θ(f (n)).

c. Θ(f (n)) + Θ(g(n)) = Θ(f (n) + g(n)).

d. Θ(f (n)) · Θ(g(n)) = Θ(f (n) · g(n)).

e. Argue that for any real constants a₁, b₁ > 0 and integer constants
k₁, k₂, the following asymptotic bound holds:

[art]

★ f. Prove that for S ⊆ Z, we have

[art]

assuming that both sums converge.

★ g. Show that for S ⊆ Z, the following asymptotic bound does not
necessarily hold, even assuming that both products converge, by giving a
counterexample:

[art]

3-6     Variations on O and Ω

Some authors define Ω-notation in a slightly different way than this
textbook does. We’ll use the nomenclature [art] (read “omega infinity”)
for this alternative definition. We say that [art] if there exists a
positive constant c such that f (n) ≥ cg(n) ≥ 0 for infinitely many
integers n.

a. Show that for any two asymptotically nonnegative functions f (n) and
g(n), we have f (n) = O(g(n)) or [art] (or both).

b. Show that there exist two asymptotically nonnegative functions f (n)
and g(n) for which neither f (n) = O(g(n)) nor f (n) = Ω(g(n)) holds.

c. Describe the potential advantages and disadvantages of using
[art]-notation instead of Ω-notation to characterize the running times
of programs.

Some authors also define O in a slightly different manner. We’ll use
O^(′) for the alternative definition: f (n) = O^(′)(g(n)) if and only if
|f (n)| = O(g(n)).

d. What happens to each direction of the “if and only if” in Theorem 3.1
on page 56 if we substitute O^(′) for O but still use Ω?

Some authors define [art] (read “soft-oh”) to mean O with logarithmic
factors ignored:

  ------- ----- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [art]    :    there exist positive constants c, k, and n₀ such that 0 ≤ f (n) ≤ cg(n) lg^(k)(n) for all n ≥ n₀}.
  ------- ----- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

e. Define [art] and [art] in a similar manner. Prove the corresponding
analog to Theorem 3.1.

3-7     Iterated functions

We can apply the iteration operator ^(*) used in the lg^(*) function to
any monotonically increasing function f (n) over the reals. For a given
constant c ∈ R, we define the iterated function [art] by

[art]

which need not be well defined in all cases. In other words, the
quantity [art] is the minimum number of iterated applications of the
function f required to reduce its argument down to c or less.

For each of the functions f (n) and constants c in the table below, give
as tight a bound as possible on [art]. If there is no i such that
f^((i))(n) ≤ c, write “undefined” as your answer.

  ---- --------- --- -------
       f (n)     c   [art]
  a.   n – 1     0   
  b.   lg n      1   
  c.   n/2       1   
  d.   n/2       2   
  e.   [art]     2   
  f.   [art]     1   
  g.   n^(1/3)   2   
  ---- --------- --- -------

Chapter notes

Knuth [259] traces the origin of the O-notation to a number-theory text
by P. Bachmann in 1892. The o-notation was invented by E. Landau in 1909
for his discussion of the distribution of prime numbers. The Ω and Θ
notations were advocated by Knuth [265] to correct the popular, but
technically sloppy, practice in the literature of using O-notation for
both upper and lower bounds. As noted earlier in this chapter, many
people continue to use the O-notation where the Θ-notation is more
technically precise. The soft-oh notation [art] in Problem 3-6 was
introduced by Babai, Luks, and Seress [31], although it was originally
written as O~. Some authors now define [art] as ignoring factors that
are logarithmic in g(n), rather than in n. With this definition, we can
say that [art], but with the definition in Problem 3-6, this statement
is not true. Further discussion of the history and development of
asymptotic notations appears in works by Knuth [259, 265] and Brassard
and Bratley [70].

Not all authors define the asymptotic notations in the same way,
although the various definitions agree in most common situations. Some
of the alternative definitions encompass functions that are not
asymptotically nonnegative, as long as their absolute values are
appropriately bounded.

Equation (3.29) is due to Robbins [381]. Other properties of elementary
mathematical functions can be found in any good mathematical reference,
such as Abramowitz and Stegun [1] or Zwillinger [468], or in a calculus
book, such as Apostol [19] or Thomas et al. [433]. Knuth [259] and
Graham, Knuth, and Patashnik [199] contain a wealth of material on
discrete mathematics as used in computer science.

¹ Within set notation, a colon means “such that.”

4          Divide-and-Conquer

The divide-and-conquer method is a powerful strategy for designing
asymptotically efficient algorithms. We saw an example of
divide-and-conquer in Section 2.3.1 when learning about merge sort. In
this chapter, we’ll explore applications of the divide-and-conquer
method and acquire valuable mathematical tools that you can use to solve
the recurrences that arise when analyzing divide-and-conquer algorithms.

Recall that for divide-and-conquer, you solve a given problem (instance)
recursively. If the problem is small enough—the base case—you just solve
it directly without recursing. Otherwise—the recursive case—you perform
three characteristic steps:

Divide the problem into one or more subproblems that are smaller
instances of the same problem.

Conquer the subproblems by solving them recursively.

Combine the subproblem solutions to form a solution to the original
problem.

A divide-and-conquer algorithm breaks down a large problem into smaller
subproblems, which themselves may be broken down into even smaller
subproblems, and so forth. The recursion bottoms out when it reaches a
base case and the subproblem is small enough to solve directly without
further recursing.

Recurrences

To analyze recursive divide-and-conquer algorithms, we’ll need some
mathematical tools. A recurrence is an equation that describes a
function in terms of its value on other, typically smaller, arguments.
Recurrences go hand in hand with the divide-and-conquer method because
they give us a natural way to characterize the running times of
recursive algorithms mathematically. You saw an example of a recurrence
in Section 2.3.2 when we analyzed the worst-case running time of merge
sort.

For the divide-and-conquer matrix-multiplication algorithms presented in
Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we’ll derive recurrences that describe their
worst-case running times. To understand why these two divide-and-conquer
algorithms perform the way they do, you’ll need to learn how to solve
the recurrences that describe their running times. Sections 4.3–4.7
teach several methods for solving recurrences. These sections also
explore the mathematics behind recurrences, which can give you stronger
intuition for designing your own divide-and-conquer algorithms.

We want to get to the algorithms as soon as possible. So, let’s just
cover a few recurrence basics now, and then we’ll look more deeply at
recurrences, especially how to solve them, after we see the
matrix-multiplication examples.

The general form of a recurrence is an equation or inequality that
describes a function over the integers or reals using the function
itself. It contains two or more cases, depending on the argument. If a
case involves the recursive invocation of the function on different
(usually smaller) inputs, it is a recursive case. If a case does not
involve a recursive invocation, it is a base case. There may be zero,
one, or many functions that satisfy the statement of the recurrence. The
recurrence is well defined if there is at least one function that
satisfies it, and ill defined otherwise.

Algorithmic recurrences

We’ll be particularly interested in recurrences that describe the
running times of divide-and-conquer algorithms. A recurrence T (n) is
algorithmic if, for every sufficiently large threshold constant n₀ > 0,
the following two properties hold:

1. For all n < n₀, we have T (n) = Θ(1).

2. For all n ≥ n₀, every path of recursion terminates in a defined base
case within a finite number of recursive invocations.

Similar to how we sometimes abuse asymptotic notation (see page 60),
when a function is not defined for all arguments, we understand that
this definition is constrained to values of n for which T (n) is
defined.

Why would a recurrence T (n) that represents a (correct)
divide-and-conquer algorithm’s worst-case running time satisfy these
properties for all sufficiently large threshold constants? The first
property says that there exist constants c₁, c₂ such that 0 < c₁ ≤ T (n)
≤ c₂ for n < n₀. For every legal input, the algorithm must output the
solution to the problem it’s solving in finite time (see Section 1.1).
Thus we can let c₁ be the minimum amount of time to call and return from
a procedure, which must be positive, because machine instructions need
to be executed to invoke a procedure. The running time of the algorithm
may not be defined for some values of n if there are no legal inputs of
that size, but it must be defined for at least one, or else the
“algorithm” doesn’t solve any problem. Thus we can let c₂ be the
algorithm’s maximum running time on any input of size n < n₀, where n₀
is sufficiently large that the algorithm solves at least one problem of
size less than n₀. The maximum is well defined, since there are at most
a finite number of inputs of size less than n₀, and there is at least
one if n₀ is sufficiently large. Consequently, T (n) satisfies the first
property. If the second property fails to hold for T (n), then the
algorithm isn’t correct, because it would end up in an infinite
recursive loop or otherwise fail to compute a solution. Thus, it stands
to reason that a recurrence for the worst-case running time of a correct
divide-and-conquer algorithm would be algorithmic.

Conventions for recurrences

We adopt the following convention:

Whenever a recurrence is stated without an explicit base case, we assume
that the recurrence is algorithmic.

That means you’re free to pick any sufficiently large threshold constant
n₀ for the range of base cases where T (n) = Θ(1). Interestingly, the
asymptotic solutions of most algorithmic recurrences you’re likely to
see when analyzing algorithms don’t depend on the choice of threshold
constant, as long as it’s large enough to make the recurrence well
defined.

Asymptotic solutions of algorithmic divide-and-conquer recurrences also
don’t tend to change when we drop any floors or ceilings in a recurrence
defined on the integers to convert it to a recurrence defined on the
reals. Section 4.7 gives a sufficient condition for ignoring floors and
ceilings that applies to most of the divide-and-conquer recurrences
you’re likely to see. Consequently, we’ll frequently state algorithmic
recurrences without floors and ceilings. Doing so generally simplifies
the statement of the recurrences, as well as any math that we do with
them.

You may sometimes see recurrences that are not equations, but rather
inequalities, such as T (n) ≤ 2T (n/2) + Θ(n). Because such a recurrence
states only an upper bound on T (n), we express its solution using
O-notation rather than Θ-notation. Similarly, if the inequality is
reversed to T (n) ≥ 2T (n/2) + Θ(n), then, because the recurrence gives
only a lower bound on T (n), we use Ω-notation in its solution.

Divide-and-conquer and recurrences

This chapter illustrates the divide-and-conquer method by presenting and
using recurrences to analyze two divide-and-conquer algorithms for
multiplying n × n matrices. Section 4.1 presents a simple
divide-and-conquer algorithm that solves a matrix-multiplication problem
of size n by breaking it into four subproblems of size n/2, which it
then solves recursively. The running time of the algorithm can be
characterized by the recurrence

T (n) = 8T (n/2) + Θ(1),

which turns out to have the solution T (n) = Θ(n³). Although this
divide-and-conquer algorithm is no faster than the straightforward
method that uses a triply nested loop, it leads to an asymptotically
faster divide-and-conquer algorithm due to V. Strassen, which we’ll
explore in Section 4.2. Strassen’s remarkable algorithm divides a
problem of size n into seven subproblems of size n/2 which it solves
recursively. The running time of Strassen’s algorithm can be described
by the recurrence

T (n) = 7T (n/2) + Θ(n²),

which has the solution T (n) = Θ(n^(lg 7)) = O(n^(2.81)). Strassen’s
algorithm beats the straightforward looping method asymptotically.

These two divide-and-conquer algorithms both break a problem of size n
into several subproblems of size n/2. Although it is common when using
divide-and-conquer for all the subproblems to have the same size, that
isn’t always the case. Sometimes it’s productive to divide a problem of
size n into subproblems of different sizes, and then the recurrence
describing the running time reflects the irregularity. For example,
consider a divide-and-conquer algorithm that divides a problem of size n
into one subproblem of size n/3 and another of size 2n/3, taking Θ(n)
time to divide the problem and combine the solutions to the subproblems.
Then the algorithm’s running time can be described by the recurrence

T (n) = T (n/3) + T (2n/3) + Θ(n),

which turns out to have solution T (n) = Θ(n lg n). We’ll even see an
algorithm in Chapter 9 that solves a problem of size n by recursively
solving a subproblem of size n/5 and another of size 7n/10, taking Θ(n)
time for the divide and combine steps. Its performance satisfies the
recurrence

T (n) = T (n/5) + T (7n/10) + Θ(n),

which has solution T (n) = Θ(n).

Although divide-and-conquer algorithms usually create subproblems with
sizes a constant fraction of the original problem size, that’s not
always the case. For example, a recursive version of linear search (see
Exercise 2.1-4) creates just one subproblem, with one element less than
the original problem. Each recursive call takes constant time plus the
time to recursively solve a subproblem with one less element, leading to
the recurrence

T (n) = T (n – 1) + Θ(1),

which has solution T (n) = Θ(n). Nevertheless, the vast majority of
efficient divide-and-conquer algorithms solve subproblems that are a
constant fraction of the size of the original problem, which is where
we’ll focus our efforts.

Solving recurrences

After learning about divide-and-conquer algorithms for matrix
multiplication in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we’ll explore several
mathematical tools for solving recurrences—that is, for obtaining
asymptotic Θ-, O-, or Ω-bounds on their solutions. We want simple-to-use
tools that can handle the most commonly occurring situations. But we
also want general tools that work, perhaps with a little more effort,
for less common cases. This chapter offers four methods for solving
recurrences:

- In the substitution method (Section 4.3), you guess the form of a
  bound and then use mathematical induction to prove your guess correct
  and solve for constants. This method is perhaps the most robust method
  for solving recurrences, but it also requires you to make a good guess
  and to produce an inductive proof.

- The recursion-tree method (Section 4.4) models the recurrence as a
  tree whose nodes represent the costs incurred at various levels of the
  recursion. To solve the recurrence, you determine the costs at each
  level and add them up, perhaps using techniques for bounding
  summations from Section A.2. Even if you don’t use this method to
  formally prove a bound, it can be helpful in guessing the form of the
  bound for use in the substitution method.

- The master method (Sections 4.5 and 4.6) is the easiest method, when
  it applies. It provides bounds for recurrences of the form

  T (n) = aT (n/b) + f (n),

  where a > 0 and b > 1 are constants and f (n) is a given “driving”
  function. This type of recurrence tends to arise more frequently in
  the study of algorithms than any other. It characterizes a
  divide-and-conquer algorithm that creates a subproblems, each of which
  is 1/b times the size of the original problem, using f (n) time for
  the divide and combine steps. To apply the master method, you need to
  memorize three cases, but once you do, you can easily determine
  asymptotic bounds on running times for many divide-and-conquer
  algorithms.

- The Akra-Bazzi method (Section 4.7) is a general method for solving
  divide-and-conquer recurrences. Although it involves calculus, it can
  be used to attack more complicated recurrences than those addressed by
  the master method.

4.1      Multiplying square matrices

We can use the divide-and-conquer method to multiply square matrices. If
you’ve seen matrices before, then you probably know how to multiply
them. (Otherwise, you should read Section D.1.) Let A = (a_(ik)) and B =
(b_(jk)) be square n × n matrices. The matrix product C = A · B is also
an n × n matrix, where for i, j = 1, 2, … , n, the (i, j) entry of C is
given by

[art]

Generally, we’ll assume that the matrices are dense, meaning that most
of the n² entries are not 0, as opposed to sparse, where most of the n²
entries are 0 and the nonzero entries can be stored more compactly than
in an n × n array.

Computing the matrix C requires computing n² matrix entries, each of
which is the sum of n pairwise products of input elements from A and B.
The MATRIX-MULTIPLY procedure implements this strategy in a
straightforward manner, and it generalizes the problem slightly. It
takes as input three n × n matrices A, B, and C, and it adds the matrix
product A · B to C, storing the result in C. Thus, it computes C = C + A
· B, instead of just C = A · B. If only the product A · B is needed,
just initialize all n² entries of C to 0 before calling the procedure,
which takes an additional Θ(n²) time. We’ll see that the cost of matrix
multiplication asymptotically dominates this initialization cost.

MATRIX-MULTIPLY(A, B, C, n)

  --- ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  1   for i = 1 to n                      // compute entries in each of n rows
  2   for j = 1 to n                      // compute n entries in row i
  3   for k = 1 to n                      
  4   c_(ij) = c_(ij) + a_(ik) · b_(kj)   // add in another term of equation (4.1)
  --- ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------------

The pseudocode for MATRIX-MULTIPLY works as follows. The for loop of
lines 1–4 computes the entries of each row i, and within a given row i,
the for loop of lines 2–4 computes each of the entries c_(ij) for each
column j. Each iteration of the for loop of lines 3–4 adds in one more
term of equation (4.1).

Because each of the triply nested for loops runs for exactly n
iterations, and each execution of line 4 takes constant time, the
MATRIX-MULTIPLY procedure operates in Θ(n³) time. Even if we add in the
Θ(n²) time for initializing C to 0, the running time is still Θ(n³).

A simple divide-and-conquer algorithm

Let’s see how to compute the matrix product A · B using
divide-and-conquer. For n > 1, the divide step partitions the n × n
matrices into four n/2 × n/2 submatrices. We’ll assume that n is an
exact power of 2, so that as the algorithm recurses, we are guaranteed
that the submatrix dimensions are integer. (Exercise 4.1-1 asks you to
relax this assumption.) As with MATRIX-MULTIPLY, we’ll actually compute
C = C + A · B. But to simplify the math behind the algorithm, let’s
assume that C has been initialized to the zero matrix, so that we are
indeed computing C = A · B.

The divide step views each of the n × n matrices A, B, and C as four n/2
× n/2 submatrices:

[art]

Then we can write the matrix product as

[art]

which corresponds to the equations

[art]

Equations (4.5)–(4.8) involve eight n/2 × n/2 multiplications and four
additions of n/2 × n/2 submatrices.

As we look to transform these equations to an algorithm that can be
described with pseudocode, or even implemented for real, there are two
common approaches for implementing the matrix partitioning.

One strategy is to allocate temporary storage to hold A’s four
submatrices A₁₁, A₁₂, A₂₁, and A₂₂ and B’s four submatrices B₁₁, B₁₂,
B₂₁, and B₂₂. Then copy each element in A and B to its corresponding
location in the appropriate submatrix. After the recursive conquer step,
copy the elements in each of C’s four submatrices C₁₁, C₁₂, C₂₁, and C₂₂
to their corresponding locations in C. This approach takes Θ(n²) time,
since 3n² elements are copied.

The second approach uses index calculations and is faster and more
practical. A submatrix can be specified within a matrix by indicating
where within the matrix the submatrix lies without touching any matrix
elements. Partitioning a matrix (or recursively, a submatrix) only
involves arithmetic on this location information, which has constant
size independent of the size of the matrix. Changes to the submatrix
elements update the original matrix, since they occupy the same storage.

Going forward, we’ll assume that index calculations are used and that
partitioning can be performed in Θ(1) time. Exercise 4.1-3 asks you to
show that it makes no difference to the overall asymptotic running time
of matrix multiplication, however, whether the partitioning of matrices
uses the first method of copying or the second method of index
calculation. But for other divide-and-conquer matrix calculations, such
as matrix addition, it can make a difference, as Exercise 4.1-4 asks you
to show.

The procedure MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE uses equations (4.5)–(4.8) to
implement a divide-and-conquer strategy for square-matrix
multiplication. Like MATRIX-MULTIPLY, the procedure
MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE computes C = C + A · B since, if necessary, C
can be initialized to 0 before the procedure is called in order to
compute only C = A · B.

MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A, B, C, n)

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|   1                               | if n == 1                         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|   2                               | // Base case.                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|   3                               | c₁₁ = c₁₁ + a₁₁ · b₁₁             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|   4                               | return                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|   5                               | // Divide.                        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|   6                               | partition A, B, and C into n/2 ×  |
|                                   | n/2 submatrices                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | A₁₁, A₁₂, A₂₁, A₂₂; B₁₁, B₁₂,     |
|                                   | B₂₁, B₂₂;                         |
|                                   | and C₁₁, C₁₂, C₂₁, C₂₂;           |
|                                   | respectively                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|   7                               | // Conquer.                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|   8                               | MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A₁₁,    |
|                                   | B₁₁, C₁₁, n/2)                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|   9                               | MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A₁₁,    |
|                                   | B₁₂, C₁₂, n/2)                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 10                                | MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A₂₁,    |
|                                   | B₁₁, C₂₁, n/2)                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 11                                | MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A₂₁,    |
|                                   | B₁₂, C₂₂, n/2)                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 12                                | MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A₁₂,    |
|                                   | B₂₁, C₁₁, n/2)                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 13                                | MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A₁₂,    |
|                                   | B₂₂, C₁₂, n/2)                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 14                                | MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A₂₂,    |
|                                   | B₂₁, C₂₁, n/2)                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 15                                | MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A₂₂,    |
|                                   | B₂₂, C₂₂, n/2)                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

As we walk through the pseudocode, we’ll derive a recurrence to
characterize its running time. Let T (n) be the worst-case time to
multiply two n × n matrices using this procedure.

In the base case, when n = 1, line 3 performs just the one scalar
multiplication and one addition, which means that T (1) = Θ(1). As is
our convention for constant base cases, we can omit this base case in
the statement of the recurrence.

The recursive case occurs when n > 1. As discussed, we’ll use index
calculations to partition the matrices in line 6, taking Θ(1) time.
Lines 8–15 recursively call MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE a total of eight
times. The first four recursive calls compute the first terms of
equations (4.5)–(4.8), and the subsequent four recursive calls compute
and add in the second terms. Each recursive call adds the product of a
submatrix of A and a submatrix of B to the appropriate submatrix of C in
place, thanks to index calculations. Because each recursive call
multiplies two n/2 × n/2 matrices, thereby contributing T (n/2) to the
overall running time, the time taken by all eight recursive calls is 8T
(n/2). There is no combine step, because the matrix C is updated in
place. The total time for the recursive case, therefore, is the sum of
the partitioning time and the time for all the recursive calls, or
Θ(1) + 8T (n/2).

Thus, omitting the statement of the base case, our recurrence for the
running time of MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE is

[art]

As we’ll see from the master method in Section 4.5, recurrence (4.9) has
the solution T (n) = Θ(n³), which means that it has the same asymptotic
running time as the straightforward MATRIX-MULTIPLY procedure.

Why is the Θ(n³) solution to this recurrence so much larger than the Θ(n
lg n) solution to the merge-sort recurrence (2.3) on page 41? After all,
the recurrence for merge sort contains a Θ(n) term, whereas the
recurrence for recursive matrix multiplication contains only a Θ(1)
term.

Let’s think about what the recursion tree for recurrence (4.9) would
look like as compared with the recursion tree for merge sort,
illustrated in Figure 2.5 on page 43. The factor of 2 in the merge-sort
recurrence determines how many children each tree node has, which in
turn determines how many terms contribute to the sum at each level of
the tree. In comparison, for the recurrence (4.9) for
MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, each internal node in the recursion tree has
eight children, not two, leading to a “bushier” recursion tree with many
more leaves, despite the fact that the internal nodes are each much
smaller. Consequently, the solution to recurrence (4.9) grows much more
quickly than the solution to recurrence (2.3), which is borne out in the
actual solutions: Θ(n³) versus Θ(n lg n).

Exercises

Note: You may wish to read Section 4.5 before attempting some of these
exercises.

4.1-1

Generalize MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE to multiply n × n matrices for
which n is not necessarily an exact power of 2. Give a recurrence
describing its running time. Argue that it runs in Θ(n³) time in the
worst case.

4.1-2

How quickly can you multiply a k n × n matrix (k n rows and n columns)
by an n × k n matrix, where k ≥ 1, using MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE as a
subroutine? Answer the same question for multiplying an n × k n matrix
by a k n × n matrix. Which is asymptotically faster, and by how much?

4.1-3

Suppose that instead of partitioning matrices by index calculation in
MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, you copy the appropriate elements of A, B,
and C into separate n/2 × n/2 submatrices A₁₁, A₁₂, A₂₁, A₂₂; B₁₁, B₁₂,
B₂₁, B₂₂; and C₁₁, C₁₂, C₂₁, C₂₂, respectively. After the recursive
calls, you copy the results from C₁₁, C₁₂, C₂₁, and C₂₂ back into the
appropriate places in C. How does recurrence (4.9) change, and what is
its solution?

4.1-4

Write pseudocode for a divide-and-conquer algorithm MATRIX-ADD-RECURSIVE
that sums two n × n matrices A and B by partitioning each of them into
four n/2 × n/2 submatrices and then recursively summing corresponding
pairs of submatrices. Assume that matrix partitioning uses Θ(1)-time
index calculations. Write a recurrence for the worst-case running time
of MATRIX-ADD-RECURSIVE, and solve your recurrence. What happens if you
use Θ(n²)-time copying to implement the partitioning instead of index
calculations?

4.2      Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication

You might find it hard to imagine that any matrix multiplication
algorithm could take less than Θ(n³) time, since the natural definition
of matrix multiplication requires n³ scalar multiplications. Indeed,
many mathematicians presumed that it was not possible to multiply
matrices in o(n³) time until 1969, when V. Strassen [424] published a
remarkable recursive algorithm for multiplying n × n matrices.
Strassen’s algorithm runs in Θ(n^(lg 7)) time. Since lg 7 = 2.8073549 …,
Strassen’s algorithm runs in O(n^(2.81)) time, which is asymptotically
better than the Θ(n³) MATRIX-MULTIPLY and MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE
procedures.

The key to Strassen’s method is to use the divide-and-conquer idea from
the MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE procedure, but make the recursion tree
less bushy. We’ll actually increase the work for each divide and combine
step by a constant factor, but the reduction in bushiness will pay off.
We won’t reduce the bushiness from the eight-way branching of recurrence
(4.9) all the way down to the two-way branching of recurrence (2.3), but
we’ll improve it just a little, and that will make a big difference.
Instead of performing eight recursive multiplications of n/2 × n/2
matrices, Strassen’s algorithm performs only seven. The cost of
eliminating one matrix multiplication is several new additions and
subtractions of n/2 × n/2 matrices, but still only a constant number.
Rather than saying “additions and subtractions” everywhere, we’ll adopt
the common terminology of calling them both “additions” because
subtraction is structurally the same computation as addition, except for
a change of sign.

To get an inkling how the number of multiplications might be reduced, as
well as why reducing the number of multiplications might be desirable
for matrix calculations, suppose that you have two numbers x and y, and
you want to calculate the quantity x² – y². The straightforward
calculation requires two multiplications to square x and y, followed by
one subtraction (which you can think of as a “negative addition”). But
let’s recall the old algebra trick x² – y² = x² – xy + xy – y² = x(x –
y) + y(x – y) = (x + y)(x – y). Using this formulation of the desired
quantity, you could instead compute the sum x + y and the difference x –
y and then multiply them, requiring only a single multiplication and two
additions. At the cost of an extra addition, only one multiplication is
needed to compute an expression that looks as if it requires two. If x
and y are scalars, there’s not much difference: both approaches require
three scalar operations. If x and y are large matrices, however, the
cost of multiplying outweighs the cost of adding, in which case the
second method outperforms the first, although not asymptotically.

Strassen’s strategy for reducing the number of matrix multiplications at
the expense of more matrix additions is not at all obvious—perhaps the
biggest understatement in this book! As with MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE,
Strassen’s algorithm uses the divide-and-conquer method to compute C =
C + A · B, where A, B, and C are all n × n matrices and n is an exact
power of 2. Strassen’s algorithm computes the four submatrices C₁₁, C₁₂,
C₂₁, and C₂₂ of C from equations (4.5)–(4.8) on page 82 in four steps.
We’ll analyze costs as we go along to develop a recurrence T (n) for the
overall running time. Let’s see how it works:

1.  If n = 1, the matrices each contain a single element. Perform a
    single scalar multiplication and a single scalar addition, as in
    line 3 of MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, taking Θ(1) time, and return.
    Otherwise, partition the input matrices A and B and output matrix C
    into n/2 × n/2 submatrices, as in equation (4.2). This step takes
    Θ(1) time by index calculation, just as in
    MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.
2.  Create n/2 × n/2 matrices S₁, S₂, … , S₁₀, each of which is the sum
    or difference of two submatrices from step 1. Create and zero the
    entries of seven n/2 × n/2 matrices P₁, P₂, … , P₇ to hold seven n/2
    × n/2 matrix products. All 17 matrices can be created, and the P_(i)
    initialized, in Θ(n²) time.
3.  Using the submatrices from step 1 and the matrices S₁, S₂, … , S₁₀
    created in step 2, recursively compute each of the seven matrix
    products P₁, P₂, … , P₇, taking 7T (n/2) time.
4.  Update the four submatrices C₁₁, C₁₂, C₂₁, C₂₂ of the result matrix
    C by adding or subtracting various P_(i) matrices, which takes Θ(n²)
    time.

We’ll see the details of steps 2–4 in a moment, but we already have
enough information to set up a recurrence for the running time of
Strassen’s method. As is common, the base case in step 1 takes Θ(1)
time, which we’ll omit when stating the recurrence. When n > 1, steps 1,
2, and 4 take a total of Θ(n²) time, and step 3 requires seven
multiplications of n/2 × n/2 matrices. Hence, we obtain the following
recurrence for the running time of Strassen’s algorithm:

[art]

Compared with MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, we have traded off one
recursive submatrix multiplication for a constant number of submatrix
additions. Once you understand recurrences and their solutions, you’ll
be able to see why this trade-off actually leads to a lower asymptotic
running time. By the master method in Section 4.5, recurrence (4.10) has
the solution T (n) = Θ(n^(lg 7)) = O(n^(2.81)), beating the Θ(n³)-time
algorithms.

Now, let’s delve into the details. Step 2 creates the following 10
matrices:

  ----- --- ---------------
  S₁    =   B₁₂ – B₂₂,
  S₂    =   A₁₁ + A₁₂,
  S₃    =   A₂₁ + A₂₂,
  S₄    =   B₂₁ – B_(11,)
  S₅    =   A₁₁ + A₂₂,
  S₆    =   B₁₁ + B₂₂,
  S₇    =   A₁₂ – A₂₂,
  S₈    =   B₂₁ + B₂₂,
  S₉    =   A₁₁ – A_(21,)
  S₁₀   =   B₁₁ + B₁₂.
  ----- --- ---------------

This step adds or subtracts n/2 × n/2 matrices 10 times, taking Θ(n²)
time.

Step 3 recursively multiplies n/2 × n/2 matrices 7 times to compute the
following n/2 × n/2 matrices, each of which is the sum or difference of
products of A and B submatrices:

  ---- --- ---------- ----------------------------------------------------
  P₁   =   A₁₁ · S₁   (= A₁₁ · B₁₂ – A₁₁ · B₂₂),
  P₂   =   S₂ · B₂₂   (= A₁₁ · B₂₂ + A₁₂ · B₂₂),
  P₃   =   S₃ · B₁₁   (= A₂₁ · B₁₁ + A₂₂ · B₁₁),
  P₄   =   A₂₂ · S₄   (= A₂₂ · B₂₁ – A₂₂ · B₁₁),
  P₅   =   S₅ · S₆    (= A₁₁ · B₁₁ + A₁₁ · B₂₂ + A₂₂ · B₁₁ + A₂₂ · B₂₂),
  P₆   =   S₇ · S₈    (= A₁₂ · B₂₁ + A₁₂ · B₂₂ – A₂₂ · B₂₁ – A₂₂ · B₂₂),
  P₇   =   S₉ · S₁₀   (= A₁₁ · B₁₁ + A₁₁ · B₁₂ – A₂₁ · B₁₁ – A₂₁ · B₁₂).
  ---- --- ---------- ----------------------------------------------------

The only multiplications that the algorithm performs are those in the
middle column of these equations. The right-hand column just shows what
these products equal in terms of the original submatrices created in
step 1, but the terms are never explicitly calculated by the algorithm.

Step 4 adds to and subtracts from the four n/2 × n/2 submatrices of the
product C the various P_(i) matrices created in step 3. We start with

C₁₁ = C₁₁ + P₅ + P₄ – P₂ + P₆.

Expanding the calculation on the right-hand side, with the expansion of
each P_(i) on its own line and vertically aligning terms that cancel
out, we see that the update to C₁₁ equals

[art]

which corresponds to equation (4.5). Similarly, setting

C₁₂ = C₁₂ + P₁ + P₂

means that the update to C₁₂ equals

[art]

corresponding to equation (4.6). Setting

C₂₁ = C₂₁ + P₃ + P₄

means that the update to C₂₁ equals

[art]

corresponding to equation (4.7). Finally, setting

C₂₂ = C₂₂ + P₅ + P₁ – P₃ – P₇

means that the update to C₂₂ equals

[art]

which corresponds to equation (4.8). Altogether, since we add or
subtract n/2×n/2 matrices 12 times in step 4, this step indeed takes
Θ(n²) time.

We can see that Strassen’s remarkable algorithm, comprising steps 1–4,
produces the correct matrix product using 7 submatrix multiplications
and 18 submatrix additions. We can also see that recurrence (4.10)
characterizes its running time. Since Section 4.5 shows that this
recurrence has the solution T (n) = Θ(n^(lg 7)) = o(n³), Strassen’s
method asymptotically beats the Θ(n³) MATRIX-MULTIPLY and
MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE procedures.

Exercises

Note: You may wish to read Section 4.5 before attempting some of these
exercises.

4.2-1

Use Strassen’s algorithm to compute the matrix product

[art]

Show your work.

4.2-2

Write pseudocode for Strassen’s algorithm.

4.2-3

What is the largest k such that if you can multiply 3 × 3 matrices using
k multiplications (not assuming commutativity of multiplication), then
you can multiply n × n matrices in o(n^(lg 7)) time? What is the running
time of this algorithm?

4.2-4

V. Pan discovered a way of multiplying 68 × 68 matrices using 132,464
multiplications, a way of multiplying 70 × 70 matrices using 143,640
multiplications, and a way of multiplying 72 × 72 matrices using 155,424
multiplications. Which method yields the best asymptotic running time
when used in a divide-and-conquer matrix-multiplication algorithm? How
does it compare with Strassen’s algorithm?

4.2-5

Show how to multiply the complex numbers a + bi and c + d i using only
three multiplications of real numbers. The algorithm should take a, b,
c, and d as input and produce the real component ac – bd and the
imaginary component ad + bc separately.

4.2-6

Suppose that you have a Θ(n^(α))-time algorithm for squaring n × n
matrices, where α ≥ 2. Show how to use that algorithm to multiply two
different n × n matrices in Θ(n^(α)) time.

4.3      The substitution method for solving recurrences

Now that you have seen how recurrences characterize the running times of
divide-and-conquer algorithms, let’s learn how to solve them. We start
in this section with the substitution method, which is the most general
of the four methods in this chapter. The substitution method comprises
two steps:

1.  Guess the form of the solution using symbolic constants.
2.  Use mathematical induction to show that the solution works, and find
    the constants.

To apply the inductive hypothesis, you substitute the guessed solution
for the function on smaller values—hence the name “substitution method.”
This method is powerful, but you must guess the form of the answer.
Although generating a good guess might seem difficult, a little practice
can quickly improve your intuition.

You can use the substitution method to establish either an upper or a
lower bound on a recurrence. It’s usually best not to try to do both at
the same time. That is, rather than trying to prove a Θ-bound directly,
first prove an O-bound, and then prove an Ω-bound. Together, they give
you a Θ-bound (Theorem 3.1 on page 56).

As an example of the substitution method, let’s determine an asymptotic
upper bound on the recurrence:

[art]

This recurrence is similar to recurrence (2.3) on page 41 for merge
sort, except for the floor function, which ensures that T (n) is defined
over the integers. Let’s guess that the asymptotic upper bound is the
same—T (n) = O(n lg n)—and use the substitution method to prove it.

We’ll adopt the inductive hypothesis that T (n) ≤ c n lg n for all n ≥
n₀, where we’ll choose the specific constants c > 0 and n₀ > 0 later,
after we see what constraints they need to obey. If we can establish
this inductive hypothesis, we can conclude that T (n) = O(n lg n). It
would be dangerous to use T (n) = O(n lg n) as the inductive hypothesis
because the constants matter, as we’ll see in a moment in our discussion
of pitfalls.

Assume by induction that this bound holds for all numbers at least as
big as n₀ and less than n. In particular, therefore, if n ≥ 2n₀, it
holds for ⌊n/2⌋, yielding T (⌊n/2 ⌋) ≤ c ⌊n/2⌋ lg(⌊n/2⌋). Substituting
into recurrence (4.11)—hence the name “substitution” method—yields

  ------- --- -----------------------------
  T (n)   ≤   2(c ⌊n/2⌋ lg(⌊n/2⌋)) + Θ(n)
          ≤   2(c(n/2) lg(n/2)) + Θ(n)
          =   cn lg(n/2) + Θ(n)
          =   cn lg n – cn lg 2 + Θ(n)
          =   cn lg n – cn + Θ(n)
          ≤   cn lg n,
  ------- --- -----------------------------

where the last step holds if we constrain the constants n₀ and c to be
sufficiently large that for n ≥ 2n₀, the quantity cn dominates the
anonymous function hidden by the Θ(n) term.

We’ve shown that the inductive hypothesis holds for the inductive case,
but we also need to prove that the inductive hypothesis holds for the
base cases of the induction, that is, that T (n) ≤ cn lg n when n₀ ≤ n <
2n₀. As long as n₀ > 1 (a new constraint on n₀), we have lg n > 0, which
implies that n lg n > 0. So let’s pick n₀ = 2. Since the base case of
recurrence (4.11) is not stated explicitly, by our convention, T (n) is
algorithmic, which means that T (2) and T (3) are constant (as they
should be if they describe the worst-case running time of any real
program on inputs of size 2 or 3). Picking c = max {T (2), T (3)} yields
T (2) ≤ c < (2 lg 2)c and T (3) ≤ c < (3 lg 3)c, establishing the
inductive hypothesis for the base cases.

Thus, we have T (n) ≤ cn lg n for all n ≥ 2, which implies that the
solution to recurrence (4.11) is T (n) = O(n lg n).

In the algorithms literature, people rarely carry out their substitution
proofs to this level of detail, especially in their treatment of base
cases. The reason is that for most algorithmic divide-and-conquer
recurrences, the base cases are all handled in pretty much the same way.
You ground the induction on a range of values from a convenient positive
constant n₀ up to some constant [art] such that for [art], the
recurrence always bottoms out in a constant-sized base case between n₀
and [art]. (This example used [art].) Then, it’s usually apparent,
without spelling out the details, that with a suitably large choice of
the leading constant (such as c for this example), the inductive
hypothesis can be made to hold for all the values in the range from n₀
to [art].

Making a good guess

Unfortunately, there is no general way to correctly guess the tightest
asymptotic solution to an arbitrary recurrence. Making a good guess
takes experience and, occasionally, creativity. Fortunately, learning
some recurrence-solving heuristics, as well as playing around with
recurrences to gain experience, can help you become a good guesser. You
can also use recursion trees, which we’ll see in Section 4.4, to help
generate good guesses.

If a recurrence is similar to one you’ve seen before, then guessing a
similar solution is reasonable. As an example, consider the recurrence

T (n) = 2T (n/2 + 17) + Θ(n),

defined on the reals. This recurrence looks somewhat like the merge-sort
recurrence (2.3), but it’s more complicated because of the added “17” in
the argument to T on the right-hand side. Intuitively, however, this
additional term shouldn’t substantially affect the solution to the
recurrence. When n is large, the relative difference between n/2 and
n/2 + 17 is not that large: both cut n nearly in half. Consequently, it
makes sense to guess that T (n) = O(n lg n), which you can verify is
correct using the substitution method (see Exercise 4.3-1).

Another way to make a good guess is to determine loose upper and lower
bounds on the recurrence and then reduce your range of uncertainty. For
example, you might start with a lower bound of T (n) = Ω(n) for
recurrence (4.11), since the recurrence includes the term Θ(n), and you
can prove an initial upper bound of T (n) = O(n²). Then split your time
between trying to lower the upper bound and trying to raise the lower
bound until you converge on the correct, asymptotically tight solution,
which in this case is T (n) = Θ(n lg n).

A trick of the trade: subtracting a low-order term

Sometimes, you might correctly guess a tight asymptotic bound on the
solution of a recurrence, but somehow the math fails to work out in the
induction proof. The problem frequently turns out to be that the
inductive assumption is not strong enough. The trick to resolving this
problem is to revise your guess by subtracting a lower-order term when
you hit such a snag. The math then often goes through.

Consider the recurrence

[art]

defined on the reals. Let’s guess that the solution is T (n) = O(n) and
try to show that T (n) ≤ cn for n ≥ n₀, where we choose the constants c,
n₀ > 0 suitably. Substituting our guess into the recurrence, we obtain

  ------- --- ------------------
  T (n)   ≤   2(c(n/2)) + Θ(1)
          =   cn + Θ(1),
  ------- --- ------------------

which, unfortunately, does not imply that T (n) ≤ cn for any choice of
c. We might be tempted to try a larger guess, say T (n) = O(n²).
Although this larger guess works, it provides only a loose upper bound.
It turns out that our original guess of T (n) = O(n) is correct and
tight. In order to show that it is correct, however, we must strengthen
our inductive hypothesis.

Intuitively, our guess is nearly right: we are off only by Θ(1), a
lower-order term. Nevertheless, mathematical induction requires us to
prove the exact form of the inductive hypothesis. Let’s try our trick of
subtracting a lower-order term from our previous guess: T (n) ≤ cn – d,
where d ≥ 0 is a constant. We now have

  ------- --- ----------------------
  T (n)   ≤   2(c(n/2) – d) + Θ(1)
          =   cn – 2d + Θ(1)
          ≤   cn – d – (d – Θ(1))
          ≤   cn – d
  ------- --- ----------------------

as long as we choose d to be larger than the anonymous upper-bound
constant hidden by the Θ-notation. Subtracting a lower-order term works!
Of course, we must not forget to handle the base case, which is to
choose the constant c large enough that cn – d dominates the implicit
base cases.

You might find the idea of subtracting a lower-order term to be
counterintuitive. After all, if the math doesn’t work out, shouldn’t you
increase your guess? Not necessarily! When the recurrence contains more
than one recursive invocation (recurrence (4.12) contains two), if you
add a lower-order term to the guess, then you end up adding it once for
each of the recursive invocations. Doing so takes you even further away
from the inductive hypothesis. On the other hand, if you subtract a
lower-order term from the guess, then you get to subtract it once for
each of the recursive invocations. In the above example, we subtracted
the constant d twice because the coefficient of T (n/2) is 2. We ended
up with the inequality T (n) ≤ cn – d – (d – Θ(1)), and we readily found
a suitable value for d.

Avoiding pitfalls

Avoid using asymptotic notation in the inductive hypothesis for the
substitution method because it’s error prone. For example, for
recurrence (4.11), we can falsely “prove” that T (n) = O(n) if we
unwisely adopt T (n) = O(n) as our inductive hypothesis:

+-------+---+------------+--------------+
| T (n) | ≤ | 2 · O(⌊n/2⌋) + Θ(n)       |
+-------+---+---------------------------+
|       | = | 2 · O(n) + Θ(n)           |
+-------+---+------------+--------------+
|       | = | O(n).      | [art] wrong! |
+-------+---+------------+--------------+

The problem with this reasoning is that the constant hidden by the
O-notation changes. We can expose the fallacy by repeating the “proof”
using an explicit constant. For the inductive hypothesis, assume that T
(n) ≤ cn for all n ≥ n₀, where c, n₀ > 0 are constants. Repeating the
first two steps in the inequality chain yields

  ------- --- -------------------
  T (n)   ≤   2(c ⌊n/2⌋) + Θ(n)
          ≤   cn + Θ(n).
  ------- --- -------------------

Now, indeed cn + Θ(n) = O(n), but the constant hidden by the O-notation
must be larger than c because the anonymous function hidden by the Θ(n)
is asymptotically positive. We cannot take the third step to conclude
that cn + Θ(n) ≤ cn, thus exposing the fallacy.

When using the substitution method, or more generally mathematical
induction, you must be careful that the constants hidden by any
asymptotic notation are the same constants throughout the proof.
Consequently, it’s best to avoid asymptotic notation in your inductive
hypothesis and to name constants explicitly.

Here’s another fallacious use of the substitution method to show that
the solution to recurrence (4.11) is T (n) = O(n). We guess T (n) ≤ cn
and then argue

+-------+---+-----------+--------------+
| T (n) | ≤ | 2(c ⌊n/2⌋) + Θ(n)        |
+-------+---+--------------------------+
|       | ≤ | cn + Θ(n)                |
+-------+---+-----------+--------------+
|       | = | O(n),     | [art] wrong! |
+-------+---+-----------+--------------+

since c is a positive constant. The mistake stems from the difference
between our goal—to prove that T (n) = O(n)—and our inductive
hypothesis—to prove that T (n) ≤ cn. When using the substitution method,
or in any inductive proof, you must prove the exact statement of the
inductive hypothesis. In this case, we must explicitly prove that T (n)
≤ cn to show that T (n) = O(n).

Exercises

4.3-1

Use the substitution method to show that each of the following
recurrences defined on the reals has the asymptotic solution specified:

a. T (n) = T (n – 1) + n has solution T (n) = O(n²).

b. T (n) = T (n/2) + Θ(1) has solution T (n) = O(lg n).

c. T (n) = 2T (n/2) + n has solution T (n) = Θ(n lg n).

d. T (n) = 2T (n/2 + 17) + n has solution T (n) = O(n lg n).

e. T (n) = 2T (n/3) + Θ(n) has solution T (n) = Θ(n).

f. T (n) = 4T (n/2) + Θ(n) has solution T (n) = Θ(n²).

4.3-2

The solution to the recurrence T (n) = 4T (n/2)+n turns out to be T (n)
= Θ(n²). Show that a substitution proof with the assumption T (n) ≤ cn²
fails. Then show how to subtract a lower-order term to make a
substitution proof work.

4.3-3

The recurrence T (n) = 2T (n – 1) + 1 has the solution T (n) = O(2^(n)).
Show that a substitution proof fails with the assumption T (n) ≤ c
2^(n), where c > 0 is constant. Then show how to subtract a lower-order
term to make a substitution proof work.

4.4      The recursion-tree method for solving recurrences

Although you can use the substitution method to prove that a solution to
a recurrence is correct, you might have trouble coming up with a good
guess. Drawing out a recursion tree, as we did in our analysis of the
merge-sort recurrence in Section 2.3.2, can help. In a recursion tree,
each node represents the cost of a single subproblem somewhere in the
set of recursive function invocations. You typically sum the costs
within each level of the tree to obtain the per-level costs, and then
you sum all the per-level costs to determine the total cost of all
levels of the recursion. Sometimes, however, adding up the total cost
takes more creativity.

A recursion tree is best used to generate intuition for a good guess,
which you can then verify by the substitution method. If you are
meticulous when drawing out a recursion tree and summing the costs,
however, you can use a recursion tree as a direct proof of a solution to
a recurrence. But if you use it only to generate a good guess, you can
often tolerate a small amount of “sloppiness,” which can simplify the
math. When you verify your guess with the substitution method later on,
your math should be precise. This section demonstrates how you can use
recursion trees to solve recurrences, generate good guesses, and gain
intuition for recurrences.

An illustrative example

Let’s see how a recursion tree can provide a good guess for an
upper-bound solution to the recurrence

[art]

Figure 4.1 shows how to derive the recursion tree for T (n) = 3T (n/4) +
cn², where the constant c > 0 is the upper-bound constant in the Θ(n²)
term. Part (a) of the figure shows T (n), which part (b) expands into an
equivalent tree representing the recurrence. The cn² term at the root
represents the cost at the top level of recursion, and the three
subtrees of the root represent the costs incurred by the subproblems of
size n/4. Part (c) shows this process carried one step further by
expanding each node with cost T (n/4) from part (b). The cost for each
of the three children of the root is c(n/4)². We continue expanding each
node in the tree by breaking it into its constituent parts as determined
by the recurrence.

[art]

Figure 4.1 Constructing a recursion tree for the recurrence T (n) = 3T
(n/4) + cn². Part (a) shows T (n), which progressively expands in
(b)–(d) to form the recursion tree. The fully expanded tree in (d) has
height log₄ n.

Because subproblem sizes decrease by a factor of 4 every time we go down
one level, the recursion must eventually bottom out in a base case where
n < n₀. By convention, the base case is T (n) = Θ(1) for n < n₀, where
n₀ > 0 is any threshold constant sufficiently large that the recurrence
is well defined. For the purpose of intuition, however, let’s simplify
the math a little. Let’s assume that n is an exact power of 4 and that
the base case is T (1) = Θ(1). As it turns out, these assumptions don’t
affect the asymptotic solution.

What’s the height of the recursion tree? The subproblem size for a node
at depth i is n/4^(i). As we descend the tree from the root, the
subproblem size hits n = 1 when n/4^(i) = 1 or, equivalently, when i =
log₄ n. Thus, the tree has internal nodes at depths 0, 1, 2, … , log₄ n
– 1 and leaves at depth log₄ n.

Part (d) of Figure 4.1 shows the cost at each level of the tree. Each
level has three times as many nodes as the level above, and so the
number of nodes at depth i is 3^(i). Because subproblem sizes reduce by
a factor of 4 for each level further from the root, each internal node
at depth i = 0, 1, 2, … , log₄ n – 1 has a cost of c(n/4^(i))².
Multiplying, we see that the total cost of all nodes at a given depth i
is 3^(i)c(n/4^(i))² = (3/16)^(i)cn². The bottom level, at depth log₄ n,
contains [art] leaves (using equation (3.21) on page 66). Each leaf
contributes Θ(1), leading to a total leaf cost of [art].

Now we add up the costs over all levels to determine the cost for the
entire tree:

[art]

We’ve derived the guess of T (n) = O(n²) for the original recurrence. In
this example, the coefficients of cn² form a decreasing geometric
series. By equation (A.7), the sum of these coefficients is bounded from
above by the constant 16/13. Since the root’s contribution to the total
cost is cn², the cost of the root dominates the total cost of the tree.

In fact, if O(n²) is indeed an upper bound for the recurrence (as we’ll
verify in a moment), then it must be a tight bound. Why? The first
recursive call contributes a cost of Θ(n²), and so Ω(n²) must be a lower
bound for the recurrence.

Let’s now use the substitution method to verify that our guess is
correct, namely, that T (n) = O(n²) is an upper bound for the recurrence
T (n) = 3T (n/4)+Θ(n²). We want to show that T (n) ≤ dn² for some
constant d > 0. Using the same constant c > 0 as before, we have

  ------- --- ----------------
  T (n)   ≤   3T (n/4) + cn²
          ≤   3d(n/4)² + cn²
          =   [art]
          ≤   dn²,
  ------- --- ----------------

where the last step holds if we choose d ≥ (16/13)c.

For the base case of the induction, let n₀ > 0 be a sufficiently large
threshold constant that the recurrence is well defined when T (n) = Θ(1)
for n < n₀. We can pick d large enough that d dominates the constant
hidden by the Θ, in which case dn² ≥ d ≥ T (n) for 1 ≤ n < n₀,
completing the proof of the base case.

The substitution proof we just saw involves two named constants, c and
d. We named c and used it to stand for the upper-bound constant hidden
and guaranteed to exist by the Θ-notation. We cannot pick c
arbitrarily—it’s given to us—although, for any such c, any constant
c^(′) ≥ c also suffices. We also named d, but we were free to choose any
value for it that fit our needs. In this example, the value of d
happened to depend on the value of c, which is fine, since d is constant
if c is constant.

An irregular example

Let’s find an asymptotic upper bound for another, more irregular,
example. Figure 4.2 shows the recursion tree for the recurrence

[art]

This recursion tree is unbalanced, with different root-to-leaf paths
having different lengths. Going left at any node produces a subproblem
of one-third the size, and going right produces a subproblem of
two-thirds the size. Let n₀ > 0 be the implicit threshold constant such
that T (n) = Θ(1) for 0 < n < n₀, and let c represent the upper-bound
constant hidden by the Θ(n) term for n ≥ n₀. There are actually two n₀
constants here—one for the threshold in the recurrence, and the other
for the threshold in the Θ-notation, so we’ll let n₀ be the larger of
the two constants.

[art]

Figure 4.2 A recursion tree for the recurrence T (n) = T (n/3) + T
(2n/3) + cn.

The height of the tree runs down the right edge of the tree,
corresponding to subproblems of sizes n, (2/3)n, (4/9)n, … , Θ(1) with
costs bounded by cn, c(2n/3), c(4n/9), … , Θ(1), respectively. We hit
the rightmost leaf when (2/3)^(h)n < n₀ ≤ (2/3)^(h–1)n, which happens
when h = ⌊log_(3/2)(n/n₀)⌋ + 1 since, applying the floor bounds in
equation (3.2) on page 64 with x = log_(3/2) (n/n₀), we have (2/3)^(h)n
= (2/3)^(⌊x⌋+1)n < (2/3)^(x)n = (n₀/n)n = n₀ and (2/3)^(h–1)n =
(2/3)^(⌊x⌋)n > (2/3)^(x)n = (n₀/n)n = n₀. Thus, the height of the tree
is h = Θ(lg n).

We’re now in a position to understand the upper bound. Let’s postpone
dealing with the leaves for a moment. Summing the costs of internal
nodes across each level, we have at most cn per level times the Θ(lg n)
tree height for a total cost of O(n lg n) for all internal nodes.

It remains to deal with the leaves of the recursion tree, which
represent base cases, each costing Θ(1). How many leaves are there? It’s
tempting to upper-bound their number by the number of leaves in a
complete binary tree of height h = ⌊log_(3/2)(n/n₀)⌋ + 1, since the
recursion tree is contained within such a complete binary tree. But this
approach turns out to give us a poor bound. The complete binary tree has
1 node at the root, 2 nodes at depth 1, and generally 2^(k) nodes at
depth k. Since the height is h = ⌊log_(3/2) n⌋ + 1, there are [art]
leaves in the complete binary tree, which is an upper bound on the
number of leaves in the recursion tree. Because the cost of each leaf is
Θ(1), this analysis says that the total cost of all leaves in the
recursion tree is [art], which is an asymptotically greater bound than
the O(n lg n) cost of all internal nodes. In fact, as we’re about to
see, this bound is not tight. The cost of all leaves in the recursion
tree is O(n)—asymptotically less than O(n lg n). In other words, the
cost of the internal nodes dominates the cost of the leaves, not vice
versa.

Rather than analyzing the leaves, we could quit right now and prove by
substitution that T (n) = Θ(n lg n). This approach works (see Exercise
4.4-3), but it’s instructive to understand how many leaves this
recursion tree has. You may see recurrences for which the cost of leaves
dominates the cost of internal nodes, and then you’ll be in better shape
if you’ve had some experience analyzing the number of leaves.

To figure out how many leaves there really are, let’s write a recurrence
L(n) for the number of leaves in the recursion tree for T (n). Since all
the leaves in T (n) belong either to the left subtree or the right
subtree of the root, we have

[art]

This recurrence is similar to recurrence (4.14), but it’s missing the
Θ(n) term, and it contains an explicit base case. Because this
recurrence omits the Θ(n) term, it is much easier to solve. Let’s apply
the substitution method to show that it has solution L(n) = O(n). Using
the inductive hypothesis L(n) ≤ dn for some constant d > 0, and assuming
that the inductive hypothesis holds for all values less than n, we have

  ------ --- ------------------
  L(n)   =   L(n/3) + L(2n/3)
         ≤   dn/3 + 2(dn)/3
         ≤   dn,
  ------ --- ------------------

which holds for any d > 0. We can now choose d large enough to handle
the base case L(n) = 1 for 0 < n < n₀, for which d = 1 suffices, thereby
completing the substitution method for the upper bound on leaves.
(Exercise 4.4-2 asks you to prove that L(n) = Θ(n).)

Returning to recurrence (4.14) for T (n), it now becomes apparent that
the total cost of leaves over all levels must be L(n) · Θ(1) = Θ(n).
Since we have derived the bound of O(n lg n) on the cost of the internal
nodes, it follows that the solution to recurrence (4.14) is T (n) = O(n
lg n) + Θ(n) = O(n lg n). (Exercise 4.4-3 asks you to prove that T (n) =
Θ(n lg n).)

It’s wise to verify any bound obtained with a recursion tree by using
the substitution method, especially if you’ve made simplifying
assumptions. But another strategy altogether is to use more-powerful
mathematics, typically in the form of the master method in the next
section (which unfortunately doesn’t apply to recurrence (4.14)) or the
Akra-Bazzi method (which does, but requires calculus). Even if you use a
powerful method, a recursion tree can improve your intuition for what’s
going on beneath the heavy math.

Exercises

4.4-1

For each of the following recurrences, sketch its recursion tree, and
guess a good asymptotic upper bound on its solution. Then use the
substitution method to verify your answer.

a. T (n) = T (n/2) + n³.

b. T (n) = 4T (n/3) + n.

c. T (n) = 4T (n/2) + n.

d. T (n) = 3T (n – 1) + 1.

4.4-2

Use the substitution method to prove that recurrence (4.15) has the
asymptotic lower bound L(n) = Ω(n). Conclude that L(n) = Θ(n).

4.4-3

Use the substitution method to prove that recurrence (4.14) has the
solution T (n) = Ω(n lg n). Conclude that T (n) = Θ(n lg n).

4.4-4

Use a recursion tree to justify a good guess for the solution to the
recurrence T (n) = T (αn)+T ((1–α)n)+Θ(n), where α is a constant in the
range 0 < α < 1.

4.5      The master method for solving recurrences

The master method provides a “cookbook” method for solving algorithmic
recurrences of the form

[art]

where a > 0 and b > 1 are constants. We call f (n) a driving function,
and we call a recurrence of this general form a master recurrence. To
use the master method, you need to memorize three cases, but then you’ll
be able to solve many master recurrences quite easily.

A master recurrence describes the running time of a divide-and-conquer
algorithm that divides a problem of size n into a subproblems, each of
size n/b < n. The algorithm solves the a subproblems recursively, each
in T (n/b) time. The driving function f (n) encompasses the cost of
dividing the problem before the recursion, as well as the cost of
combining the results of the recursive solutions to subproblems. For
example, the recurrence arising from Strassen’s algorithm is a master
recurrence with a = 7, b = 2, and driving function f (n) = Θ(n²).

As we have mentioned, in solving a recurrence that describes the running
time of an algorithm, one technicality that we’d often prefer to ignore
is the requirement that the input size n be an integer. For example, we
saw that the running time of merge sort can be described by recurrence
(2.3), T (n) = 2T (n/2) + Θ(n), on page 41. But if n is an odd number,
we really don’t have two problems of exactly half the size. Rather, to
ensure that the problem sizes are integers, we round one subproblem down
to size ⌊n/2⌋ and the other up to size ⌈n/2⌉, so the true recurrence is
T (n) = T (⌈n/2⌉ + T (⌊n/2⌋) + Θ(n). But this floors-and-ceilings
recurrence is longer to write and messier to deal with than recurrence
(2.3), which is defined on the reals. We’d rather not worry about floors
and ceilings, if we don’t have to, especially since the two recurrences
have the same Θ(n lg n) solution.

The master method allows you to state a master recurrence without floors
and ceilings and implicitly infer them. No matter how the arguments are
rounded up or down to the nearest integer, the asymptotic bounds that it
provides remain the same. Moreover, as we’ll see in Section 4.6, if you
define your master recurrence on the reals, without implicit floors and
ceilings, the asymptotic bounds still don’t change. Thus you can ignore
floors and ceilings for master recurrences. Section 4.7 gives sufficient
conditions for ignoring floors and ceilings in more general
divide-and-conquer recurrences.

The master theorem

The master method depends upon the following theorem.

Theorem 4.1 (Master theorem)

Let a > 0 and b > 1 be constants, and let f (n) be a driving function
that is defined and nonnegative on all sufficiently large reals. Define
the recurrence T (n) on n ∈ N by

[art]

where aT (n/b) actually means a^(′)T (⌊n/b⌋) + a^(″)T (⌈n/b⌉) for some
constants a^(′) ≥ 0 and a^(″) ≥ 0 satisfying a = a^(′) + a^(″). Then the
asymptotic behavior of T (n) can be characterized as follows:

1.  If there exists a constant ϵ > 0 such that [art], then [art].
2.  If there exists a constant k ≥ 0 such that [art], then [art].
3.  If there exists a constant ϵ > 0 such that [art], and if f (n)
    additionally satisfies the regularity condition af (n/b) ≤ cf (n)
    for some constant c < 1 and all sufficiently large n, then T (n) =
    Θ(f (n)).

▪

Before applying the master theorem to some examples, let’s spend a few
moments to understand broadly what it says. The function [art] is called
the watershed function. In each of the three cases, we compare the
driving function f (n) to the watershed function [art]. Intuitively, if
the watershed function grows asymptotically faster than the driving
function, then case 1 applies. Case 2 applies if the two functions grow
at nearly the same asymptotic rate. Case 3 is the “opposite” of case 1,
where the driving function grows asymptotically faster than the
watershed function. But the technical details matter.

In case 1, not only must the watershed function grow asymptotically
faster than the driving function, it must grow polynomially faster. That
is, the watershed function [art] must be asymptotically larger than the
driving function f (n) by at least a factor of Θ(n^(ϵ)) for some
constant ϵ > 0. The master theorem then says that the solution is [art].
In this case, if we look at the recursion tree for the recurrence, the
cost per level grows at least geometrically from root to leaves, and the
total cost of leaves dominates the total cost of the internal nodes.

In case 2, the watershed and driving functions grow at nearly the same
asymptotic rate. But more specifically, the driving function grows
faster than the watershed function by a factor of Θ(lg^(k) n), where k ≥
0. The master theorem says that we tack on an extra lg n factor to f
(n), yielding the solution [art]. In this case, each level of the
recursion tree costs approximately the same—[art]—and there are Θ(lg n)
levels. In practice, the most common situation for case 2 occurs when k
= 0, in which case the watershed and driving functions have the same
asymptotic growth, and the solution is [art].

Case 3 mirrors case 1. Not only must the driving function grow
asymptotically faster than the watershed function, it must grow
polynomially faster. That is, the driving function f (n) must be
asymptotically larger than the watershed function [art] by at least a
factor of Θ(n^(ϵ)) for some constant ϵ > 0. Moreover, the driving
function must satisfy the regularity condition that af (n/b) ≤ cf (n).
This condition is satisfied by most of the polynomially bounded
functions that you’re likely to encounter when applying case 3. The
regularity condition might not be satisfied if the driving function
grows slowly in local areas, yet relatively quickly overall. (Exercise
4.5-5 gives an example of such a function.) For case 3, the master
theorem says that the solution is T (n) = Θ(f (n)). If we look at the
recursion tree, the cost per level drops at least geometrically from the
root to the leaves, and the root cost dominates the cost of all other
nodes.

It’s worth looking again at the requirement that there be polynomial
separation between the watershed function and the driving function for
either case 1 or case 3 to apply. The separation doesn’t need to be
much, but it must be there, and it must grow polynomially. For example,
for the recurrence T (n) = 4T (n/2) + n^(1.99) (admittedly not a
recurrence you’re likely to see when analyzing an algorithm), the
watershed function is [art]. Hence the driving function f (n) = n^(1.99)
is polynomially smaller by a factor of n^(0.01). Thus case 1 applies
with ϵ = 0.01.

Using the master method

To use the master method, you determine which case (if any) of the
master theorem applies and write down the answer.

As a first example, consider the recurrence T (n) = 9T (n/3) + n. For
this recurrence, we have a = 9 and b = 3, which implies that [art].
Since f (n) = n = O(n^(2–ϵ)) for any constant ϵ ≤ 1, we can apply case 1
of the master theorem to conclude that the solution is T (n) = Θ(n²).

Now consider the recurrence T (n) = T (2n/3) + 1, which has a = 1 and b
= 3/2, which means that the watershed function is [art]. Case 2 applies
since [art]. The solution to the recurrence is T (n) = Θ(lg n).

For the recurrence T (n) = 3T (n/4) + n lg n, we have a = 3 and b = 4,
which means that [art]. Since [art], where ϵ can be as large as
approximately 0.2, case 3 applies as long as the regularity condition
holds for f (n). It does, because for sufficiently large n, we have that
af (n/b) = 3(n/4) lg(n/4) ≤ (3/4)n lg n = cf (n) for c = 3/4. By case 3,
the solution to the recurrence is T (n) = Θ(n lg n).

Next, let’s look at the recurrence T (n) = 2T (n/2) + n lg n, where we
have a = 2, b = 2, and [art]. Case 2 applies since [art]. We conclude
that the solution is T (n) = Θ(n lg² n).

We can use the master method to solve the recurrences we saw in Sections
2.3.2, 4.1, and 4.2.

Recurrence (2.3), T (n) = 2T (n/2) + Θ(n), on page 41, characterizes the
running time of merge sort. Since a = 2 and b = 2, the watershed
function is [art]. Case 2 applies because f (n) = Θ(n), and the solution
is T (n) = Θ(n lg n).

Recurrence (4.9), T (n) = 8T (n/2) + Θ(1), on page 84, describes the
running time of the simple recursive algorithm for matrix
multiplication. We have a = 8 and b = 2, which means that the watershed
function is [art]. Since n³ is polynomially larger than the driving
function f (n) = Θ(1)—indeed, we have f (n) = O(n^(3–ϵ)) for any
positive ϵ < 3—case 1 applies. We conclude that T (n) = Θ(n³).

Finally, recurrence (4.10), T (n) = 7T (n/2) + Θ(n²), on page 87, arose
from the analysis of Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication. For
this recurrence, we have a = 7 and b = 2, and the watershed function is
[art]. Observing that lg 7 = 2.807355 …, we can let ϵ = 0.8 and bound
the driving function f (n) = Θ(n²) = O(n^(lg 7–ϵ)). Case 1 applies with
solution T (n) = Θ(n^(lg 7)).

When the master method doesn’t apply

There are situations where you can’t use the master theorem. For
example, it can be that the watershed function and the driving function
cannot be asymptotically compared. We might have that [art] for an
infinite number of values of n but also that [art] for an infinite
number of different values of n. As a practical matter, however, most of
the driving functions that arise in the study of algorithms can be
meaningfully compared with the watershed function. If you encounter a
master recurrence for which that’s not the case, you’ll have to resort
to substitution or other methods.

Even when the relative growths of the driving and watershed functions
can be compared, the master theorem does not cover all the
possibilities. There is a gap between cases 1 and 2 when [art], yet the
watershed function does not grow polynomially faster than the driving
function. Similarly, there is a gap between cases 2 and 3 when [art] and
the driving function grows more than polylogarithmically faster than the
watershed function, but it does not grow polynomially faster. If the
driving function falls into one of these gaps, or if the regularity
condition in case 3 fails to hold, you’ll need to use something other
than the master method to solve the recurrence.

As an example of a driving function falling into a gap, consider the
recurrence T (n) = 2T (n/2) + n/lg n. Since a = 2 and b = 2, the
watershed function is [art]. The driving function is n/lg n = o(n),
which means that it grows asymptotically more slowly than the watershed
function n. But n/lg n grows only logarithmically slower than n, not
polynomially slower. More precisely, equation (3.24) on page 67 says
that lg n = o(n^(ϵ)) for any constant ϵ > 0, which means that 1/lg n =
ω(n^(–ϵ)) and [art]. Thus no constant ϵ > 0 exists such that [art],
which is required for case 1 to apply. Case 2 fails to apply as well,
since [art], where k = –1, but k must be nonnegative for case 2 to
apply.

To solve this kind of recurrence, you must use another method, such as
the substitution method (Section 4.3) or the Akra-Bazzi method (Section
4.7). (Exercise 4.6-3 asks you to show that the answer is Θ(n lg lg n).)
Although the master theorem doesn’t handle this particular recurrence,
it does handle the overwhelming majority of recurrences that tend to
arise in practice.

Exercises

4.5-1

Use the master method to give tight asymptotic bounds for the following
recurrences.

a. T (n) = 2T (n/4) + 1.

b. T (n) = 2T (n/4) + [art].

c. T (n) = 2T (n/4) + [art].

d. T (n) = 2T (n/4) + n.

e. T (n) = 2T (n/4) + n².

4.5-2

Professor Caesar wants to develop a matrix-multiplication algorithm that
is asymptotically faster than Strassen’s algorithm. His algorithm will
use the divide-and-conquer method, dividing each matrix into n/4 × n/4
submatrices, and the divide and combine steps together will take Θ(n²)
time. Suppose that the professor’s algorithm creates a recursive
subproblems of size n/4. What is the largest integer value of a for
which his algorithm could possibly run asymptotically faster than
Strassen’s?

4.5-3

Use the master method to show that the solution to the binary-search
recurrence T (n) = T (n/2) + Θ(1) is T (n) = Θ(lg n). (See Exercise
2.3-6 for a description of binary search.)

4.5-4

Consider the function f (n) = lg n. Argue that although f (n/2) < f (n),
the regularity condition af (n/b) ≤ cf (n) with a = 1 and b = 2 does not
hold for any constant c < 1. Argue further that for any ϵ > 0, the
condition in case 3 that [art] does not hold.

4.5-5

Show that for suitable constants a, b, and ϵ, the function f (n) =
2^(⌈lg n⌉) satisfies all the conditions in case 3 of the master theorem
except the regularity condition.

★ 4.6      Proof of the continuous master theorem

Proving the master theorem (Theorem 4.1) in its full generality,
especially dealing with the knotty technical issue of floors and
ceilings, is beyond the scope of this book. This section, however,
states and proves a variant of the master theorem, called the continuous
master theorem¹ in which the master recurrence (4.17) is defined over
sufficiently large positive real numbers. The proof of this version,
uncomplicated by floors and ceilings, contains the main ideas needed to
understand how master recurrences behave. Section 4.7 discusses floors
and ceilings in divide-and-conquer recurrences at greater length,
presenting sufficient conditions for them not to affect the asymptotic
solutions.

Of course, since you need not understand the proof of the master theorem
in order to apply the master method, you may choose to skip this
section. But if you wish to study more-advanced algorithms beyond the
scope of this textbook, you may appreciate a better understanding of the
underlying mathematics, which the proof of the continuous master theorem
provides.

Although we usually assume that recurrences are algorithmic and don’t
require an explicit statement of a base case, we must be much more
careful for proofs that justify the practice. The lemmas and theorem in
this section explicitly state the base cases, because the inductive
proofs require mathematical grounding. It is common in the world of
mathematics to be extraordinarily careful proving theorems that justify
acting more casually in practice.

The proof of the continuous master theorem involves two lemmas. Lemma
4.2 uses a slightly simplified master recurrence with a threshold
constant of n₀ = 1, rather than the more general n₀ > 0 threshold
constant implied by the unstated base case. The lemma employs a
recursion tree to reduce the solution of the simplified master
recurrence to that of evaluating a summation. Lemma 4.3 then provides
asymptotic bounds for the summation, mirroring the three cases of the
master theorem. Finally, the continuous master theorem itself (Theorem
4.4) gives asymptotic bounds for master recurrences, while generalizing
to an arbitrary threshold constant n₀ > 0 as implied by the unstated
base case.

Some of the proofs use the properties described in Problem 3-5 on pages
72–73 to combine and simplify complicated asymptotic expressions.
Although Problem 3-5 addresses only Θ-notation, the properties
enumerated there can be extended to O-notation and Ω-notation as well.

Here’s the first lemma.

Lemma 4.2

Let a > 0 and b > 1 be constants, and let f (n) be a function defined
over real numbers n ≥ 1. Then the recurrence

[art]

has solution

[art]

Proof   Consider the recursion tree in Figure 4.3. Let’s look first at
its internal nodes. The root of the tree has cost f (n), and it has a
children, each with cost f (n/b). (It is convenient to think of a as
being an integer, especially when visualizing the recursion tree, but
the mathematics does not require it.) Each of these children has a
children, making a² nodes at depth 2, and each of the a children has
cost f (n/b²). In general, there are a^(j) nodes at depth j, and each
node has cost f (n/b^(j)).

Now, let’s move on to understanding the leaves. The tree grows downward
until n/b^(j) becomes less than 1. Thus, the tree has height ⌊log_(b)
n⌋ + 1, because [art] and [art]. Since, as we have observed, the number
of nodes at depth j is a^(j) and all the leaves are at depth
⌊log_(b) n⌋ + 1, the tree contains [art] leaves. Using the identity
(3.21) on page 66, we have [art], since a is constant, and [art].
Consequently, the total number of leaves is [art]—asymptotically, the
watershed function.

We are now in a position to derive equation (4.18) by summing the costs
of the nodes at each depth in the tree, as shown in the figure. The
first term in the equation is the total costs of the leaves. Since each
leaf is at depth ⌊log_(b)n⌋ + 1 and [art], the base case of the
recurrence gives the cost of a leaf: [art]. Hence the cost of all [art]
leaves is [art] by Problem 3-5(d). The second term in equation (4.18) is
the cost of the internal nodes, which, in the underlying
divide-and-conquer algorithm, represents the costs of dividing problems
into subproblems and then recombining the subproblems. Since the cost
for all the internal nodes at depth j is a^(j) f (n/b^(j)), the total
cost of all internal nodes is

[art]

▪

[art]

Figure 4.3 The recursion tree generated by T (n) = aT (n/b) + f (n). The
tree is a complete a-ary tree with [art] leaves and height ⌊log_(b)
n⌋ + 1. The cost of the nodes at each depth is shown at the right, and
their sum is given in equation (4.18).

As we’ll see, the three cases of the master theorem depend on the
distribution of the total cost across levels of the recursion tree:

Case 1: The costs increase geometrically from the root to the leaves,
growing by a constant factor with each level.

Case 2: The costs depend on the value of k in the theorem. With k = 0,
the costs are equal for each level; with k = 1, the costs grow linearly
from the root to the leaves; with k = 2, the growth is quadratic; and in
general, the costs grow polynomially in k.

Case 3: The costs decrease geometrically from the root to the leaves,
shrinking by a constant factor with each level.

The summation in equation (4.18) describes the cost of the dividing and
combining steps in the underlying divide-and-conquer algorithm. The next
lemma provides asymptotic bounds on the summation’s growth.

Lemma 4.3

Let a > 0 and b > 1 be constants, and let f (n) be a function defined
over real numbers n ≥ 1. Then the asymptotic behavior of the function

[art]

defined for n ≥ 1, can be characterized as follows:

1.  If there exists a constant ϵ > 0 such that [art], then [art].
2.  If there exists a constant k ≥ 0 such that [art], then [art].
3.  If there exists a constant c in the range 0 < c < 1 such that 0 < af
    (n/b) ≤ cf (n) for all n ≥ 1, then g(n) = Θ(f (n)).

Proof   For case 1, we have [art], which implies that [art].
Substituting into equation (4.19) yields

[art]

the last series being geometric. Since b and ϵ are constants, the b^(ϵ)
– 1 denominator doesn’t affect the asymptotic growth of g(n), and
neither does the –1 in the numerator. Since [art], we obtain [art],
thereby proving case 1.

Case 2 assumes that [art], from which we can conclude that [art].
Substituting into equation (4.19) and repeatedly applying Problem 3-5(c)
yields

[art]

The summation within the Θ-notation can be bounded from above as
follows:

[art]

Exercise 4.6-1 asks you to show that the summation can similarly be
bounded from below by [art]. Since we have tight upper and lower bounds,
the summation is [art], from which we can conclude that [art], thereby
completing the proof of case 2.

For case 3, observe that f (n) appears in the definition (4.19) of g(n)
(when j = 0) and that all terms of g(n) are positive. Therefore, we must
have g(n) = Ω(f (n)), and it only remains to prove that g(n) = O(f (n)).
Performing j iterations of the inequality af (n/b) ≤ cf (n) yields a^(j)
f (n/b^(j)) ≤ c^(j) f (n). Substituting into equation (4.19), we obtain

[art]

Thus, we can conclude that g(n) = Θ(f (n)). With case 3 proved, the
entire proof of the lemma is complete.

▪

We can now state and prove the continuous master theorem.

Theorem 4.4 (Continuous master theorem)

Let a > 0 and b > 1 be constants, and let f (n) be a driving function
that is defined and nonnegative on all sufficiently large reals. Define
the algorithmic recurrence T (n) on the positive real numbers by

T (n) = aT (n/b) + f (n).

Then the asymptotic behavior of T (n) can be characterized as follows:

1.  If there exists a constant ϵ > 0 such that [art], then [art].
2.  If there exists a constant k ≥ 0 such that [art], then [art].
3.  If there exists a constant ϵ > 0 such that [art], and if f (n)
    additionally satisfies the regularity condition af (n/b) ≤ cf (n)
    for some constant c < 1 and all sufficiently large n, then T (n) =
    Θ(f (n)).

Proof   The idea is to bound the summation (4.18) from Lemma 4.2 by
applying Lemma 4.3. But we must account for Lemma 4.2 using a base case
for 0 < n < 1, whereas this theorem uses an implicit base case for 0 < n
< n₀, where n₀ > 0 is an arbitrary threshold constant. Since the
recurrence is algorithmic, we can assume that f (n) is defined for n ≥
n₀.

For n > 0, let us define two auxiliary functions T^(′)(n) = T (n₀ n) and
f ^(′)(n) = f (n₀ n). We have

[art]

We have obtained a recurrence for T ^(′)(n) that satisfies the
conditions of Lemma 4.2, and by that lemma, the solution is

[art]

To solve T ^(′)(n), we first need to bound f ^(′)(n). Let’s examine the
individual cases in the theorem.

The condition for case 1 is [art] for some constant ϵ > 0. We have

[art]

since a, b, n₀, and ϵ are all constant. The function f ^(′)(n) satisfies
the conditions of case 1 of Lemma 4.3, and the summation in equation
(4.18) of Lemma 4.2 evaluates to [art]. Because a, b and n₀ are all
constants, we have

[art]

thereby completing case 1 of the theorem.

The condition for case 2 is [art] for some constant k ≥ 0. We have

[art]

Similar to the proof of case 1, the function f^(′)(n) satisfies the
conditions of case 2 of Lemma 4.3. The summation in equation (4.18) of
Lemma 4.2 is therefore [art], which implies that

[art]

which proves case 2 of the theorem.

Finally, the condition for case 3 is [art] for some constant ϵ > 0 and f
(n) additionally satisfies the regularity condition af (n/b) ≤ cf (n)
for all n ≥ n₀ and some constants c < 1 and n₀ > 1. The first part of
case 3 is like case 1:

[art]

Using the definition of f ^(′)(n) and the fact that n₀ n ≥ n₀ for all n
≥ 1, we have for n ≥ 1 that

  -------------- --- -------------
  af ^(′)(n/b)   =   af (n₀ n/b)
                 ≤   cf (n₀ n)
                 =   cf ^(′)(n).
  -------------- --- -------------

Thus f ^(′)(n) satisfies the requirements for case 3 of Lemma 4.3, and
the summation in equation (4.18) of Lemma 4.2 evaluates to Θ(f ^(′)(n)),
yielding

  ------- --- -----------------
  T (n)   =   T ^(′)(n/n₀)
          =   [art]
          =   Θ(f ^(′)(n/n₀))
          =   Θ(f (n)),
  ------- --- -----------------

which completes the proof of case 3 of the theorem and thus the whole
theorem.

▪

Exercises

4.6-1

Show that [art].

★ 4.6-2

Show that case 3 of the master theorem is overstated (which is also why
case 3 of Lemma 4.3 does not require that [art] in the sense that the
regularity condition af (n/b) ≤ cf (n) for some constant c < 1 implies
that there exists a constant ϵ > 0 such that [art].

★ 4.6-3

For [art], prove that the summation in equation (4.19) has solution
[art]. Conclude that a master recurrence T (n) using f (n) as its
driving function has solution [art].

★ 4.7      Akra-Bazzi recurrences

This section provides an overview of two advanced topics related to
divide-and-conquer recurrences. The first deals with technicalities
arising from the use of floors and ceilings, and the second discusses
the Akra-Bazzi method, which involves a little calculus, for solving
complicated divide-and-conquer recurrences.

In particular, we’ll look at the class of algorithmic divide-and-conquer
recurrences originally studied by M. Akra and L. Bazzi [13]. These
Akra-Bazzi recurrences take the form

[art]

where k is a positive integer; all the constants a₁, a₂, … , a_(k) ∈ R
are strictly positive; all the constants b₁, b₂, … , b_(k) ∈ R are
strictly greater than 1; and the driving function f (n) is defined on
sufficiently large nonnegative reals and is itself nonnegative.

Akra-Bazzi recurrences generalize the class of recurrences addressed by
the master theorem. Whereas master recurrences characterize the running
times of divide-and-conquer algorithms that break a problem into
equal-sized subproblems (modulo floors and ceilings), Akra-Bazzi
recurrences can describe the running time of divide-and-conquer
algorithms that break a problem into different-sized subproblems. The
master theorem, however, allows you to ignore floors and ceilings, but
the Akra-Bazzi method for solving Akra-Bazzi recurrences needs an
additional requirement to deal with floors and ceilings.

But before diving into the Akra-Bazzi method itself, let’s understand
the limitations involved in ignoring floors and ceilings in Akra-Bazzi
recurrences. As you’re aware, algorithms generally deal with
integer-sized inputs. The mathematics for recurrences is often easier
with real numbers, however, than with integers, where we must cope with
floors and ceilings to ensure that terms are well defined. The
difference may not seem to be much—especially because that’s often the
truth with recurrences—but to be mathematically correct, we must be
careful with our assumptions. Since our end goal is to understand
algorithms and not the vagaries of mathematical corner cases, we’d like
to be casual yet rigorous. How can we treat floors and ceilings casually
while still ensuring rigor?

From a mathematical point of view, the difficulty in dealing with floors
and ceilings is that some driving functions can be really, really weird.
So it’s not okay in general to ignore floors and ceilings in Akra-Bazzi
recurrences. Fortunately, most of the driving functions we encounter in
the study of algorithms behave nicely, and floors and ceilings don’t
make a difference.

The polynomial-growth condition

If the driving function f (n) in equation (4.22) is well behaved in the
following sense, it’s okay to drop floors and ceilings.

A function f (n) defined on all sufficiently large positive reals
satisfies the polynomial-growth condition if there exists a constant
[art] such that the following holds: for every constant ϕ ≥ 1, there
exists a constant d > 1 (depending on ϕ) such that f (n)/d ≤ f (ψ n) ≤
df (n) for all 1 ≤ ψ ≤ ϕ and [art].

This definition may be one of the hardest in this textbook to get your
head around. To a first order, it says that f (n) satisfies the property
that f (Θ(n)) = Θ(f (n)), although the polynomial-growth condition is
actually somewhat stronger (see Exercise 4.7-4). The definition also
implies that f (n) is asymptotically positive (see Exercise 4.7-3).

Examples of functions that satisfy the polynomial-growth condition
include any function of the form f (n) = Θ(n^(α) lg^(β) n lg lg^(γ)n),
where α, β, and γ are constants. Most of the polynomially bounded
functions used in this book satisfy the condition. Exponentials and
superexponentials do not (see Exercise 4.7-2, for example), and there
also exist polynomially bounded functions that do not.

Floors and ceilings in “nice” recurrences

When the driving function in an Akra-Bazzi recurrence satisfies the
polynomial-growth condition, floors and ceilings don’t change the
asymptotic behavior of the solution. The following theorem, which is
presented without proof, formalizes this notion.

Theorem 4.5

Let T (n) be a function defined on the nonnegative reals that satisfies
recurrence (4.22), where f (n) satisfies the polynomial-growth
condition. Let T ^(′)(n) be another function defined on the natural
numbers also satisfying recurrence (4.22), except that each T (n/b_(i))
is replaced either with T (⌈n/b_(i)⌉) or with T (⌊n/b_(i)⌋). Then we
have T ^(′)(n) = Θ(T (n)).

▪

Floors and ceilings represent a minor perturbation to the arguments in
the recursion. By inequality (3.2) on page 64, they perturb an argument
by at most 1. But much larger perturbations are tolerable. As long as
the driving function f (n) in recurrence (4.22) satisfies the
polynomial-growth condition, it turns out that replacing any term T
(n/b_(i)) with T (n/b_(i) + h_(i)(n)), where |h_(i)(n)| =
O(n/lg^(1+ϵ) n) for some constant ϵ > 0 and sufficiently large n, leaves
the asymptotic solution unaffected. Thus, the divide step in a
divide-and-conquer algorithm can be moderately coarse without affecting
the solution to its running-time recurrence.

The Akra-Bazzi method

The Akra-Bazzi method, not surprisingly, was developed to solve
Akra-Bazzi recurrences (4.22), which by dint of Theorem 4.5, applies in
the presence of floors and ceilings or even larger perturbations, as
just discussed. The method involves first determining the unique real
number p such that [art]. Such a p always exists, because when p → –∞,
the sum goes to ∞; it decreases as p increases; and when p → ∞, it goes
to 0. The Akra-Bazzi method then gives the solution to the recurrence as

[art]

As an example, consider the recurrence

[art]

We’ll see the similar recurrence (9.1) on page 240 when we study an
algorithm for selecting the ith smallest element from a set of n
numbers. This recurrence has the form of equation (4.22), where a₁ = a₂
= 1, b₁ = 5, b₂ = 10/7, and f (n) = n. To solve it, the Akra-Bazzi
method says that we should determine the unique p satisfying

[art]

Solving for p is kind of messy—it turns out that p = 0.83978 …—but we
can solve the recurrence without actually knowing the exact value for p.
Observe that (1/5)⁰ + (7/10)⁰ = 2 and (1/5)¹ + (7/10)¹ = 9/10, and thus
p lies in the range 0 < p < 1. That turns out to be sufficient for the
Akra-Bazzi method to give us the solution. We’ll use the fact from
calculus that if k ≠ –1, then ∫ x^(k)dx = x^(k + 1)/(k + 1), which we’ll
apply with k = – p ≠ –1. The Akra-Bazzi solution (4.23) gives us

[art]

Although the Akra-Bazzi method is more general than the master theorem,
it requires calculus and sometimes a bit more reasoning. You also must
ensure that your driving function satisfies the polynomial-growth
condition if you want to ignore floors and ceilings, although that’s
rarely a problem. When it applies, the master method is much simpler to
use, but only when subproblem sizes are more or less equal. They are
both good tools for your algorithmic toolkit.

Exercises

★ 4.7-1

Consider an Akra-Bazzi recurrence T (n) on the reals as given in
recurrence (4.22), and define T ^(′)(n) as

[art]

where c > 0 is constant. Prove that whatever the implicit initial
conditions for T (n) might be, there exist initial conditions for
T ^(′)(n) such that T ^(′)(n) = cT (n) for all n > 0. Conclude that we
can drop the asymptotics on a driving function in any Akra-Bazzi
recurrence without affecting its asymptotic solution.

4.7-2

Show that f (n) = n² satisfies the polynomial-growth condition but that
f (n) = 2^(n) does not.

4.7-3

Let f (n) be a function that satisfies the polynomial-growth condition.
Prove that f (n) is asymptotically positive, that is, there exists a
constant n₀ ≥ 0 such that f (n) ≥ 0 for all n ≥ n₀.

★ 4.7-4

Give an example of a function f (n) that does not satisfy the
polynomial-growth condition but for which f (Θ(n)) = Θ(f (n)).

4.7-5

Use the Akra-Bazzi method to solve the following recurrences.

a. T (n) = T (n/2) + T (n/3) + T (n/6) + n lg n.

b. T (n) = 3T (n/3) + 8T (n/4) + n²/lg n.

c. T (n) = (2/3)T (n/3) + (1/3)T (2n/3) + lg n.

d. T (n) = (1/3)T (n/3) + 1/n.

e. T (n) = 3T (n/3) + 3T (2n/3) + n².

★ 4.7-6

Use the Akra-Bazzi method to prove the continuous master theorem.

Problems

4-1     Recurrence examples

Give asymptotically tight upper and lower bounds for T (n) in each of
the following algorithmic recurrences. Justify your answers.

a. T (n) = 2T (n/2) + n³.

b. T (n) = T (8n/11) + n.

c. T (n) = 16T (n/4) + n².

d. T (n) = 4T (n/2) + n² lg n.

e. T (n) = 8T (n/3) + n².

f. T (n) = 7T (n/2) + n² lg n.

g. [art].

h. T (n) = T (n –2) + n².

4-2     Parameter-passing costs

Throughout this book, we assume that parameter passing during procedure
calls takes constant time, even if an N-element array is being passed.
This assumption is valid in most systems because a pointer to the array
is passed, not the array itself. This problem examines the implications
of three parameter-passing strategies:

1.  Arrays are passed by pointer. Time = Θ(1).
2.  Arrays are passed by copying. Time = Θ(N), where N is the size of
    the array.
3.  Arrays are passed by copying only the subrange that might be
    accessed by the called procedure. Time = Θ(n) if the subarray
    contains n elements.

Consider the following three algorithms:

a. The recursive binary-search algorithm for finding a number in a
sorted array (see Exercise 2.3-6).

b. The MERGE-SORT procedure from Section 2.3.1.

c. The MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE procedure from Section 4.1.

Give nine recurrences T_(a1)(N, n), T_(a2)(N, n), … , T_(c3)(N, n) for
the worst-case running times of each of the three algorithms above when
arrays and matrices are passed using each of the three parameter-passing
strategies above. Solve your recurrences, giving tight asymptotic
bounds.

4-3     Solving recurrences with a change of variables

Sometimes, a little algebraic manipulation can make an unknown
recurrence similar to one you have seen before. Let’s solve the
recurrence

[art]

by using the change-of-variables method.

a. Define m = lg n and S(m) = T (2^(m)). Rewrite recurrence (4.25) in
terms of m and S(m).

b. Solve your recurrence for S(m).

c. Use your solution for S(m) to conclude that T (n) = Θ(lg n lg lg n).

d. Sketch the recursion tree for recurrence (4.25), and use it to
explain intuitively why the solution is T (n) = Θ(lg n lg lg n).

Solve the following recurrences by changing variables:

e. [art].

f. [art].

4-4     More recurrence examples

Give asymptotically tight upper and lower bounds for T (n) in each of
the following recurrences. Justify your answers.

a. T (n) = 5T (n/3) + n lg n.

b. T (n) = 3T (n/3) + n/lg n.

c. [art].

d. T (n) = 2T (n/2 –2) + n/2.

e. T (n) = 2T (n/2) + n/lg n.

f. T (n) = T (n/2) + T (n/4) + T (n/8) + n.

g. T (n) = T (n – 1) + 1/n.

h. T (n) = T (n – 1) + lg n.

i. T (n) = T (n – 2) + 1/lg n.

j. [art].

4-5     Fibonacci numbers

This problem develops properties of the Fibonacci numbers, which are
defined by recurrence (3.31) on page 69. We’ll explore the technique of
generating functions to solve the Fibonacci recurrence. Define the
generating function (or formal power series) F as

[art]

where F_(i) is the ith Fibonacci number.

a. Show that F (z) = z + zF (z) + z²F (z).

b. Show that

[art]

where ϕ is the golden ratio, and [art] is its conjugate (see page 69).

c. Show that

[art]

You may use without proof the generating-function version of equation
(A.7) on page 1142, [art]. Because this equation involves a generating
function, x is a formal variable, not a real-valued variable, so that
you don’t have to worry about convergence of the summation or about the
requirement in equation (A.7) that |x| < 1, which doesn’t make sense
here.

d. Use part (c) to prove that [art] for i > 0, rounded to the nearest
integer. (Hint: Observe that [art].)

e. Prove that F_(i+2) ≥ ϕ^(i) for i ≥ 0.

4-6     Chip testing

Professor Diogenes has n supposedly identical integrated-circuit chips
that in principle are capable of testing each other. The professor’s
test jig accommodates two chips at a time. When the jig is loaded, each
chip tests the other and reports whether it is good or bad. A good chip
always reports accurately whether the other chip is good or bad, but the
professor cannot trust the answer of a bad chip. Thus, the four possible
outcomes of a test are as follows:

  ------------- ------------- --------------------------------
  Chip A says   Chip B says   Conclusion
  B is good     A is good     both are good, or both are bad
  B is good     A is bad      at least one is bad
  B is bad      A is good     at least one is bad
  B is bad      A is bad      at least one is bad
  ------------- ------------- --------------------------------

a. Show that if at least n/2 chips are bad, the professor cannot
necessarily determine which chips are good using any strategy based on
this kind of pairwise test. Assume that the bad chips can conspire to
fool the professor.

Now you will design an algorithm to identify which chips are good and
which are bad, assuming that more than n/2 of the chips are good. First,
you will determine how to identify one good chip.

b. Show that ⌊n/2⌋ pairwise tests are sufficient to reduce the problem
to one of nearly half the size. That is, show how to use ⌊n/2⌋ pairwise
tests to obtain a set with at most ⌈n/2⌉ chips that still has the
property that more than half of the chips are good.

c. Show how to apply the solution to part (b) recursively to identify
one good chip. Give and solve the recurrence that describes the number
of tests needed to identify one good chip.

You have now determined how to identify one good chip.

d. Show how to identify all the good chips with an additional Θ(n)
pairwise tests.

4-7     Monge arrays

An m × n array A of real numbers is a Monge array if for all i, j, k,
and l such that 1 ≤ i < k ≤ m and 1 ≤ j < l ≤ n, we have

A[i, j] + A[k, l] ≤ A[i, l] + A[k, j].

In other words, whenever we pick two rows and two columns of a Monge
array and consider the four elements at the intersections of the rows
and the columns, the sum of the upper-left and lower-right elements is
less than or equal to the sum of the lower-left and upper-right
elements. For example, the following array is Monge:

  ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  10   17   13   28   23
  17   22   16   29   23
  24   28   22   34   24
  11   13   6    17   7
  45   44   32   37   23
  36   33   19   21   6
  75   66   51   53   34
  ---- ---- ---- ---- ----

a. Prove that an array is Monge if and only if for all i = 1, 2, …, m –
1 and j = 1, 2, …, n – 1, we have

A[i, j] + A[i + 1, j + 1] ≤ A[i, j + 1] + A[i + 1, j].

(Hint: For the “if” part, use induction separately on rows and columns.)

b. The following array is not Monge. Change one element in order to make
it Monge. (Hint: Use part (a).)

  ---- ---- ---- ----
  37   23   22   32
  21   6    7    10
  53   34   30   31
  32   13   9    6
  43   21   15   8
  ---- ---- ---- ----

c. Let f (i) be the index of the column containing the leftmost minimum
element of row i. Prove that f (1) ≤ f (2) ≤ ⋯ ≤ f (m) for any m × n
Monge array.

d. Here is a description of a divide-and-conquer algorithm that computes
the leftmost minimum element in each row of an m × n Monge array A:

Construct a submatrix A^(′) of A consisting of the even-numbered rows of
A. Recursively determine the leftmost minimum for each row of A^(′).
Then compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-numbered rows of A.

Explain how to compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-numbered rows of
A (given that the leftmost minimum of the even-numbered rows is known)
in O(m + n) time.

e. Write the recurrence for the running time of the algorithm in part
(d). Show that its solution is O(m + n log m).

Chapter notes

Divide-and-conquer as a technique for designing algorithms dates back at
least to 1962 in an article by Karatsuba and Ofman [242], but it might
have been used well before then. According to Heideman, Johnson, and
Burrus [211], C. F. Gauss devised the first fast Fourier transform
algorithm in 1805, and Gauss’s formulation breaks the problem into
smaller subproblems whose solutions are combined.

Strassen’s algorithm [424] caused much excitement when it appeared in
1969. Before then, few imagined the possibility of an algorithm
asymptotically faster than the basic MATRIX-MULTIPLY procedure. Shortly
thereafter, S. Winograd reduced the number of submatrix additions from
18 to 15 while still using seven submatrix multiplications. This
improvement, which Winograd apparently never published (and which is
frequently miscited in the literature), may enhance the practicality of
the method, but it does not affect its asymptotic performance. Probert
[368] described Winograd’s algorithm and showed that with seven
multiplications, 15 additions is the minimum possible.

Strassen’s Θ(n^(lg 7)) = O(n^(2.81)) bound for matrix multiplication
held until 1987, when Coppersmith and Winograd [103] made a significant
advance, improving the bound to O(n^(2.376)) time with a mathematically
sophisticated but wildly impractical algorithm based on tensor products.
It took approximately 25 years before the asymptotic upper bound was
again improved. In 2012 Vassilevska Williams [445] improved it to
O(n^(2.37287)), and two years later Le Gall [278] achieved
O(n^(2.37286)), both of them using mathematically fascinating but
impractical algorithms. The best lower bound to date is just the obvious
Ω(n²) bound (obvious because any algorithm for matrix multiplication
must fill in the n² elements of the product matrix).

The performance of MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE can be improved in practice
by coarsening the leaves of the recursion. It also exhibits better cache
behavior than MATRIX-MULTIPLY, although MATRIX-MULTIPLY can be improved
by “tiling.” Leiserson et al. [293] conducted a performance-engineering
study of matrix multiplication in which a parallel and vectorized
divide-and-conquer algorithm achieved the highest performance.
Strassen’s algorithm can be practical for large dense matrices, although
large matrices tend to be sparse, and sparse methods can be much faster.
When using limited-precision floating-point values, Strassen’s algorithm
produces larger numerical errors than the Θ(n³) algorithms do, although
Higham [215] demonstrated that Strassen’s algorithm is amply accurate
for some applications.

Recurrences were studied as early as 1202 by Leonardo Bonacci [66], also
known as Fibonacci, for whom the Fibonacci numbers are named, although
Indian mathematicians had discovered Fibonacci numbers centuries before.
The French mathematician De Moivre [108] introduced the method of
generating functions with which he studied Fibonacci numbers (see
Problem 4-5). Knuth [259] and Liu [302] are good resources for learning
the method of generating functions.

Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5, 6] offered one of the first general
methods for solving recurrences arising from the analysis of
divide-and-conquer algorithms. The master method was adapted from
Bentley, Haken, and Saxe [52]. The Akra-Bazzi method is due
(unsurprisingly) to Akra and Bazzi [13]. Divide-and-conquer recurrences
have been studied by many researchers, including Campbell [79], Graham,
Knuth, and Patashnik [199], Kuszmaul and Leiserson [274], Leighton
[287], Purdom and Brown [371], Roura [389], Verma [447], and Yap [462].

The issue of floors and ceilings in divide-and-conquer recurrences,
including a theorem similar to Theorem 4.5, was studied by Leighton
[287]. Leighton proposed a version of the polynomial-growth condition.
Campbell [79] removed several limitations in Leighton’s statement of it
and showed that there were polynomially bounded functions that do not
satisfy Leighton’s condition. Campbell also carefully studied many other
technical issues, including the well-definedness of divide-and-conquer
recurrences. Kuszmaul and Leiserson [274] provided a proof of Theorem
4.5 that does not involve calculus or other higher math. Both Campbell
and Leighton explored the perturbations of arguments beyond simple
floors and ceilings.

¹ This terminology does not mean that either T (n) or f (n) need be
continuous, only that the domain of T (n) is the real numbers, as
opposed to integers.

5          Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms

This chapter introduces probabilistic analysis and randomized
algorithms. If you are unfamiliar with the basics of probability theory,
you should read Sections C.1–C.4 of Appendix C, which review this
material. We’ll revisit probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms
several times throughout this book.

5.1      The hiring problem

Suppose that you need to hire a new office assistant. Your previous
attempts at hiring have been unsuccessful, and you decide to use an
employment agency. The employment agency sends you one candidate each
day. You interview that person and then decide either to hire that
person or not. You must pay the employment agency a small fee to
interview an applicant. To actually hire an applicant is more costly,
however, since you must fire your current office assistant and also pay
a substantial hiring fee to the employment agency. You are committed to
having, at all times, the best possible person for the job. Therefore,
you decide that, after interviewing each applicant, if that applicant is
better qualified than the current office assistant, you will fire the
current office assistant and hire the new applicant. You are willing to
pay the resulting price of this strategy, but you wish to estimate what
that price will be.

The procedure HIRE-ASSISTANT on the facing page expresses this strategy
for hiring in pseudocode. The candidates for the office assistant job
are numbered 1 through n and interviewed in that order. The procedure
assumes that after interviewing candidate i, you can determine whether
candidate i is the best candidate you have seen so far. It starts by
creating a dummy candidate, numbered 0, who is less qualified than each
of the other candidates.

The cost model for this problem differs from the model described in
Chapter 2. We focus not on the running time of HIRE-ASSISTANT, but
instead on the fees paid for interviewing and hiring. On the surface,
analyzing the cost of this algorithm may seem very different from
analyzing the running time of, say, merge sort. The analytical
techniques used, however, are identical whether we are analyzing cost or
running time. In either case, we are counting the number of times
certain basic operations are executed.

HIRE-ASSISTANT(n)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | best = 0                       | // candidate 0 is a            |
|   |                                | least-qualified dummy          |
|   |                                | candidate                      |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | for i = 1 to n                                                  |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3 | interview candidate i                                           |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4 | if candidate i is better than candidate best                    |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5 | best = i                                                        |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6 | hire candidate i                                                |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

Interviewing has a low cost, say c_(i), whereas hiring is expensive,
costing c_(h). Letting m be the number of people hired, the total cost
associated with this algorithm is O(c_(i)n + c_(h)m). No matter how many
people you hire, you always interview n candidates and thus always incur
the cost c_(i)n associated with interviewing. We therefore concentrate
on analyzing c_(h)m, the hiring cost. This quantity depends on the order
in which you interview candidates.

This scenario serves as a model for a common computational paradigm.
Algorithms often need to find the maximum or minimum value in a sequence
by examining each element of the sequence and maintaining a current
“winner.” The hiring problem models how often a procedure updates its
notion of which element is currently winning.

Worst-case analysis

In the worst case, you actually hire every candidate that you interview.
This situation occurs if the candidates come in strictly increasing
order of quality, in which case you hire n times, for a total hiring
cost of O(c_(h)n).

Of course, the candidates do not always come in increasing order of
quality. In fact, you have no idea about the order in which they arrive,
nor do you have any control over this order. Therefore, it is natural to
ask what we expect to happen in a typical or average case.

Probabilistic analysis

Probabilistic analysis is the use of probability in the analysis of
problems. Most commonly, we use probabilistic analysis to analyze the
running time of an algorithm. Sometimes we use it to analyze other
quantities, such as the hiring cost in procedure HIRE-ASSISTANT. In
order to perform a probabilistic analysis, we must use knowledge of, or
make assumptions about, the distribution of the inputs. Then we analyze
our algorithm, computing an average-case running time, where we take the
average, or expected value, over the distribution of the possible
inputs. When reporting such a running time, we refer to it as the
average-case running time.

You must be careful in deciding on the distribution of inputs. For some
problems, you may reasonably assume something about the set of all
possible inputs, and then you can use probabilistic analysis as a
technique for designing an efficient algorithm and as a means for
gaining insight into a problem. For other problems, you cannot
characterize a reasonable input distribution, and in these cases you
cannot use probabilistic analysis.

For the hiring problem, we can assume that the applicants come in a
random order. What does that mean for this problem? We assume that you
can compare any two candidates and decide which one is better qualified,
which is to say that there is a total order on the candidates. (See
Section B.2 for the definition of a total order.) Thus, you can rank
each candidate with a unique number from 1 through n, using rank(i) to
denote the rank of applicant i, and adopt the convention that a higher
rank corresponds to a better qualified applicant. The ordered list
〈rank(1), rank(2), … , rank(n)〉 is a permutation of the list 〈1, 2, …
, n〉. Saying that the applicants come in a random order is equivalent
to saying that this list of ranks is equally likely to be any one of the
n! permutations of the numbers 1 through n. Alternatively, we say that
the ranks form a uniform random permutation, that is, each of the
possible n! permutations appears with equal probability.

Section 5.2 contains a probabilistic analysis of the hiring problem.

Randomized algorithms

In order to use probabilistic analysis, you need to know something about
the distribution of the inputs. In many cases, you know little about the
input distribution. Even if you do know something about the
distribution, you might not be able to model this knowledge
computationally. Yet, probability and randomness often serve as tools
for algorithm design and analysis, by making part of the algorithm
behave randomly.

In the hiring problem, it may seem as if the candidates are being
presented to you in a random order, but you have no way of knowing
whether they really are. Thus, in order to develop a randomized
algorithm for the hiring problem, you need greater control over the
order in which you’ll interview the candidates. We will, therefore,
change the model slightly. The employment agency sends you a list of the
n candidates in advance. On each day, you choose, randomly, which
candidate to interview. Although you know nothing about the candidates
(besides their names), we have made a significant change. Instead of
accepting the order given to you by the employment agency and hoping
that it’s random, you have instead gained control of the process and
enforced a random order.

More generally, we call an algorithm randomized if its behavior is
determined not only by its input but also by values produced by a
random-number generator. We assume that we have at our disposal a
random-number generator RANDOM. A call to RANDOM(a, b) returns an
integer between a and b, inclusive, with each such integer being equally
likely. For example, RANDOM(0, 1) produces 0 with probability 1/2, and
it produces 1 with probability 1/2. A call to RANDOM(3, 7) returns any
one of 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7, each with probability 1/5. Each integer
returned by RANDOM is independent of the integers returned on previous
calls. You may imagine RANDOM as rolling a (b – a + 1)-sided die to
obtain its output. (In practice, most programming environments offer a
pseudorandom-number generator: a deterministic algorithm returning
numbers that “look” statistically random.)

When analyzing the running time of a randomized algorithm, we take the
expectation of the running time over the distribution of values returned
by the random number generator. We distinguish these algorithms from
those in which the input is random by referring to the running time of a
randomized algorithm as an expected running time. In general, we discuss
the average-case running time when the probability distribution is over
the inputs to the algorithm, and we discuss the expected running time
when the algorithm itself makes random choices.

Exercises

5.1-1

Show that the assumption that you are always able to determine which
candidate is best, in line 4 of procedure HIRE-ASSISTANT, implies that
you know a total order on the ranks of the candidates.

★ 5.1-2

Describe an implementation of the procedure RANDOM(a, b) that makes
calls only to RANDOM(0, 1). What is the expected running time of your
procedure, as a function of a and b?

★ 5.1-3

You wish to implement a program that outputs 0 with probability 1/2 and
1 with probability 1/2. At your disposal is a procedure BIASED-RANDOM
that outputs either 0 or 1, but it outputs 1 with some probability p and
0 with probability 1 – p, where 0 < p < 1. You do not know what p is.
Give an algorithm that uses BIASED-RANDOM as a subroutine, and returns
an unbiased answer, returning 0 with probability 1/2 and 1 with
probability 1/2. What is the expected running time of your algorithm as
a function of p?

5.2      Indicator random variables

In order to analyze many algorithms, including the hiring problem, we
use indicator random variables. Indicator random variables provide a
convenient method for converting between probabilities and expectations.
Given a sample space S and an event A, the indicator random variable I
{A} associated with event A is defined as

[art]

As a simple example, let us determine the expected number of heads
obtained when flipping a fair coin. The sample space for a single coin
flip is S = {H, T}, with Pr {H} = Pr {T} = 1/2. We can then define an
indicator random variable X_(H), associated with the coin coming up
heads, which is the event H. This variable counts the number of heads
obtained in this flip, and it is 1 if the coin comes up heads and 0
otherwise. We write

[art]

The expected number of heads obtained in one flip of the coin is simply
the expected value of our indicator variable X_(H):

  ----------- --- -------------------------
  E [X_(H)]   =   E [I {H}]
              =   1 · Pr {H} + 0 · Pr {T}
              =   1 · (1/2) + 0 · (1/2)
              =   1/2.
  ----------- --- -------------------------

Thus the expected number of heads obtained by one flip of a fair coin is
1/2. As the following lemma shows, the expected value of an indicator
random variable associated with an event A is equal to the probability
that A occurs.

Lemma 5.1

Given a sample space S and an event A in the sample space S, let X_(A) =
I {A}. Then E [X_(A)] = Pr {A}.

Proof   By the definition of an indicator random variable from equation
(5.1) and the definition of expected value, we have

  ----------- --- -------------------------
  E [X_(A)]   =   E [I {A}]
              =   1 · Pr {A} + 0 · Pr {A}
              =   Pr {A},
  ----------- --- -------------------------

where A denotes S – A, the complement of A.

▪

Although indicator random variables may seem cumbersome for an
application such as counting the expected number of heads on a flip of a
single coin, they are useful for analyzing situations that perform
repeated random trials. In Appendix C, for example, indicator random
variables provide a simple way to determine the expected number of heads
in n coin flips. One option is to consider separately the probability of
obtaining 0 heads, 1 head, 2 heads, etc. to arrive at the result of
equation (C.41) on page 1199. Alternatively, we can employ the simpler
method proposed in equation (C.42), which uses indicator random
variables implicitly. Making this argument more explicit, let X_(i) be
the indicator random variable associated with the event in which the ith
flip comes up heads: X_(i) = I {the ith flip results in the event H}.
Let X be the random variable denoting the total number of heads in the n
coin flips, so that

[art]

In order to compute the expected number of heads, take the expectation
of both sides of the above equation to obtain

[art]

By Lemma 5.1, the expectation of each of the random variables is E
[X_(i)] = 1/2 for i = 1, 2, … , n. Then we can compute the sum of the
expectations: [art]. But equation (5.2) calls for the expectation of the
sum, not the sum of the expectations. How can we resolve this conundrum?
Linearity of expectation, equation (C.24) on page 1192, to the rescue:
the expectation of the sum always equals the sum of the expectations.
Linearity of expectation applies even when there is dependence among the
random variables. Combining indicator random variables with linearity of
expectation gives us a powerful technique to compute expected values
when multiple events occur. We now can compute the expected number of
heads:

[art]

Thus, compared with the method used in equation (C.41), indicator random
variables greatly simplify the calculation. We use indicator random
variables throughout this book.

Analysis of the hiring problem using indicator random variables

Returning to the hiring problem, we now wish to compute the expected
number of times that you hire a new office assistant. In order to use a
probabilistic analysis, let’s assume that the candidates arrive in a
random order, as discussed in Section 5.1. (We’ll see in Section 5.3 how
to remove this assumption.) Let X be the random variable whose value
equals the number of times you hire a new office assistant. We could
then apply the definition of expected value from equation (C.23) on page
1192 to obtain

[art]

but this calculation would be cumbersome. Instead, let’s simplify the
calculation by using indicator random variables.

To use indicator random variables, instead of computing E [X] by
defining just one variable denoting the number of times you hire a new
office assistant, think of the process of hiring as repeated random
trials and define n variables indicating whether each particular
candidate is hired. In particular, let X_(i) be the indicator random
variable associated with the event in which the ith candidate is hired.
Thus,

[art]

and

[art]

Lemma 5.1 gives

E [X_(i)] = Pr {candidate i is hired},

and we must therefore compute the probability that lines 5–6 of
HIRE-ASSISTANT are executed.

Candidate i is hired, in line 6, exactly when candidate i is better than
each of candidates 1 through i – 1. Because we have assumed that the
candidates arrive in a random order, the first i candidates have
appeared in a random order. Any one of these first i candidates is
equally likely to be the best qualified so far. Candidate i has a
probability of 1/i of being better qualified than candidates 1 through i
– 1 and thus a probability of 1/i of being hired. By Lemma 5.1, we
conclude that

[art]

Now we can compute E [X]:

[art]

Even though you interview n people, you actually hire only approximately
ln n of them, on average. We summarize this result in the following
lemma.

Lemma 5.2

Assuming that the candidates are presented in a random order, algorithm
HIRE-ASSISTANT has an average-case total hiring cost of O(c_(h) ln n).

Proof   The bound follows immediately from our definition of the hiring
cost and equation (5.6), which shows that the expected number of hires
is approximately ln n.

▪

The average-case hiring cost is a significant improvement over the
worst-case hiring cost of O(c_(h)n).

Exercises

5.2-1

In HIRE-ASSISTANT, assuming that the candidates are presented in a
random order, what is the probability that you hire exactly one time?
What is the probability that you hire exactly n times?

5.2-2

In HIRE-ASSISTANT, assuming that the candidates are presented in a
random order, what is the probability that you hire exactly twice?

5.2-3

Use indicator random variables to compute the expected value of the sum
of n dice.

5.2-4

This exercise asks you to (partly) verify that linearity of expectation
holds even if the random variables are not independent. Consider two
6-sided dice that are rolled independently. What is the expected value
of the sum? Now consider the case where the first die is rolled normally
and then the second die is set equal to the value shown on the first
die. What is the expected value of the sum? Now consider the case where
the first die is rolled normally and the second die is set equal to 7
minus the value of the first die. What is the expected value of the sum?

5.2-5

Use indicator random variables to solve the following problem, which is
known as the hat-check problem. Each of n customers gives a hat to a
hat-check person at a restaurant. The hat-check person gives the hats
back to the customers in a random order. What is the expected number of
customers who get back their own hat?

5.2-6

Let A[1 : n] be an array of n distinct numbers. If i < j and A[i] >
A[j], then the pair (i, j) is called an inversion of A. (See Problem 2-4
on page 47 for more on inversions.) Suppose that the elements of A form
a uniform random permutation of 〈1, 2, … , n〉. Use indicator random
variables to compute the expected number of inversions.

5.3      Randomized algorithms

In the previous section, we showed how knowing a distribution on the
inputs can help us to analyze the average-case behavior of an algorithm.
What if you do not know the distribution? Then you cannot perform an
average-case analysis. As mentioned in Section 5.1, however, you might
be able to use a randomized algorithm.

For a problem such as the hiring problem, in which it is helpful to
assume that all permutations of the input are equally likely, a
probabilistic analysis can guide us when developing a randomized
algorithm. Instead of assuming a distribution of inputs, we impose a
distribution. In particular, before running the algorithm, let’s
randomly permute the candidates in order to enforce the property that
every permutation is equally likely. Although we have modified the
algorithm, we still expect to hire a new office assistant approximately
ln n times. But now we expect this to be the case for any input, rather
than for inputs drawn from a particular distribution.

Let us further explore the distinction between probabilistic analysis
and randomized algorithms. In Section 5.2, we claimed that, assuming
that the candidates arrive in a random order, the expected number of
times you hire a new office assistant is about ln n. This algorithm is
deterministic: for any particular input, the number of times a new
office assistant is hired is always the same. Furthermore, the number of
times you hire a new office assistant differs for different inputs, and
it depends on the ranks of the various candidates. Since this number
depends only on the ranks of the candidates, to represent a particular
input, we can just list, in order, the ranks 〈rank(1), rank(2), … ,
rank(n)〉 of the candidates. Given the rank list A₁ = 〈1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10〉, a new office assistant is always hired 10 times, since
each successive candidate is better than the previous one, and lines 5–6
of HIRE-ASSISTANT are executed in each iteration. Given the list of
ranks A₂ = 〈10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1〉, a new office assistant is
hired only once, in the first iteration. Given a list of ranks A₃ = 〈5,
2, 1, 8, 4, 7, 10, 9, 3, 6〉, a new office assistant is hired three
times, upon interviewing the candidates with ranks 5, 8, and 10.
Recalling that the cost of our algorithm depends on how many times you
hire a new office assistant, we see that there are expensive inputs such
as A₁, inexpensive inputs such as A₂, and moderately expensive inputs
such as A₃.

Consider, on the other hand, the randomized algorithm that first
permutes the list of candidates and then determines the best candidate.
In this case, we randomize in the algorithm, not in the input
distribution. Given a particular input, say A₃ above, we cannot say how
many times the maximum is updated, because this quantity differs with
each run of the algorithm. The first time you run the algorithm on A₃,
it might produce the permutation A₁ and perform 10 updates. But the
second time you run the algorithm, it might produce the permutation A₂
and perform only one update. The third time you run the algorithm, it
might perform some other number of updates. Each time you run the
algorithm, its execution depends on the random choices made and is
likely to differ from the previous execution of the algorithm. For this
algorithm and many other randomized algorithms, no particular input
elicits its worst-case behavior. Even your worst enemy cannot produce a
bad input array, since the random permutation makes the input order
irrelevant. The randomized algorithm performs badly only if the
random-number generator produces an “unlucky” permutation.

For the hiring problem, the only change needed in the code is to
randomly permute the array, as done in the RANDOMIZED-HIRE-ASSISTANT
procedure. This simple change creates a randomized algorithm whose
performance matches that obtained by assuming that the candidates were
presented in a random order.

RANDOMIZED-HIRE-ASSISTANT(n)

  --- -----------------------------------------
  1   randomly permute the list of candidates
  2   HIRE-ASSISTANT(n)
  --- -----------------------------------------

Lemma 5.3

The expected hiring cost of the procedure RANDOMIZED-HIRE-ASSISTANT is
O(c_(h) ln n).

Proof   Permuting the input array achieves a situation identical to that
of the probabilistic analysis of HIRE-ASSISTANT in Secetion 5.2.

▪

By carefully comparing Lemmas 5.2 and 5.3, you can see the difference
between probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms. Lemma 5.2
makes an assumption about the input. Lemma 5.3 makes no such assumption,
although randomizing the input takes some additional time. To remain
consistent with our terminology, we couched Lemma 5.2 in terms of the
average-case hiring cost and Lemma 5.3 in terms of the expected hiring
cost. In the remainder of this section, we discuss some issues involved
in randomly permuting inputs.

Randomly permuting arrays

Many randomized algorithms randomize the input by permuting a given
input array. We’ll see elsewhere in this book other ways to randomize an
algorithm, but now, let’s see how we can randomly permute an array of n
elements. The goal is to produce a uniform random permutation, that is,
a permutation that is as likely as any other permutation. Since there
are n! possible permutations, we want the probability that any
particular permutation is produced to be 1/n!.

You might think that to prove that a permutation is a uniform random
permutation, it suffices to show that, for each element A[i], the
probability that the element winds up in position j is 1/n. Exercise
5.3-4 shows that this weaker condition is, in fact, insufficient.

Our method to generate a random permutation permutes the array in place:
at most a constant number of elements of the input array are ever stored
outside the array. The procedure RANDOMLY-PERMUTE permutes an array A[1
: n] in place in Θ(n) time. In its ith iteration, it chooses the element
A[i] randomly from among elements A[i] through A[n]. After the ith
iteration, A[i] is never altered.

RANDOMLY-PERMUTE(A, n)

  --- --------------------------------
  1   for i = 1 to n
  2   swap A[i] with A[RANDOM(i, n)]
  --- --------------------------------

We use a loop invariant to show that procedure RANDOMLY-PERMUTE produces
a uniform random permutation. A k-permutation on a set of n elements is
a sequence containing k of the n elements, with no repetitions. (See
page 1180 in Appendix C.) There are n!/(n – k)! such possible
k-permutations.

Lemma 5.4

Procedure RANDOMLY-PERMUTE computes a uniform random permutation.

Proof   We use the following loop invariant:

Just prior to the ith iteration of the for loop of lines 1–2, for each
possible (i – 1)-permutation of the n elements, the subarray A[1 : i –
1] contains this (i – 1)-permutation with probability (n – i + 1)!/n!.

We need to show that this invariant is true prior to the first loop
iteration, that each iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, that
the loop terminates, and that the invariant provides a useful property
to show correctness when the loop terminates.

Initialization: Consider the situation just before the first loop
iteration, so that i = 1. The loop invariant says that for each possible
0-permutation, the subarray A[1 : 0] contains this 0-permutation with
probability (n – i + 1)!/n! = n!/n! = 1. The subarray A[1 : 0] is an
empty subarray, and a 0-permutation has no elements. Thus, A[1 : 0]
contains any 0-permutation with probability 1, and the loop invariant
holds prior to the first iteration.

Maintenance: By the loop invariant, we assume that just before the ith
iteration, each possible (i – 1)-permutation appears in the subarray A[1
: i – 1] with probability (n – i + 1)!/n!. We shall show that after the
ith iteration, each possible i-permutation appears in the subarray A[1 :
i] with probability (n – i)!/n!. Incrementing i for the next iteration
then maintains the loop invariant.

Let us examine the ith iteration. Consider a particular i-permutation,
and denote the elements in it by 〈x₁, x₂, … , x_(i)〉. This permutation
consists of an (i – 1)-permutation 〈x₁, … , x_(i–1)〉 followed by the
value x_(i) that the algorithm places in A[i]. Let E₁ denote the event
in which the first i – 1 iterations have created the particular (i –
1)-permutation 〈x₁, … , x_(i–1)〉 in A[1 : i – 1]. By the loop
invariant, Pr {E₁} = (n – i + 1)!/n!. Let E₂ be the event that the ith
iteration puts x_(i) in position A[i]. The i-permutation 〈x₁, … ,
x_(i)〉 appears in A[1 : i] precisely when both E₁ and E₂ occur, and so
we wish to compute Pr {E₂ ∩ E₁}. Using equation (C.16) on page 1187, we
have

Pr {E₂ ∩ E₁} = Pr {E₂ | E₁} Pr {E₁}.

The probability Pr {E₂ | E₁} equals 1/(n – i + 1) because in line 2 the
algorithm chooses x_(i) randomly from the n – i + 1 values in positions
A[i : n]. Thus, we have

[art]

Termination: The loop terminates, since it is a for loop iterating n
times. At termination, i = n + 1, and we have that the subarray A[1 : n]
is a given n-permutation with probability (n – (n + 1) + 1)!/n! = 0!/n!
= 1/n!.

Thus, RANDOMLY-PERMUTE produces a uniform random permutation.

▪

A randomized algorithm is often the simplest and most efficient way to
solve a problem.

Exercises

5.3-1

Professor Marceau objects to the loop invariant used in the proof of
Lemma 5.4. He questions whether it holds prior to the first iteration.
He reasons that we could just as easily declare that an empty subarray
contains no 0-permutations. Therefore, the probability that an empty
subarray contains a 0-permutation should be 0, thus invalidating the
loop invariant prior to the first iteration. Rewrite the procedure
RANDOMLY-PERMUTE so that its associated loop invariant applies to a
nonempty subarray prior to the first iteration, and modify the proof of
Lemma 5.4 for your procedure.

5.3-2

Professor Kelp decides to write a procedure that produces at random any
permutation except the identity permutation, in which every element ends
up where it started. He proposes the procedure PERMUTE-WITHOUT-IDENTITY.
Does this procedure do what Professor Kelp intends?

PERMUTE-WITHOUT-IDENTITY(A, n)

  --- ------------------------------------
  1   for i = 1 to n – 1
  2   swap A[i] with A[RANDOM(i + 1, n)]
  --- ------------------------------------

5.3-3

Consider the PERMUTE-WITH-ALL procedure on the facing page, which
instead of swapping element A[i] with a random element from the subarray
A[i : n], swaps it with a random element from anywhere in the array.
Does PERMUTE-WITH-ALL produce a uniform random permutation? Why or why
not?

PERMUTE-WITH-ALL(A, n)

  --- --------------------------------
  1   for i = 1 to n
  2   swap A[i] with A[RANDOM(1, n)]
  --- --------------------------------

5.3-4

Professor Knievel suggests the procedure PERMUTE-BY-CYCLE to generate a
uniform random permutation. Show that each element A[i] has a 1/n
probability of winding up in any particular position in B. Then show
that Professor Knievel is mistaken by showing that the resulting
permutation is not uniformly random.

PERMUTE-BY-CYCLE(A, n)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   let B[1 : n] be a new array
  2   offset = RANDOM(1, n)
  3   for i = 1 to n
  4   dest = i + offset
  5   if dest > n
  6   dest = dest – n
  7   B[dest] = A[i]
  8   return B
  --- -----------------------------

5.3-5

Professor Gallup wants to create a random sample of the set {1, 2, 3, …
, n}, that is, an m-element subset S, where 0 ≤ m ≤ n, such that each
m-subset is equally likely to be created. One way is to set A[i] = i,
for i = 1, 2, 3, … , n, call RANDOMLY-PERMUTE(A), and then take just the
first m array elements. This method makes n calls to the RANDOM
procedure. In Professor Gallup’s application, n is much larger than m,
and so the professor wants to create a random sample with fewer calls to
RANDOM.

RANDOM-SAMPLE(m, n)

  --- ------------------------ ---------------------
  1   S = ∅                    
  2   for k = n – m + 1 to n   // iterates m times
  3   i = RANDOM(1, k)         
  4   if i ∈ S                 
  5   S = S ⋃ {k}              
  6   else S = S ⋃ {i}         
  7   return S                 
  --- ------------------------ ---------------------

Show that the procedure RANDOM-SAMPLE on the previous page returns a
random m-subset S of {1, 2, 3, … , n}, in which each m-subset is equally
likely, while making only m calls to RANDOM.

★ 5.4      Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random
variables

This advanced section further illustrates probabilistic analysis by way
of four examples. The first determines the probability that in a room of
k people, two of them share the same birthday. The second example
examines what happens when randomly tossing balls into bins. The third
investigates “streaks” of consecutive heads when flipping coins. The
final example analyzes a variant of the hiring problem in which you have
to make decisions without actually interviewing all the candidates.

5.4.1    The birthday paradox

Our first example is the birthday paradox. How many people must there be
in a room before there is a 50% chance that two of them were born on the
same day of the year? The answer is surprisingly few. The paradox is
that it is in fact far fewer than the number of days in a year, or even
half the number of days in a year, as we shall see.

To answer this question, we index the people in the room with the
integers 1, 2, … , k, where k is the number of people in the room. We
ignore the issue of leap years and assume that all years have n = 365
days. For i = 1, 2, … , k, let b_(i) be the day of the year on which
person i’s birthday falls, where 1 ≤ b_(i) ≤ n. We also assume that
birthdays are uniformly distributed across the n days of the year, so
that Pr {b_(i) = r} = 1/n for i = 1, 2, … , k and r = 1, 2, … , n.

The probability that two given people, say i and j, have matching
birthdays depends on whether the random selection of birthdays is
independent. We assume from now on that birthdays are independent, so
that the probability that i’s birthday and j’s birthday both fall on day
r is

[art]

Thus, the probability that they both fall on the same day is

[art]

More intuitively, once b_(i) is chosen, the probability that b_(j) is
chosen to be the same day is 1/n. As long as the birthdays are
independent, the probability that i and j have the same birthday is the
same as the probability that the birthday of one of them falls on a
given day.

We can analyze the probability of at least 2 out of k people having
matching birthdays by looking at the complementary event. The
probability that at least two of the birthdays match is 1 minus the
probability that all the birthdays are different. The event B_(k) that k
people have distinct birthdays is

[art]

where A_(i) is the event that person i’s birthday is different from
person j’s for all j < i. Since we can write B_(k) = A_(k) ∩ B_(k–1), we
obtain from equation (C.18) on page 1189 the recurrence

[art]

where we take Pr {B₁} = Pr {A₁} = 1 as an initial condition. In other
words, the probability that b₁, b₂, … , b_(k) are distinct birthdays
equals the probability that b₁, b₂, … , b_(k–1) are distinct birthdays
multiplied by the probability that b_(k) ≠ b_(i) for i = 1, 2, … , k –
1, given that b₁, b₂, … , b_(k–1) are distinct.

If b₁, b₂, … , b_(k–1) are distinct, the conditional probability that
b_(k) ≠ b_(i) for i = 1, 2, … , k – 1 is Pr {A_(k) | B_(k–1)} = (n – k +
1)/n, since out of the n days, n – (k – 1) days are not taken. We
iteratively apply the recurrence (5.8) to obtain

[art]

Inequality (3.14) on page 66, 1 + x ≤ e^(x), gives us

[art]

when –k(k – 1)/2n ≤ ln(1/2). The probability that all k birthdays are
distinct is at most 1/2 when k(k – 1) ≥ 2n ln 2 or, solving the
quadratic equation, when [art]. For n = 365, we must have k ≥ 23. Thus,
if at least 23 people are in a room, the probability is at least 1/2
that at least two people have the same birthday. Since a year on Mars is
669 Martian days long, it takes 31 Martians to get the same effect.

An analysis using indicator random variables

Indicator random variables afford a simpler but approximate analysis of
the birthday paradox. For each pair (i, j) of the k people in the room,
define the indicator random variable X_(ij), for 1 ≤ i < j ≤ k, by

[art]

By equation (5.7), the probability that two people have matching
birthdays is 1/n, and thus by Lemma 5.1 on page 130, we have

  ------------ --- ---------------------------------------------------
  E [X_(ij)]   =   Pr {person i and person j have the same birthday}
               =   1/n.
  ------------ --- ---------------------------------------------------

Letting X be the random variable that counts the number of pairs of
individuals having the same birthday, we have

[art]

Taking expectations of both sides and applying linearity of expectation,
we obtain

[art]

When k(k – 1) ≥ 2n, therefore, the expected number of pairs of people
with the same birthday is at least 1. Thus, if we have at least [art]
individuals in a room, we can expect at least two to have the same
birthday. For n = 365, if k = 28, the expected number of pairs with the
same birthday is (28 · 27)/(2 · 365) ≈ 1.0356. Thus, with at least 28
people, we expect to find at least one matching pair of birthdays. On
Mars, with 669 days per year, we need at least 38 Martians.

The first analysis, which used only probabilities, determined the number
of people required for the probability to exceed 1/2 that a matching
pair of birthdays exists, and the second analysis, which used indicator
random variables, determined the number such that the expected number of
matching birthdays is 1. Although the exact numbers of people differ for
the two situations, they are the same asymptotically: [art].

5.4.2    Balls and bins

Consider a process in which you randomly toss identical balls into b
bins, numbered 1, 2, … , b. The tosses are independent, and on each toss
the ball is equally likely to end up in any bin. The probability that a
tossed ball lands in any given bin is 1/b. If we view the ball-tossing
process as a sequence of Bernoulli trials (see Appendix C.4), where
success means that the ball falls in the given bin, then each trial has
a probability 1/b of success. This model is particularly useful for
analyzing hashing (see Chapter 11), and we can answer a variety of
interesting questions about the ball-tossing process. (Problem C-2 asks
additional questions about balls and bins.)

- How many balls fall in a given bin? The number of balls that fall in a
  given bin follows the binomial distribution b(k;n, 1/b). If you toss n
  balls, equation (C.41) on page 1199 tells us that the expected number
  of balls that fall in the given bin is n/b.

- How many balls must you toss, on the average, until a given bin
  contains a ball? The number of tosses until the given bin receives a
  ball follows the geometric distribution with probability 1/b and, by
  equation (C.36) on page 1197, the expected number of tosses until
  success is 1/(1/b) = b.

- How many balls must you toss until every bin contains at least one
  ball? Let us call a toss in which a ball falls into an empty bin a
  “hit.” We want to know the expected number n of tosses required to get
  b hits.

  Using the hits, we can partition the n tosses into stages. The ith
  stage consists of the tosses after the (i – 1)st hit up to and
  including the ith hit. The first stage consists of the first toss,
  since you are guaranteed to have a hit when all bins are empty. For
  each toss during the ith stage, i – 1 bins contain balls and b – i + 1
  bins are empty. Thus, for each toss in the ith stage, the probability
  of obtaining a hit is (b – i + 1)/b.

  Let n_(i) denote the number of tosses in the ith stage. The number of
  tosses required to get b hits is [art]. Each random variable n_(i) has
  a geometric distribution with probability of success (b – i + 1)/b and
  thus, by equation (C.36), we have

  [art]

  By linearity of expectation, we have

  [art]

  It therefore takes approximately b ln b tosses before we can expect
  that every bin has a ball. This problem is also known as the coupon
  collector’s problem, which says that if you are trying to collect each
  of b different coupons, then you should expect to acquire
  approximately b ln b randomly obtained coupons in order to succeed.

5.4.3    Streaks

Suppose that you flip a fair coin n times. What is the longest streak of
consecutive heads that you expect to see? We’ll prove upper and lower
bounds separately to show that the answer is Θ(lg n).

We first prove that the expected length of the longest streak of heads
is O(lg n). The probability that each coin flip is a head is 1/2. Let
A_(ik) be the event that a streak of heads of length at least k begins
with the ith coin flip or, more precisely, the event that the k
consecutive coin flips i, i + 1, … , i + k – 1 yield only heads, where 1
≤ k ≤ n and 1 ≤ i ≤ n – k + 1. Since coin flips are mutually
independent, for any given event A_(ik), the probability that all k
flips are heads is

[art]

and thus the probability that a streak of heads of length at least 2 ⌈lg
n⌉ begins in position i is quite small. There are at most n – 2 ⌈lg n⌉ +
1 positions where such a streak can begin. The probability that a streak
of heads of length at least 2 ⌈lg n⌉ begins anywhere is therefore

[art]

We can use inequality (5.10) to bound the length of the longest streak.
For j = 0, 1, 2, … , n, let L_(j) be the event that the longest streak
of heads has length exactly j, and let L be the length of the longest
streak. By the definition of expected value, we have

[art]

We could try to evaluate this sum using upper bounds on each Pr {L_(j)}
similar to those computed in inequality (5.10). Unfortunately, this
method yields weak bounds. We can use some intuition gained by the above
analysis to obtain a good bound, however. For no individual term in the
summation in equation (5.11) are both the factors j and Pr {L_(j)}
large. Why? When j ≥ 2 ⌈lg n⌉, then Pr {L_(j)} is very small, and when j
< 2 ⌈lg n⌉, then j is fairly small. More precisely, since the events
L_(j) for j = 0, 1, … , n are disjoint, the probability that a streak of
heads of length at least 2 ⌈lg n⌉ begins anywhere is [art]. Inequality
(5.10) tells us that the probability that a streak of heads of length at
least 2 ⌈lg n⌉ begins anywhere is less than 1/n, which means that [art].
Also, noting that [art], we have that [art]. Thus, we obtain

[art]

The probability that a streak of heads exceeds r ⌈lg n⌉ flips diminishes
quickly with r. Let’s get a rough bound on the probability that a streak
of at least r ⌈lg n⌉ heads occurs, for r ≥ 1. The probability that a
streak of at least r ⌈lg n⌉ heads starts in position i is

[art]

A streak of at least r ⌈lg n⌉ heads cannot start in the last n – r ⌈lg
n⌉ + 1 flips, but let’s overestimate the probability of such a streak by
allowing it to start anywhere within the n coin flips. Then the
probability that a streak of at least r ⌈lg n⌉ heads occurs is at most

[art]

Equivalently, the probability is at least 1 – 1/n^(r–1) that the longest
streak has length less than r ⌈lg n⌉.

As an example, during n = 1000 coin flips, the probability of
encountering a streak of at least 2 ⌈lg n⌉ = 20 heads is at most 1/n =
1/1000. The chance of a streak of at least 3 ⌈lg n⌉ = 30 heads is at
most 1/n² = 1/1,000,000.

Let’s now prove a complementary lower bound: the expected length of the
longest streak of heads in n coin flips is Ω(lg n). To prove this bound,
we look for streaks of length s by partitioning the n flips into
approximately n/s groups of s flips each. If we choose s = ⌊(lg n)/2⌋,
we’ll see that it is likely that at least one of these groups comes up
all heads, which means that it’s likely that the longest streak has
length at least s = Ω(lg n). We’ll then show that the longest streak has
expected length Ω(lg n).

Let’s partition the n coin flips into at least ⌊n/ ⌊(lg n)/2⌋⌋ groups of
⌊(lg n)/2⌋ consecutive flips and bound the probability that no group
comes up all heads. By equation (5.9), the probability that the group
starting in position i comes up all heads is

[art]

The probability that a streak of heads of length at least ⌊(lg n)/2⌋
does not begin in position i is therefore at most [art]. Since the ⌊n/
⌊(lg n)/2⌋⌋ groups are formed from mutually exclusive, independent coin
flips, the probability that every one of these groups fails to be a
streak of length ⌊(lg n)/2⌋ is at most

[art]

For this argument, we used inequality (3.14), 1 + x ≤ e^(x), on page 66
and the fact, which you may verify, that [art] for sufficiently large n.

We want to bound the probability that the longest streak equals or
exceeds ⌊(lg n)/2⌋. To do so, let L be the event that the longest streak
of heads equals or exceeds s = ⌊(lg n)/2⌋. Let L be the complementary
event, that the longest streak of heads is strictly less than s, so that
Pr {L} + Pr {L} = 1. Let F be the event that every group of s flips
fails to be a streak of s heads. By inequality (5.12), we have Pr {F} =
O(1/n). If the longest streak of heads is less than s, then certainly
every group of s flips fails to be a streak of s heads, which means that
event L implies event F. Of course, event F could occur even if event L
does not (for example, if a streak of s or more heads crosses over the
boundary between two groups), and so we have Pr {L} ≤ Pr {F} = O(1/n).
Since Pr {L} + Pr {L} = 1, we have that

  -------- --- -------------
  Pr {L}   =   1 – Pr {L}
           ≥   1 – Pr {F}
           =   1 – O(1/n).
  -------- --- -------------

That is, the probability that the longest streak equals or exceeds ⌊(lg
n)/2⌋ is

[art]

We can now calculate a lower bound on the expected length of the longest
streak, beginning with equation (5.11) and proceeding in a manner
similar to our analysis of the upper bound:

[art]

As with the birthday paradox, we can obtain a simpler, but approximate,
analysis using indicator random variables. Instead of determining the
expected length of the longest streak, we’ll find the expected number of
streaks with at least a given length. Let X_(ik) = I {A_(ik)} be the
indicator random variable associated with a streak of heads of length at
least k beginning with the ith coin flip. To count the total number of
such streaks, define

[art]

Taking expectations and using linearity of expectation, we have

[art]

By plugging in various values for k, we can calculate the expected
number of streaks of length at least k. If this expected number is large
(much greater than 1), then we expect many streaks of length k to occur,
and the probability that one occurs is high. If this expected number is
small (much less than 1), then we expect to see few streaks of length k,
and the probability that one occurs is low. If k = c lg n, for some
positive constant c, we obtain

[art]

If c is large, the expected number of streaks of length c lg n is small,
and we conclude that they are unlikely to occur. On the other hand, if c
= 1/2, then we obtain E [X_((1/2) lg n)] = Θ(1/n^(1/2–1)) = Θ(n^(1/2)),
and we expect there to be numerous streaks of length (1/2) lg n.
Therefore, one streak of such a length is likely to occur. We can
conclude that the expected length of the longest streak is Θ(lg n).

5.4.4    The online hiring problem

As a final example, let’s consider a variant of the hiring problem.
Suppose now that you do not wish to interview all the candidates in
order to find the best one. You also want to avoid hiring and firing as
you find better and better applicants. Instead, you are willing to
settle for a candidate who is close to the best, in exchange for hiring
exactly once. You must obey one company requirement: after each
interview you must either immediately offer the position to the
applicant or immediately reject the applicant. What is the trade-off
between minimizing the amount of interviewing and maximizing the quality
of the candidate hired?

We can model this problem in the following way. After meeting an
applicant, you are able to give each one a score. Let score(i) denote
the score you give to the ith applicant, and assume that no two
applicants receive the same score. After you have seen j applicants, you
know which of the j has the highest score, but you do not know whether
any of the remaining n – j applicants will receive a higher score. You
decide to adopt the strategy of selecting a positive integer k < n,
interviewing and then rejecting the first k applicants, and hiring the
first applicant thereafter who has a higher score than all preceding
applicants. If it turns out that the best-qualified applicant was among
the first k interviewed, then you hire the nth applicant—the last one
interviewed. We formalize this strategy in the procedure
ONLINE-MAXIMUM(k, n), which returns the index of the candidate you wish
to hire.

ONLINE-MAXIMUM(k, n)

  --- --------------------------
  1   best-score = –∞
  2   for i = 1 to k
  3   if score(i) > best-score
  4   best-score = score(i)
  5   for i = k + 1 to n
  6   if score(i) > best-score
  7   return i
  8   return n
  --- --------------------------

If we determine, for each possible value of k, the probability that you
hire the most qualified applicant, then you can choose the best possible
k and implement the strategy with that value. For the moment, assume
that k is fixed. Let M(j) = max {score(i) : 1 ≤ i ≤ j} denote the
maximum score among applicants 1 through j. Let S be the event that you
succeed in choosing the best-qualified applicant, and let S_(i) be the
event that you succeed when the best-qualified applicant is the ith one
interviewed. Since the various S_(i) are disjoint, we have that [art].
Noting that you never succeed when the best-qualified applicant is one
of the first k, we have that Pr {S_(i)} = 0 for i = 1, 2, … , k. Thus,
we obtain

[art]

We now compute Pr {S_(i)}. In order to succeed when the best-qualified
applicant is the ith one, two things must happen. First, the
best-qualified applicant must be in position i, an event which we denote
by B_(i). Second, the algorithm must not select any of the applicants in
positions k + 1 through i – 1, which happens only if, for each j such
that k + 1 ≤ j ≤ i – 1, line 6 finds that score(j) < best-score.
(Because scores are unique, we can ignore the possibility of score(j) =
best-score.) In other words, all of the values score(k + 1) through
score(i – 1) must be less than M(k). If any are greater than M(k), the
algorithm instead returns the index of the first one that is greater. We
use O_(i) to denote the event that none of the applicants in position
k + 1 through i – 1 are chosen. Fortunately, the two events B_(i) and
O_(i) are independent. The event O_(i) depends only on the relative
ordering of the values in positions 1 through i – 1, whereas B_(i)
depends only on whether the value in position i is greater than the
values in all other positions. The ordering of the values in positions 1
through i – 1 does not affect whether the value in position i is greater
than all of them, and the value in position i does not affect the
ordering of the values in positions 1 through i – 1. Thus, we can apply
equation (C.17) on page 1188 to obtain

Pr {S_(i)} = Pr {B_(i) ∩ O_(i)} = Pr {B_(i)} Pr {O_(i)}.

We have Pr {B_(i)} = 1/n since the maximum is equally likely to be in
any one of the n positions. For event O_(i) to occur, the maximum value
in positions 1 through i –1, which is equally likely to be in any of
these i – 1 positions, must be in one of the first k positions.
Consequently, Pr {O_(i)} = k/(i – 1) and Pr {S_(i)} = k/(n(i – 1)).
Using equation (5.14), we have

[art]

We approximate by integrals to bound this summation from above and
below. By the inequalities (A.19) on page 1150, we have

[art]

Evaluating these definite integrals gives us the bounds

[art]

which provide a rather tight bound for Pr {S}. Because you wish to
maximize your probability of success, let us focus on choosing the value
of k that maximizes the lower bound on Pr {S}. (Besides, the lower-bound
expression is easier to maximize than the upper-bound expression.)
Differentiating the expression (k/n)(ln n – ln k) with respect to k, we
obtain

[art]

Setting this derivative equal to 0, we see that you maximize the lower
bound on the probability when ln k = ln n – 1 = ln(n/e) or,
equivalently, when k = n/e. Thus, if you implement our strategy with k =
n/e, you succeed in hiring the best-qualified applicant with probability
at least 1/e.

Exercises

5.4-1

How many people must there be in a room before the probability that
someone has the same birthday as you do is at least 1/2? How many people
must there be before the probability that at least two people have a
birthday on July 4 is greater than 1/2?

5.4-2

How many people must there be in a room before the probability that two
people have the same birthday is at least 0.99? For that many people,
what is the expected number of pairs of people who have the same
birthday?

5.4-3

You toss balls into b bins until some bin contains two balls. Each toss
is independent, and each ball is equally likely to end up in any bin.
What is the expected number of ball tosses?

★ 5.4-4

For the analysis of the birthday paradox, is it important that the
birthdays be mutually independent, or is pairwise independence
sufficient? Justify your answer.

★ 5.4-5

How many people should be invited to a party in order to make it likely
that there are three people with the same birthday?

★ 5.4-6

What is the probability that a k-string (defined on page 1179) over a
set of size n forms a k-permutation? How does this question relate to
the birthday paradox?

★ 5.4-7

You toss n balls into n bins, where each toss is independent and the
ball is equally likely to end up in any bin. What is the expected number
of empty bins? What is the expected number of bins with exactly one
ball?

★ 5.4-8

Sharpen the lower bound on streak length by showing that in n flips of a
fair coin, the probability is at least 1 – 1/n that a streak of length
lg n – 2 lg lg n consecutive heads occurs.

Problems

5-1     Probabilistic counting

With a b-bit counter, we can ordinarily only count up to 2^(b) – 1. With
R. Morris’s probabilistic counting, we can count up to a much larger
value at the expense of some loss of precision.

We let a counter value of i represent a count of n_(i) for i = 0, 1, … ,
2^(b) – 1, where the n_(i) form an increasing sequence of nonnegative
values. We assume that the initial value of the counter is 0,
representing a count of n₀ = 0. The INCREMENT operation works on a
counter containing the value i in a probabilistic manner. If i = 2^(b) –
1, then the operation reports an overflow error. Otherwise, the
INCREMENT operation increases the counter by 1 with probability
1/(n_(i + 1) – n_(i)), and it leaves the counter unchanged with
probability 1 – 1/(n_(i + 1) – n_(i)).

If we select n_(i) = i for all i ≥ 0, then the counter is an ordinary
one. More interesting situations arise if we select, say, n_(i) =
2^(i – 1) for i > 0 or n_(i) = F_(i) (the ith Fibonacci number—see
equation (3.31) on page 69).

For this problem, assume that [art] is large enough that the probability
of an overflow error is negligible.

a. Show that the expected value represented by the counter after n
INCREMENT operations have been performed is exactly n.

b. The analysis of the variance of the count represented by the counter
depends on the sequence of the n_(i). Let us consider a simple case:
n_(i) = 100i for all i ≥ 0. Estimate the variance in the value
represented by the register after n INCREMENT operations have been
performed.

5-2     Searching an unsorted array

This problem examines three algorithms for searching for a value x in an
unsorted array A consisting of n elements.

Consider the following randomized strategy: pick a random index i into
A. If A[i] = x, then terminate; otherwise, continue the search by
picking a new random index into A. Continue picking random indices into
A until you find an index j such that A[j] = x or until every element of
A has been checked. This strategy may examine a given element more than
once, because it picks from the whole set of indices each time.

a. Write pseudocode for a procedure RANDOM-SEARCH to implement the
strategy above. Be sure that your algorithm terminates when all indices
into A have been picked.

b. Suppose that there is exactly one index i such that A[i] = x. What is
the expected number of indices into A that must be picked before x is
found and RANDOM-SEARCH terminates?

c. Generalizing your solution to part (b), suppose that there are k ≥ 1
indices i such that A[i] = x. What is the expected number of indices
into A that must be picked before x is found and RANDOM-SEARCH
terminates? Your answer should be a function of n and k.

d. Suppose that there are no indices i such that A[i] = x. What is the
expected number of indices into A that must be picked before all
elements of A have been checked and RANDOM-SEARCH terminates?

Now consider a deterministic linear search algorithm. The algorithm,
which we call DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH, searches A for x in order,
considering A[1], A[2], A[3], … , A[n] until either it finds A[i] = x or
it reaches the end of the array. Assume that all possible permutations
of the input array are equally likely.

e. Suppose that there is exactly one index i such that A[i] = x. What is
the average-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH? What is the
worst-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?

f. Generalizing your solution to part (e), suppose that there are k ≥ 1
indices i such that A[i] = x. What is the average-case running time of
DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH? What is the worst-case running time of
DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH? Your answer should be a function of n and k.

g. Suppose that there are no indices i such that A[i] = x. What is the
average-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH? What is the
worst-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?

Finally, consider a randomized algorithm SCRAMBLE-SEARCH that first
randomly permutes the input array and then runs the deterministic linear
search given above on the resulting permuted array.

h. Letting k be the number of indices i such that A[i] = x, give the
worst-case and expected running times of SCRAMBLE-SEARCH for the cases
in which k = 0 and k = 1. Generalize your solution to handle the case in
which k ≥ 1.

i. Which of the three searching algorithms would you use? Explain your
answer.

Chapter notes

Bollobás [65], Hofri [223], and Spencer [420] contain a wealth of
advanced probabilistic techniques. The advantages of randomized
algorithms are discussed and surveyed by Karp [249] and Rabin [372]. The
textbook by Motwani and Raghavan [336] gives an extensive treatment of
randomized algorithms.

The RANDOMLY-PERMUTE procedure is by Durstenfeld [128], based on an
earlier procedure by Fisher and Yates [143, p. 34].

Several variants of the hiring problem have been widely studied. These
problems are more commonly referred to as “secretary problems.” Examples
of work in this area are the paper by Ajtai, Meggido, and Waarts [11]
and another by Kleinberg [258], which ties the secretary problem to
online ad auctions.

Part II    Sorting and Order Statistics

 

 

Introduction

This part presents several algorithms that solve the following sorting
problem:

Input: A sequence of n numbers 〈a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)〉.

Output: A permutation (reordering) [art] of the input sequence such that
[art].

The input sequence is usually an n-element array, although it may be
represented in some other fashion, such as a linked list.

The structure of the data

In practice, the numbers to be sorted are rarely isolated values. Each
is usually part of a collection of data called a record. Each record
contains a key, which is the value to be sorted. The remainder of the
record consists of satellite data, which are usually carried around with
the key. In practice, when a sorting algorithm permutes the keys, it
must permute the satellite data as well. If each record includes a large
amount of satellite data, it often pays to permute an array of pointers
to the records rather than the records themselves in order to minimize
data movement.

In a sense, it is these implementation details that distinguish an
algorithm from a full-blown program. A sorting algorithm describes the
method to determine the sorted order, regardless of whether what’s being
sorted are individual numbers or large records containing many bytes of
satellite data. Thus, when focusing on the problem of sorting, we
typically assume that the input consists only of numbers. Translating an
algorithm for sorting numbers into a program for sorting records is
conceptually straightforward, although in a given engineering situation
other subtleties may make the actual programming task a challenge.

Why sorting?

Many computer scientists consider sorting to be the most fundamental
problem in the study of algorithms. There are several reasons:

- Sometimes an application inherently needs to sort information. For
  example, in order to prepare customer statements, banks need to sort
  checks by check number.
- Algorithms often use sorting as a key subroutine. For example, a
  program that renders graphical objects which are layered on top of
  each other might have to sort the objects according to an “above”
  relation so that it can draw these objects from bottom to top. We will
  see numerous algorithms in this text that use sorting as a subroutine.
- We can draw from among a wide variety of sorting algorithms, and they
  employ a rich set of techniques. In fact, many important techniques
  used throughout algorithm design appear in sorting algorithms that
  have been developed over the years. In this way, sorting is also a
  problem of historical interest.
- We can prove a nontrivial lower bound for sorting (as we’ll do in
  Chapter 8). Since the best upper bounds match the lower bound
  asymptotically, we can conclude that certain of our sorting algorithms
  are asymptotically optimal. Moreover, we can use the lower bound for
  sorting to prove lower bounds for various other problems.
- Many engineering issues come to the fore when implementing sorting
  algorithms. The fastest sorting program for a particular situation may
  depend on many factors, such as prior knowledge about the keys and
  satellite data, the memory hierarchy (caches and virtual memory) of
  the host computer, and the software environment. Many of these issues
  are best dealt with at the algorithmic level, rather than by
  “tweaking” the code.

Sorting algorithms

We introduced two algorithms that sort n real numbers in Chapter 2.
Insertion sort takes Θ(n²) time in the worst case. Because its inner
loops are tight, however, it is a fast sorting algorithm for small input
sizes. Moreover, unlike merge sort, it sorts in place, meaning that at
most a constant number of elements of the input array are ever stored
outside the array, which can be advantageous for space efficiency. Merge
sort has a better asymptotic running time, Θ(n lg n), but the MERGE
procedure it uses does not operate in place. (We’ll see a parallelized
version of merge sort in Section 26.3.)

This part introduces two more algorithms that sort arbitrary real
numbers. Heapsort, presented in Chapter 6, sorts n numbers in place in
O(n lg n) time. It uses an important data structure, called a heap,
which can also implement a priority queue.

Quicksort, in Chapter 7, also sorts n numbers in place, but its
worst-case running time is Θ(n²). Its expected running time is Θ(n lg
n), however, and it generally outperforms heapsort in practice. Like
insertion sort, quicksort has tight code, and so the hidden constant
factor in its running time is small. It is a popular algorithm for
sorting large arrays.

Insertion sort, merge sort, heapsort, and quicksort are all comparison
sorts: they determine the sorted order of an input array by comparing
elements. Chapter 8 begins by introducing the decision-tree model in
order to study the performance limitations of comparison sorts. Using
this model, we prove a lower bound of Ω(n lg n) on the worst-case
running time of any comparison sort on n inputs, thus showing that
heapsort and merge sort are asymptotically optimal comparison sorts.

Chapter 8 then goes on to show that we might be able to beat this lower
bound of Ω(n lg n) if an algorithm can gather information about the
sorted order of the input by means other than comparing elements. The
counting sort algorithm, for example, assumes that the input numbers
belong to the set {0, 1, … , k}. By using array indexing as a tool for
determining relative order, counting sort can sort n numbers in Θ(k + n)
time. Thus, when k = O(n), counting sort runs in time that is linear in
the size of the input array. A related algorithm, radix sort, can be
used to extend the range of counting sort. If there are n integers to
sort, each integer has d digits, and each digit can take on up to k
possible values, then radix sort can sort the numbers in Θ(d(n + k))
time. When d is a constant and k is O(n), radix sort runs in linear
time. A third algorithm, bucket sort, requires knowledge of the
probabilistic distribution of numbers in the input array. It can sort n
real numbers uniformly distributed in the half-open interval [0, 1) in
average-case O(n) time.

The table on the following page summarizes the running times of the
sorting algorithms from Chapters 2 and 6–8. As usual, n denotes the
number of items to sort. For counting sort, the items to sort are
integers in the set {0, 1, … , k}. For radix sort, each item is a
d-digit number, where each digit takes on k possible values. For bucket
sort, we assume that the keys are real numbers uniformly distributed in
the half-open interval [0, 1). The rightmost column gives the
average-case or expected running time, indicating which one it gives
when it differs from the worst-case running time. We omit the
average-case running time of heapsort because we do not analyze it in
this book.

  ---------------- ------------------------- ------------------------------------
  Algorithm        Worst-case running time   Average-case/expected running time
  Insertion sort   Θ(n²)                     Θ(n²)
  Merge sort       Θ(n lg n)                 Θ(n lg n)
  Heapsort         O(n lg n)                 —
  Quicksort        Θ(n²)                     Θ(n lg n) (expected)
  Counting sort    Θ(k + n)                  Θ(k + n)
  Radix sort       Θ(d(n + k))               Θ(d(n + k))
  Bucket sort      Θ(n²)                     Θ(n) (average-case)
  ---------------- ------------------------- ------------------------------------

Order statistics

The ith order statistic of a set of n numbers is the ith smallest number
in the set. You can, of course, select the ith order statistic by
sorting the input and indexing the ith element of the output. With no
assumptions about the input distribution, this method runs in Ω(n lg n)
time, as the lower bound proved in Chapter 8 shows.

Chapter 9 shows how to find the ith smallest element in O(n) time, even
when the elements are arbitrary real numbers. We present a randomized
algorithm with tight pseudocode that runs in Θ(n²) time in the worst
case, but whose expected running time is O(n). We also give a more
complicated algorithm that runs in O(n) worst-case time.

Background

Although most of this part does not rely on difficult mathematics, some
sections do require mathematical sophistication. In particular, analyses
of quicksort, bucket sort, and the order-statistic algorithm use
probability, which is reviewed in Appendix C, and the material on
probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms in Chapter 5.

6          Heapsort

This chapter introduces another sorting algorithm: heapsort. Like merge
sort, but unlike insertion sort, heapsort’s running time is O(n lg n).
Like insertion sort, but unlike merge sort, heapsort sorts in place:
only a constant number of array elements are stored outside the input
array at any time. Thus, heapsort combines the better attributes of the
two sorting algorithms we have already discussed.

Heapsort also introduces another algorithm design technique: using a
data structure, in this case one we call a “heap,” to manage
information. Not only is the heap data structure useful for heapsort,
but it also makes an efficient priority queue. The heap data structure
will reappear in algorithms in later chapters.

The term “heap” was originally coined in the context of heapsort, but it
has since come to refer to “garbage-collected storage,” such as the
programming languages Java and Python provide. Please don’t be confused.
The heap data structure is not garbage-collected storage. This book is
consistent in using the term “heap” to refer to the data structure, not
the storage class.

6.1      Heaps

The (binary) heap data structure is an array object that we can view as
a nearly complete binary tree (see Section B.5.3), as shown in Figure
6.1. Each node of the tree corresponds to an element of the array. The
tree is completely filled on all levels except possibly the lowest,
which is filled from the left up to a point. An array A[1 : n] that
represents a heap is an object with an attribute A.heap-size, which
represents how many elements in the heap are stored within array A. That
is, although A[1 : n] may contain numbers, only the elements in A[1 :
A.heap-size], where 0 ≤ A.heap-size ≤ n, are valid elements of the heap.
If A.heap-size = 0, then the heap is empty. The root of the tree is
A[1], and given the index i of a node, there’s a simple way to compute
the indices of its parent, left child, and right child with the one-line
procedures PARENT, LEFT, and RIGHT.

[art]

Figure 6.1 A max-heap viewed as (a) a binary tree and (b) an array. The
number within the circle at each node in the tree is the value stored at
that node. The number above a node is the corresponding index in the
array. Above and below the array are lines showing parent-child
relationships, with parents always to the left of their children. The
tree has height 3, and the node at index 4 (with value 8) has height 1.

PARENT(i)

  --- --------------
  1   return ⌊i/2⌋
  --- --------------

LEFT(i)

  --- -----------
  1   return 2i
  --- -----------

RIGHT(i)

  --- ---------------
  1   return 2i + 1
  --- ---------------

On most computers, the LEFT procedure can compute 2i in one instruction
by simply shifting the binary representation of i left by one bit
position. Similarly, the RIGHT procedure can quickly compute 2i + 1 by
shifting the binary representation of i left by one bit position and
then adding 1. The PARENT procedure can compute ⌊i/2⌋ by shifting i
right one bit position. Good implementations of heapsort often implement
these procedures as macros or inline procedures.

There are two kinds of binary heaps: max-heaps and min-heaps. In both
kinds, the values in the nodes satisfy a heap property, the specifics of
which depend on the kind of heap. In a max-heap, the max-heap property
is that for every node i other than the root,

A[PARENT(i)] ≥ A[i],

that is, the value of a node is at most the value of its parent. Thus,
the largest element in a max-heap is stored at the root, and the subtree
rooted at a node contains values no larger than that contained at the
node itself. A min-heap is organized in the opposite way: the min-heap
property is that for every node i other than the root,

A[PARENT(i)] ≤ A[i].

The smallest element in a min-heap is at the root.

The heapsort algorithm uses max-heaps. Min-heaps commonly implement
priority queues, which we discuss in Section 6.5. We’ll be precise in
specifying whether we need a max-heap or a min-heap for any particular
application, and when properties apply to either max-heaps or min-heaps,
we just use the term “heap.”

Viewing a heap as a tree, we define the height of a node in a heap to be
the number of edges on the longest simple downward path from the node to
a leaf, and we define the height of the heap to be the height of its
root. Since a heap of n elements is based on a complete binary tree, its
height is Θ(lg n) (see Exercise 6.1-2). As we’ll see, the basic
operations on heaps run in time at most proportional to the height of
the tree and thus take O(lg n) time. The remainder of this chapter
presents some basic procedures and shows how they are used in a sorting
algorithm and a priority-queue data structure.

- The MAX-HEAPIFY procedure, which runs in O(lg n) time, is the key to
  maintaining the max-heap property.
- The BUILD-MAX-HEAP procedure, which runs in linear time, produces a
  max-heap from an unordered input array.
- The HEAPSORT procedure, which runs in O(n lg n) time, sorts an array
  in place.
- The procedures MAX-HEAP-INSERT, MAX-HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX,
  MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY, and MAX-HEAP-MAXIMUM allow the heap data
  structure to implement a priority queue. They run in O(lg n) time plus
  the time for mapping between objects being inserted into the priority
  queue and indices in the heap.

Exercises

6.1-1

What are the minimum and maximum numbers of elements in a heap of height
h?

6.1-2

Show that an n-element heap has height ⌊lg n⌋.

6.1-3

Show that in any subtree of a max-heap, the root of the subtree contains
the largest value occurring anywhere in that subtree.

6.1-4

Where in a max-heap might the smallest element reside, assuming that all
elements are distinct?

6.1-5

At which levels in a max-heap might the kth largest element reside, for
2 ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/2⌋, assuming that all elements are distinct?

6.1-6

Is an array that is in sorted order a min-heap?

6.1-7

Is the array with values 〈33, 19, 20, 15, 13, 10, 2, 13, 16, 12〉 a
max-heap?

6.1-8

Show that, with the array representation for storing an n-element heap,
the leaves are the nodes indexed by ⌊n/2⌋ + 1, ⌊n/2⌋ + 2, … , n.

6.2      Maintaining the heap property

The procedure MAX-HEAPIFY on the facing page maintains the max-heap
property. Its inputs are an array A with the heap-size attribute and an
index i into the array. When it is called, MAX-HEAPIFY assumes that the
binary trees rooted at LEFT(i) and RIGHT(i) are max-heaps, but that A[i]
might be smaller than its children, thus violating the max-heap
property. MAX-HEAPIFY lets the value at A[i] “float down” in the
max-heap so that the subtree rooted at index i obeys the max-heap
property.

Figure 6.2 illustrates the action of MAX-HEAPIFY. Each step determines
the largest of the elements A[i], A[LEFT(i)], and A[RIGHT(i)] and stores
the index of the largest element in largest. If A[i] is largest, then
the subtree rooted at node i is already a max-heap and nothing else
needs to be done. Otherwise, one of the two children contains the
largest element. Positions i and largest swap their contents, which
causes node i and its children to satisfy the max-heap property. The
node indexed by largest, however, just had its value decreased, and thus
the subtree rooted at largest might violate the max-heap property.
Consequently, MAX-HEAPIFY calls itself recursively on that subtree.

[art]

Figure 6.2 The action of MAX-HEAPIFY(A, 2), where A.heap-size = 10. The
node that potentially violates the max-heap property is shown in blue.
(a) The initial configuration, with A[2] at node i = 2 violating the
max-heap property since it is not larger than both children. The
max-heap property is restored for node 2 in (b) by exchanging A[2] with
A[4], which destroys the max-heap property for node 4. The recursive
call MAX-HEAPIFY(A, 4) now has i = 4. After A[4] and A[9] are swapped,
as shown in (c), node 4 is fixed up, and the recursive call
MAX-HEAPIFY(A, 9) yields no further change to the data structure.

MAX-HEAPIFY(A, i)

  ----- ------------------------------------------
    1   l = LEFT(i)
    2   r = RIGHT(i)
    3   if l ≤ A.heap-size and A[l] > A[i]
    4   largest = l
    5   else largest = i
    6   if r ≤ A.heap-size and A[r] > A[largest]
    7   largest = r
    8   if largest ≠ i
    9   exchange A[i] with A[largest]
  10    MAX-HEAPIFY(A, largest)
  ----- ------------------------------------------

To analyze MAX-HEAPIFY, let T (n) be the worst-case running time that
the procedure takes on a subtree of size at most n. For a tree rooted at
a given node i, the running time is the Θ(1) time to fix up the
relationships among the elements A[i], A[LEFT(i)], and A[RIGHT(i)], plus
the time to run MAX-HEAPIFY on a subtree rooted at one of the children
of node i (assuming that the recursive call occurs). The children’s
subtrees each have size at most 2n/3 (see Exercise 6.2-2), and therefore
we can describe the running time of MAX-HEAPIFY by the recurrence

[art]

The solution to this recurrence, by case 2 of the master theorem
(Theorem 4.1 on page 102), is T (n) = O(lg n). Alternatively, we can
characterize the running time of MAX-HEAPIFY on a node of height h as
O(h).

Exercises

6.2-1

Using Figure 6.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of MAX-HEAPIFY(A,
3) on the array A = 〈27, 17, 3, 16, 13, 10, 1, 5, 7, 12, 4, 8, 9, 0〉.

6.2-2

Show that each child of the root of an n-node heap is the root of a
subtree containing at most 2n/3 nodes. What is the smallest constant α
such that each subtree has at most α n nodes? How does that affect the
recurrence (6.1) and its solution?

6.2-3

Starting with the procedure MAX-HEAPIFY, write pseudocode for the
procedure MIN-HEAPIFY(A, i), which performs the corresponding
manipulation on a min-heap. How does the running time of MIN-HEAPIFY
compare with that of MAX-HEAPIFY?

6.2-4

What is the effect of calling MAX-HEAPIFY(A, i) when the element A[i] is
larger than its children?

6.2-5

What is the effect of calling MAX-HEAPIFY(A, i) for i > A.heap-size/2?

6.2-6

The code for MAX-HEAPIFY is quite efficient in terms of constant
factors, except possibly for the recursive call in line 10, for which
some compilers might produce inefficient code. Write an efficient
MAX-HEAPIFY that uses an iterative control construct (a loop) instead of
recursion.

6.2-7

Show that the worst-case running time of MAX-HEAPIFY on a heap of size n
is Ω(lg n). (Hint: For a heap with n nodes, give node values that cause
MAX-HEAPIFY to be called recursively at every node on a simple path from
the root down to a leaf.)

6.3      Building a heap

The procedure BUILD-MAX-HEAP converts an array A[1 : n] into a max-heap
by calling MAX-HEAPIFY in a bottom-up manner. Exercise 6.1-8 says that
the elements in the subarray A[⌊n/2⌋ + 1 : n] are all leaves of the
tree, and so each is a 1-element heap to begin with. BUILD-MAX-HEAP goes
through the remaining nodes of the tree and runs MAX-HEAPIFY on each
one. Figure 6.3 shows an example of the action of BUILD-MAX-HEAP.

BUILD-MAX-HEAP(A, n)

  --- ------------------------
  1   A.heap-size = n
  2   for i = ⌊n/2⌋ downto 1
  3   MAX-HEAPIFY(A, i)
  --- ------------------------

To show why BUILD-MAX-HEAP works correctly, we use the following loop
invariant:

At the start of each iteration of the for loop of lines 2–3, each node
i + 1, i + 2, … , n is the root of a max-heap.

We need to show that this invariant is true prior to the first loop
iteration, that each iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, that
the loop terminates, and that the invariant provides a useful property
to show correctness when the loop terminates.

Initialization: Prior to the first iteration of the loop, i = ⌊n/2⌋.
Each node ⌊n/2⌋ + 1, ⌊n/2⌋ + 2, … , n is a leaf and is thus the root of
a trivial max-heap.

Maintenance: To see that each iteration maintains the loop invariant,
observe that the children of node i are numbered higher than i. By the
loop invariant, therefore, they are both roots of max-heaps. This is
precisely the condition required for the call MAX-HEAPIFY(A, i) to make
node i a max-heap root. Moreover, the MAX-HEAPIFY call preserves the
property that nodes i + 1, i + 2, … , n are all roots of max-heaps.
Decrementing i in the for loop update reestablishes the loop invariant
for the next iteration.

[art]

Figure 6.3 The operation of BUILD-MAX-HEAP, showing the data structure
before the call to MAX-HEAPIFY in line 3 of BUILD-MAX-HEAP. The node
indexed by i in each iteration is shown in blue. (a) A 10-element input
array A and the binary tree it represents. The loop index i refers to
node 5 before the call MAX-HEAPIFY(A, i). (b) The data structure that
results. The loop index i for the next iteration refers to node 4.
(c)–(e) Subsequent iterations of the for loop in BUILD-MAX-HEAP. Observe
that whenever MAX-HEAPIFY is called on a node, the two subtrees of that
node are both max-heaps. (f) The max-heap after BUILD-MAX-HEAP finishes.

Termination: The loop makes exactly ⌊n/2⌋ iterations, and so it
terminates. At termination, i = 0. By the loop invariant, each node 1,
2, … , n is the root of a max-heap. In particular, node 1 is.

We can compute a simple upper bound on the running time of
BUILD-MAX-HEAP as follows. Each call to MAX-HEAPIFY costs O(lg n) time,
and BUILD-MAX-HEAP makes O(n) such calls. Thus, the running time is O(n
lg n). This upper bound, though correct, is not as tight as it can be.

We can derive a tighter asymptotic bound by observing that the time for
MAX-HEAPIFY to run at a node varies with the height of the node in the
tree, and that the heights of most nodes are small. Our tighter analysis
relies on the properties that an n-element heap has height ⌊lg n⌋ (see
Exercise 6.1-2) and at most ⌈n/2^(h + 1)⌉ nodes of any height h (see
Exercise 6.3-4).

The time required by MAX-HEAPIFY when called on a node of height h is
O(h). Letting c be the constant implicit in the asymptotic notation, we
can express the total cost of BUILD-MAX-HEAP as being bounded from above
by [art]. As Exercise 6.3-2 shows, we have ⌈n/2^(h + 1)⌉ ≥ 1/2 for 0 ≤ h
≤ ⌊lg n⌋. Since ⌈x⌉ ≤ 2x for any x ≥ 1/2, we have ⌈n/2^(h + 1)⌉ ≤
n/2^(h). We thus obtain

[art]

Hence, we can build a max-heap from an unordered array in linear time.

To build a min-heap, use the procedure BUILD-MIN-HEAP, which is the same
as BUILD-MAX-HEAP but with the call to MAX-HEAPIFY in line 3 replaced by
a call to MIN-HEAPIFY (see Exercise 6.2-3). BUILD-MIN-HEAP produces a
min-heap from an unordered linear array in linear time.

Exercises

6.3-1

Using Figure 6.3 as a model, illustrate the operation of BUILD-MAX-HEAP
on the array A = 〈5, 3, 17, 10, 84, 19, 6, 22, 9〉.

6.3-2

Show that ⌈n/2^(h + 1)⌉ ≥ 1/2 for 0 ≤ h ≤ ⌊lg n⌋.

6.3-3

Why does the loop index i in line 2 of BUILD-MAX-HEAP decrease from
⌊n/2⌋ to 1 rather than increase from 1 to ⌊n/2⌋?

6.3-4

Show that there are at most ⌈n/2^(h + 1)⌉ nodes of height h in any
n-element heap.

6.4      The heapsort algorithm

The heapsort algorithm, given by the procedure HEAPSORT, starts by
calling the BUILD-MAX-HEAP procedure to build a max-heap on the input
array A[1 : n]. Since the maximum element of the array is stored at the
root A[1], HEAPSORT can place it into its correct final position by
exchanging it with A[n]. If the procedure then discards node n from the
heap—and it can do so by simply decrementing A.heap-size—the children of
the root remain max-heaps, but the new root element might violate the
max-heap property. To restore the max-heap property, the procedure just
calls MAX-HEAPIFY(A, 1), which leaves a max-heap in A[1 : n – 1]. The
HEAPSORT procedure then repeats this process for the max-heap of size n
– 1 down to a heap of size 2. (See Exercise 6.4-2 for a precise loop
invariant.)

HEAPSORT(A, n)

  --- -------------------------------
  1   BUILD-MAX-HEAP(A, n)
  2   for i = n downto 2
  3   exchange A[1] with A[i]
  4   A.heap-size = A.heap-size – 1
  5   MAX-HEAPIFY(A, 1)
  --- -------------------------------

Figure 6.4 shows an example of the operation of HEAPSORT after line 1
has built the initial max-heap. The figure shows the max-heap before the
first iteration of the for loop of lines 2–5 and after each iteration.

[art]

Figure 6.4 The operation of HEAPSORT. (a) The max-heap data structure
just after BUILD-MAX-HEAP has built it in line 1. (b)–(j) The max-heap
just after each call of MAX-HEAPIFY in line 5, showing the value of i at
that time. Only blue nodes remain in the heap. Tan nodes contain the
largest values in the array, in sorted order. (k) The resulting sorted
array A.

The HEAPSORT procedure takes O(n lg n) time, since the call to
BUILD-MAX-HEAP takes O(n) time and each of the n – 1 calls to
MAX-HEAPIFY takes O(lg n) time.

Exercises

6.4-1

Using Figure 6.4 as a model, illustrate the operation of HEAPSORT on the
array A = 〈5, 13, 2, 25, 7, 17, 20, 8, 4〉.

6.4-2

Argue the correctness of HEAPSORT using the following loop invariant:

At the start of each iteration of the for loop of lines 2–5, the
subarray A[1 : i] is a max-heap containing the i smallest elements of
A[1 : n], and the subarray A[i + 1 : n] contains the n – i largest
elements of A[1 : n], sorted.

6.4-3

What is the running time of HEAPSORT on an array A of length n that is
already sorted in increasing order? How about if the array is already
sorted in decreasing order?

6.4-4

Show that the worst-case running time of HEAPSORT is Ω(n lg n).

★ 6.4-5

Show that when all the elements of A are distinct, the best-case running
time of HEAPSORT is Ω(n lg n).

6.5      Priority queues

In Chapter 8, we will see that any comparison-based sorting algorithm
requires Ω(n lg n) comparisons and hence Ω(n lg n) time. Therefore,
heapsort is asymptotically optimal among comparison-based sorting
algorithms. Yet, a good implementation of quicksort, presented in
Chapter 7, usually beats it in practice. Nevertheless, the heap data
structure itself has many uses. In this section, we present one of the
most popular applications of a heap: as an efficient priority queue. As
with heaps, priority queues come in two forms: max-priority queues and
min-priority queues. We’ll focus here on how to implement max-priority
queues, which are in turn based on max-heaps. Exercise 6.5-3 asks you to
write the procedures for min-priority queues.

A priority queue is a data structure for maintaining a set S of
elements, each with an associated value called a key. A max-priority
queue supports the following operations:

INSERT(S, x, k) inserts the element x with key k into the set S, which
is equivalent to the operation S = S ⋃ {x}.

MAXIMUM(S) returns the element of S with the largest key.

EXTRACT-MAX(S) removes and returns the element of S with the largest
key.

INCREASE-KEY(S, x, k) increases the value of element x’s key to the new
value k, which is assumed to be at least as large as x’s current key
value.

Among their other applications, you can use max-priority queues to
schedule jobs on a computer shared among multiple users. The
max-priority queue keeps track of the jobs to be performed and their
relative priorities. When a job is finished or interrupted, the
scheduler selects the highest-priority job from among those pending by
calling EXTRACT-MAX. The scheduler can add a new job to the queue at any
time by calling INSERT.

Alternatively, a min-priority queue supports the operations INSERT,
MINIMUM, EXTRACT-MIN, and DECREASE-KEY. A min-priority queue can be used
in an event-driven simulator. The items in the queue are events to be
simulated, each with an associated time of occurrence that serves as its
key. The events must be simulated in order of their time of occurrence,
because the simulation of an event can cause other events to be
simulated in the future. The simulation program calls EXTRACT-MIN at
each step to choose the next event to simulate. As new events are
produced, the simulator inserts them into the min-priority queue by
calling INSERT. We’ll see other uses for min-priority queues,
highlighting the DECREASE-KEY operation, in Chapters 21 and 22.

When you use a heap to implement a priority queue within a given
application, elements of the priority queue correspond to objects in the
application. Each object contains a key. If the priority queue is
implemented by a heap, you need to determine which application object
corresponds to a given heap element, and vice versa. Because the heap
elements are stored in an array, you need a way to map application
objects to and from array indices.

One way to map between application objects and heap elements uses
handles, which are additional information stored in the objects and heap
elements that give enough information to perform the mapping. Handles
are often implemented to be opaque to the surrounding code, thereby
maintaining an abstraction barrier between the application and the
priority queue. For example, the handle within an application object
might contain the corresponding index into the heap array. But since
only the code for the priority queue accesses this index, the index is
entirely hidden from the application code. Because heap elements change
locations within the array during heap operations, an actual
implementation of the priority queue, upon relocating a heap element,
must also update the array indices in the corresponding handles.
Conversely, each element in the heap might contain a pointer to the
corresponding application object, but the heap element knows this
pointer as only an opaque handle and the application maps this handle to
an application object. Typically, the worst-case overhead for
maintaining handles is O(1) per access.

As an alternative to incorporating handles in application objects, you
can store within the priority queue a mapping from application objects
to array indices in the heap. The advantage of doing so is that the
mapping is contained entirely within the priority queue, so that the
application objects need no further embellishment. The disadvantage lies
in the additional cost of establishing and maintaining the mapping. One
option for the mapping is a hash table (see Chapter 11).¹ The added
expected time for a hash table to map an object to an array index is
just O(1), though the worst-case time can be as bad as Θ(n).

Let’s see how to implement the operations of a max-priority queue using
a max-heap. In the previous sections, we treated the array elements as
the keys to be sorted, implicitly assuming that any satellite data moved
with the corresponding keys. When a heap implements a priority queue, we
instead treat each array element as a pointer to an object in the
priority queue, so that the object is analogous to the satellite data
when sorting. We further assume that each such object has an attribute
key, which determines where in the heap the object belongs. For a heap
implemented by an array A, we refer to A[i].key.

The procedure MAX-HEAP-MAXIMUM on the facing page implements the MAXIMUM
operation in Θ(1) time, and MAX-HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX implements the
operation EXTRACT-MAX. MAX-HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX is similar to the for loop
body (lines 3–5) of the HEAPSORT procedure. We implicitly assume that
MAX-HEAPIFY compares priority-queue objects based on their key
attributes. We also assume that when MAX-HEAPIFY exchanges elements in
the array, it is exchanging pointers and also that it updates the
mapping between objects and array indices. The running time of
MAX-HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX is O(lg n), since it performs only a constant
amount of work on top of the O(lg n) time for MAX-HEAPIFY, plus whatever
overhead is incurred within MAX-HEAPIFY for mapping priority-queue
objects to array indices.

The procedure MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY on page 176 implements the
INCREASE-KEY operation. It first verifies that the new key k will not
cause the key in the object x to decrease, and if there is no problem,
it gives x the new key value. The procedure then finds the index i in
the array corresponding to object x, so that A[i] is x. Because
increasing the key of A[i] might violate the max-heap property, the
procedure then, in a manner reminiscent of the insertion loop (lines
5–7) of INSERTION-SORT on page 19, traverses a simple path from this
node toward the root to find a proper place for the newly increased key.
As MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY traverses this path, it repeatedly compares an
element’s key to that of its parent, exchanging pointers and continuing
if the element’s key is larger, and terminating if the element’s key is
smaller, since the max-heap property now holds. (See Exercise 6.5-7 for
a precise loop invariant.) Like MAX-HEAPIFY when used in a priority
queue, MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY updates the information that maps objects
to array indices when array elements are exchanged. Figure 6.5 shows an
example of a MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY operation. In addition to the
overhead for mapping priority queue objects to array indices, the
running time of MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY on an n-element heap is O(lg n),
since the path traced from the node updated in line 3 to the root has
length O(lg n).

MAX-HEAP-MAXIMUM(A)

  --- ------------------------
  1   if A.heap-size < 1
  2   error “heap underflow”
  3   return A[1]
  --- ------------------------

MAX-HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX(A)

  --- -------------------------------
  1   max = MAX-HEAP-MAXIMUM(A)
  2   A[1] = A[A.heap-size]
  3   A.heap-size = A.heap-size – 1
  4   MAX-HEAPIFY(A, 1)
  5   return max
  --- -------------------------------

The procedure MAX-HEAP-INSERT on the next page implements the INSERT
operation. It takes as inputs the array A implementing the max-heap, the
new object x to be inserted into the max-heap, and the size n of array
A. The procedure first verifies that the array has room for the new
element. It then expands the max-heap by adding to the tree a new leaf
whose key is –∞. Then it calls MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY to set the key of
this new element to its correct value and maintain the max-heap
property. The running time of MAX-HEAP-INSERT on an n-element heap is
O(lg n) plus the overhead for mapping priority queue objects to indices.

In summary, a heap can support any priority-queue operation on a set of
size n in O(lg n) time, plus the overhead for mapping priority queue
objects to array indices.

MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY(A, x, k)

  --- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   if k < x.key
  2   error “new key is smaller than current key”
  3   x.key = k
  4   find the index i in array A where object x occurs
  5   while i > 1 and A[PARENT(i)].key < A[i].key
  6   exchange A[i] with A[PARENT(i)], updating the information that maps priority queue objects to array indices
  7   i = PARENT(i)
  --- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

MAX-HEAP-INSERT(A, x, n)

  --- ---------------------------------------
  1   if A.heap-size == n
  2   error “heap overflow”
  3   A.heap-size = A.heap-size + 1
  4   k = x.key
  5   x.key = –∞
  6   A[A.heap-size] = x
  7   map x to index heap-size in the array
  8   MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY(A, x, k)
  --- ---------------------------------------

Exercises

6.5-1

Suppose that the objects in a max-priority queue are just keys.
Illustrate the operation of MAX-HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX on the heap A = 〈15,
13, 9, 5, 12, 8, 7, 4, 0, 6, 2, 1〉.

6.5-2

Suppose that the objects in a max-priority queue are just keys.
Illustrate the operation of MAX-HEAP-INSERT(A, 10) on the heap A = 〈15,
13, 9, 5, 12, 8, 7, 4, 0, 6, 2, 1〉.

6.5-3

Write pseudocode to implement a min-priority queue with a min-heap by
writing the procedures MIN-HEAP-MINIMUM, MIN-HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN,
MIN-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY, and MIN-HEAP-INSERT.

6.5-4

Write pseudocode for the procedure MAX-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY(A, x, k) in a
max-heap. What is the running time of your procedure?

[art]

Figure 6.5 The operation of MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY. Only the key of each
element in the priority queue is shown. The node indexed by i in each
iteration is shown in blue. (a) The max-heap of Figure 6.4(a) with i
indexing the node whose key is about to be increased. (b) This node has
its key increased to 15. (c) After one iteration of the while loop of
lines 5–7, the node and its parent have exchanged keys, and the index i
moves up to the parent. (d) The max-heap after one more iteration of the
while loop. At this point, A[PARENT(i)] ≥ A[i]. The max-heap property
now holds and the procedure terminates.

6.5-5

Why does MAX-HEAP-INSERT bother setting the key of the inserted object
to –∞ in line 5 given that line 8 will set the object’s key to the
desired value?

6.5-6

Professor Uriah suggests replacing the while loop of lines 5–7 in
MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY by a call to MAX-HEAPIFY. Explain the flaw in the
professor’s idea.

6.5-7

Argue the correctness of MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY using the following loop
invariant:

At the start of each iteration of the while loop of lines 5–7:

a. If both nodes PARENT(i) and LEFT(i) exist, then A[PARENT(i)].key ≥
A[LEFT(i)].key.

b. If both nodes PARENT(i) and RIGHT(i) exist, then A[PARENT(i)].key ≥
A[RIGHT(i)].key.

c. The subarray A[1 : A.heap-size] satisfies the max-heap property,
except that there may be one violation, which is that A[i].key may be
greater than A[PARENT(i)].key.

You may assume that the subarray A[1 : A.heap-size] satisfies the
max-heap property at the time MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY is called.

6.5-8

Each exchange operation on line 6 of MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY typically
requires three assignments, not counting the updating of the mapping
from objects to array indices. Show how to use the idea of the inner
loop of INSERTION-SORT to reduce the three assignments to just one
assignment.

6.5-9

Show how to implement a first-in, first-out queue with a priority queue.
Show how to implement a stack with a priority queue. (Queues and stacks
are defined in Section 10.1.3.)

6.5-10

The operation MAX-HEAP-DELETE(A, x) deletes the object x from max-heap
A. Give an implementation of MAX-HEAP-DELETE for an n-element max-heap
that runs in O(lg n) time plus the overhead for mapping priority queue
objects to array indices.

6.5-11

Give an O(n lg k)-time algorithm to merge k sorted lists into one sorted
list, where n is the total number of elements in all the input lists.
(Hint: Use a min-heap for k-way merging.)

Problems

6-1     Building a heap using insertion

One way to build a heap is by repeatedly calling MAX-HEAP-INSERT to
insert the elements into the heap. Consider the procedure
BUILD-MAX-HEAP′ on the facing page. It assumes that the objects being
inserted are just the heap elements.

BUILD-MAX-HEAP′ (A, n)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   A.heap-size = 1
  2   for i = 2 to n
  3   MAX-HEAP-INSERT(A, A[i], n)
  --- -----------------------------

a. Do the procedures BUILD-MAX-HEAP and BUILD-MAX-HEAP′ always create
the same heap when run on the same input array? Prove that they do, or
provide a counterexample.

b. Show that in the worst case, BUILD-MAX-HEAP′ requires Θ(n lg n) time
to build an n-element heap.

6-2     Analysis of d-ary heaps

A d-ary heap is like a binary heap, but (with one possible exception)
nonleaf nodes have d children instead of two children. In all parts of
this problem, assume that the time to maintain the mapping between
objects and heap elements is O(1) per operation.

a. Describe how to represent a d-ary heap in an array.

b. Using Θ-notation, express the height of a d-ary heap of n elements in
terms of n and d.

c. Give an efficient implementation of EXTRACT-MAX in a d-ary max-heap.
Analyze its running time in terms of d and n.

d. Give an efficient implementation of INCREASE-KEY in a d-ary max-heap.
Analyze its running time in terms of d and n.

e. Give an efficient implementation of INSERT in a d-ary max-heap.
Analyze its running time in terms of d and n.

6-3 Young tableaus

An m × n Young tableau is an m × n matrix such that the entries of each
row are in sorted order from left to right and the entries of each
column are in sorted order from top to bottom. Some of the entries of a
Young tableau may be ∞, which we treat as nonexistent elements. Thus, a
Young tableau can be used to hold r ≤ mn finite numbers.

a. Draw a 4 × 4 Young tableau containing the elements {9, 16, 3, 2, 4,
8, 5, 14, 12}.

b. Argue that an m × n Young tableau Y is empty if Y [1, 1] = ∞. Argue
that Y is full (contains mn elements) if Y [m, n] < ∞.

c. Give an algorithm to implement EXTRACT-MIN on a nonempty m × n Young
tableau that runs in O(m + n) time. Your algorithm should use a
recursive subroutine that solves an m × n problem by recursively solving
either an (m – 1) × n or an m × (n – 1) subproblem. (Hint: Think about
MAX-HEAPIFY.) Explain why your implementation of EXTRACT-MIN runs in
O(m + n) time.

d. Show how to insert a new element into a nonfull m × n Young tableau
in O(m + n) time.

e. Using no other sorting method as a subroutine, show how to use an n ×
n Young tableau to sort n² numbers in O(n³) time.

f. Give an O(m + n)-time algorithm to determine whether a given number
is stored in a given m × n Young tableau.

Chapter notes

The heapsort algorithm was invented by Williams [456], who also
described how to implement a priority queue with a heap. The
BUILD-MAX-HEAP procedure was suggested by Floyd [145]. Schaffer and
Sedgewick [395] showed that in the best case, the number of times
elements move in the heap during heapsort is approximately (n/2) lg n
and that the average number of moves is approximately n lg n.

We use min-heaps to implement min-priority queues in Chapters 15, 21,
and 22. Other, more complicated, data structures give better time bounds
for certain min-priority queue operations. Fredman and Tarjan [156]
developed Fibonacci heaps, which support INSERT and DECREASE-KEY in O(1)
amortized time (see Chapter 16). That is, the average worst-case running
time for these operations is O(1). Brodal, Lagogiannis, and Tarjan [73]
subsequently devised strict Fibonacci heaps, which make these time
bounds the actual running times. If the keys are unique and drawn from
the set {0, 1, … , n – 1} of nonnegative integers, van Emde Boas trees
[440, 441] support the operations INSERT, DELETE, SEARCH, MINIMUM,
MAXIMUM, PREDECESSOR, and SUCCESSOR in O(lg lg n) time.

If the data are b-bit integers, and the computer memory consists of
addressable b-bit words, Fredman and Willard [157] showed how to
implement MINIMUM in O(1) time and INSERT and EXTRACT-MIN in [art] time.
Thorup [436] has improved the [art] bound to O(lg lg n) time by using
randomized hashing, requiring only linear space.

An important special case of priority queues occurs when the sequence of
EXTRACT-MIN operations is monotone, that is, the values returned by
successive EXTRACT-MIN operations are monotonically increasing over
time. This case arises in several important applications, such as
Dijkstra’s single-source shortest-paths algorithm, which we discuss in
Chapter 22, and in discrete-event simulation. For Dijkstra’s algorithm
it is particularly important that the DECREASE-KEY operation be
implemented efficiently. For the monotone case, if the data are integers
in the range 1, 2, … , C, Ahuja, Mehlhorn, Orlin, and Tarjan [8]
describe how to implement EXTRACT-MIN and INSERT in O(lg C) amortized
time (Chapter 16 presents amortized analysis) and DECREASE-KEY in O(1)
time, using a data structure called a radix heap. The O(lg C) bound can
be improved to [art] using Fibonacci heaps in conjunction with radix
heaps. Cherkassky, Goldberg, and Silverstein [90] further improved the
bound to O(lg^(1/3+ϵ) C) expected time by combining the multilevel
bucketing structure of Denardo and Fox [112] with the heap of Thorup
mentioned earlier. Raman [375] further improved these results to obtain
a bound of O(min {lg^(1/4+ϵ) C, lg^(1/3+ϵ) n}), for any fixed ϵ > 0.

Many other variants of heaps have been proposed. Brodal [72] surveys
some of these developments.

¹ In Python, dictionaries are implemented with hash tables.

7          Quicksort

The quicksort algorithm has a worst-case running time of Θ(n²) on an
input array of n numbers. Despite this slow worst-case running time,
quicksort is often the best practical choice for sorting because it is
remarkably efficient on average: its expected running time is Θ(n lg n)
when all numbers are distinct, and the constant factors hidden in the
Θ(n lg n) notation are small. Unlike merge sort, it also has the
advantage of sorting in place (see page 158), and it works well even in
virtual-memory environments.

Our study of quicksort is broken into four sections. Section 7.1
describes the algorithm and an important subroutine used by quicksort
for partitioning. Because the behavior of quicksort is complex, we’ll
start with an intuitive discussion of its performance in Section 7.2 and
analyze it precisely at the end of the chapter. Section 7.3 presents a
randomized version of quicksort. When all elements are distinct,¹ this
randomized algorithm has a good expected running time and no particular
input elicits its worst-case behavior. (See Problem 7-2 for the case in
which elements may be equal.) Section 7.4 analyzes the randomized
algorithm, showing that it runs in Θ(n²) time in the worst case and,
assuming distinct elements, in expected O(n lg n) time.

7.1      Description of quicksort

Quicksort, like merge sort, applies the divide-and-conquer method
introduced in Section 2.3.1. Here is the three-step divide-and-conquer
process for sorting a subarray A[p : r]:

Divide by partitioning (rearranging) the array A[p : r] into two
(possibly empty) subarrays A[p : q – 1] (the low side) and A[q + 1 : r]
(the high side) such that each element in the low side of the partition
is less than or equal to the pivot A[q], which is, in turn, less than or
equal to each element in the high side. Compute the index q of the pivot
as part of this partitioning procedure.

Conquer by calling quicksort recursively to sort each of the subarrays
A[p : q – 1] and A[q + 1 : r].

Combine by doing nothing: because the two subarrays are already sorted,
no work is needed to combine them. All elements in A[p : q – 1] are
sorted and less than or equal to A[q], and all elements in A[q + 1 : r]
are sorted and greater than or equal to the pivot A[q]. The entire
subarray A[p : r] cannot help but be sorted!

The QUICKSORT procedure implements quicksort. To sort an entire
n-element array A[1 : n], the initial call is QUICKSORT (A, 1, n).

QUICKSORT(A, p, r)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | if p < r                                                        |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2 | // Partition the subarray around the pivot, which ends up in    |
|   | A[q].                                                           |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3 | q = PARTITION(A, p, r)                                          |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4 | QUICKSORT(A, p, q – 1)         | // recursively sort the low    |
|   |                                | side                           |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 5 | QUICKSORT(A, q + 1, r)         | // recursively sort the high   |
|   |                                | side                           |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+

Partitioning the array

The key to the algorithm is the PARTITION procedure on the next page,
which rearranges the subarray A[p : r] in place, returning the index of
the dividing point between the two sides of the partition.

Figure 7.1 shows how PARTITION works on an 8-element array. PARTITION
always selects the element x = A[r] as the pivot. As the procedure runs,
each element falls into exactly one of four regions, some of which may
be empty. At the start of each iteration of the for loop in lines 3–6,
the regions satisfy certain properties, shown in Figure 7.2. We state
these properties as a loop invariant:

PARTITION(A, p, r)

  --- ----------------------------- -------------------------------------------------
  1   x = A[r]                      // the pivot
  2   i = p – 1                     // highest index into the low side
  3   for j = p to r – 1            // process each element other than the pivot
  4   if A[j] ≤ x                   // does this element belong on the low side?
  5   i = i + 1                     // index of a new slot in the low side
  6   exchange A[i] with A[j]       // put this element there
  7   exchange A[i + 1] with A[r]   // pivot goes just to the right of the low side
  8   return i + 1                  // new index of the pivot
  --- ----------------------------- -------------------------------------------------

At the beginning of each iteration of the loop of lines 3–6, for any
array index k, the following conditions hold:

1.  if p ≤ k ≤ i, then A[k] ≤ x (the tan region of Figure 7.2);
2.  if i + 1 ≤ k ≤ j – 1, then A[k] > x (the blue region);
3.  if k = r, then A[k] = x (the yellow region).

We need to show that this loop invariant is true prior to the first
iteration, that each iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, that
the loop terminates, and that correctness follows from the invariant
when the loop terminates.

Initialization: Prior to the first iteration of the loop, we have i = p
– 1 and j = p. Because no values lie between p and i and no values lie
between i + 1 and j – 1, the first two conditions of the loop invariant
are trivially satisfied. The assignment in line 1 satisfies the third
condition.

Maintenance: As Figure 7.3 shows, we consider two cases, depending on
the outcome of the test in line 4. Figure 7.3(a) shows what happens when
A[j] > x: the only action in the loop is to increment j. After j has
been incremented, the second condition holds for A[j – 1] and all other
entries remain unchanged. Figure 7.3(b) shows what happens when A[j] ≤
x: the loop increments i, swaps A[i] and A[j], and then increments j.
Because of the swap, we now have that A[i] ≤ x, and condition 1 is
satisfied. Similarly, we also have that A[j – 1] > x, since the item
that was swapped into A[j – 1] is, by the loop invariant, greater than
x.

Termination: Since the loop makes exactly r – p iterations, it
terminates, whereupon j = r. At that point, the unexamined subarray A[j
: r – 1] is empty, and every entry in the array belongs to one of the
other three sets described by the invariant. Thus, the values in the
array have been partitioned into three sets: those less than or equal to
x (the low side), those greater than x (the high side), and a singleton
set containing x (the pivot).

[art]

Figure 7.1 The operation of PARTITION on a sample array. Array entry
A[r] becomes the pivot element x. Tan array elements all belong to the
low side of the partition, with values at most x. Blue elements belong
to the high side, with values greater than x. White elements have not
yet been put into either side of the partition, and the yellow element
is the pivot x. (a) The initial array and variable settings. None of the
elements have been placed into either side of the partition. (b) The
value 2 is “swapped with itself” and put into the low side. (c)–(d) The
values 8 and 7 are placed into to high side. (e) The values 1 and 8 are
swapped, and the low side grows. (f) The values 3 and 7 are swapped, and
the low side grows. (g)–(h) The high side of the partition grows to
include 5 and 6, and the loop terminates. (i) Line 7 swaps the pivot
element so that it lies between the two sides of the partition, and line
8 returns the pivot’s new index.

The final two lines of PARTITION finish up by swapping the pivot with
the leftmost element greater than x, thereby moving the pivot into its
correct place in the partitioned array, and then returning the pivot’s
new index. The output of PARTITION now satisfies the specifications
given for the divide step. In fact, it satisfies a slightly stronger
condition: after line 3 of QUICKSORT, A[q] is strictly less than every
element of A[q + 1 : r].

[art]

Figure 7.2 The four regions maintained by the procedure PARTITION on a
subarray A[p : r]. The tan values in A[p : i] are all less than or equal
to x, the blue values in A[i + 1 : j – 1] are all greater than x, the
white values in A[j : r – 1] have unknown relationships to x, and A[r] =
x.

[art]

Figure 7.3 The two cases for one iteration of procedure PARTITION. (a)
If A[j] > x, the only action is to increment j, which maintains the loop
invariant. (b) If A[j] ≤ x, index i is incremented, A[i] and A[j] are
swapped, and then j is incremented. Again, the loop invariant is
maintained.

Exercise 7.1-3 asks you to show that the running time of PARTITION on a
subarray A[p : r] of n = r – p + 1 elements is Θ(n).

Exercises

7.1-1

Using Figure 7.1 as a model, illustrate the operation of PARTITION on
the array A = 〈13, 19, 9, 5, 12, 8, 7, 4, 21, 2, 6, 11〉.

7.1-2

What value of q does PARTITION return when all elements in the subarray
A[p : r] have the same value? Modify PARTITION so that q = ⌊(p + r)/2⌋
when all elements in the subarray A[p : r] have the same value.

7.1-3

Give a brief argument that the running time of PARTITION on a subarray
of size n is Θ(n).

7.1-4

Modify QUICKSORT to sort into monotonically decreasing order.

7.2      Performance of quicksort

The running time of quicksort depends on how balanced each partitioning
is, which in turn depends on which elements are used as pivots. If the
two sides of a partition are about the same size—the partitioning is
balanced—then the algorithm runs asymptotically as fast as merge sort.
If the partitioning is unbalanced, however, it can run asymptotically as
slowly as insertion sort. To allow you to gain some intuition before
diving into a formal analysis, this section informally investigates how
quicksort performs under the assumptions of balanced versus unbalanced
partitioning.

But first, let’s briefly look at the maximum amount of memory that
quicksort requires. Although quicksort sorts in place according to the
definition on page 158, the amount of memory it uses—aside from the
array being sorted—is not constant. Since each recursive call requires a
constant amount of space on the runtime stack, outside of the array
being sorted, quicksort requires space proportional to the maximum depth
of the recursion. As we’ll see now, that could be as bad as Θ(n) in the
worst case.

Worst-case partitioning

The worst-case behavior for quicksort occurs when the partitioning
produces one subproblem with n – 1 elements and one with 0 elements.
(See Section 7.4.1.) Let us assume that this unbalanced partitioning
arises in each recursive call. The partitioning costs Θ(n) time. Since
the recursive call on an array of size 0 just returns without doing
anything, T (0) = Θ(1), and the recurrence for the running time is

  ------- --- --------------------------
  T (n)   =   T (n – 1) + T (0) + Θ(n)
          =   T (n – 1) + Θ(n).
  ------- --- --------------------------

By summing the costs incurred at each level of the recursion, we obtain
an arithmetic series (equation (A.3) on page 1141), which evaluates to
Θ(n²). Indeed, the substitution method can be used to prove that the
recurrence T (n) = T (n – 1) + Θ(n) has the solution T (n) = Θ(n²). (See
Exercise 7.2-1.)

Thus, if the partitioning is maximally unbalanced at every recursive
level of the algorithm, the running time is Θ(n²). The worst-case
running time of quicksort is therefore no better than that of insertion
sort. Moreover, the Θ(n²) running time occurs when the input array is
already completely sorted—a situation in which insertion sort runs in
O(n) time.

Best-case partitioning

In the most even possible split, PARTITION produces two subproblems,
each of size no more than n/2, since one is of size ⌊(n – 1)/2⌋ ≤ n/2
and one of size ⌈(n – 1)/2⌉ – 1 ≤ n/2. In this case, quicksort runs much
faster. An upper bound on the running time can then be described by the
recurrence

T (n) = 2T (n/2) + Θ(n).

By case 2 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1 on page 102), this
recurrence has the solution T (n) = Θ(n lg n). Thus, if the partitioning
is equally balanced at every level of the recursion, an asymptotically
faster algorithm results.

Balanced partitioning

As the analyses in Section 7.4 will show, the average-case running time
of quicksort is much closer to the best case than to the worst case. By
appreciating how the balance of the partitioning affects the recurrence
describing the running time, we can gain an understanding of why.

Suppose, for example, that the partitioning algorithm always produces a
9-to-1 proportional split, which at first blush seems quite unbalanced.
We then obtain the recurrence

T (n) = T (9n/10) + T (n/10) + Θ(n),

on the running time of quicksort. Figure 7.4 shows the recursion tree
for this recurrence, where for simplicity the Θ(n) driving function has
been replaced by n, which won’t affect the asymptotic solution of the
recurrence (as Exercise 4.7-1 on page 118 justifies). Every level of the
tree has cost n, until the recursion bottoms out in a base case at depth
log₁₀ n = Θ(lg n), and then the levels have cost at most n. The
recursion terminates at depth log_(10/9) n = Θ(lg n). Thus, with a
9-to-1 proportional split at every level of recursion, which intuitively
seems highly unbalanced, quicksort runs in O(n lg n) time—asymptotically
the same as if the split were right down the middle. Indeed, even a
99-to-1 split yields an O(n lg n) running time. In fact, any split of
constant proportionality yields a recursion tree of depth Θ(lg n), where
the cost at each level is O(n). The running time is therefore O(n lg n)
whenever the split has constant proportionality. The ratio of the split
affects only the constant hidden in the O-notation.

[art]

Figure 7.4 A recursion tree for QUICKSORT in which PARTITION always
produces a 9-to-1 split, yielding a running time of O(n lg n). Nodes
show subproblem sizes, with per-level costs on the right.

Intuition for the average case

To develop a clear notion of the expected behavior of quicksort, we must
assume something about how its inputs are distributed. Because quicksort
determines the sorted order using only comparisons between input
elements, its behavior depends on the relative ordering of the values in
the array elements given as the input, not on the particular values in
the array. As in the probabilistic analysis of the hiring problem in
Section 5.2, assume that all permutations of the input numbers are
equally likely and that the elements are distinct.

When quicksort runs on a random input array, the partitioning is highly
unlikely to happen in the same way at every level, as our informal
analysis has assumed. We expect that some of the splits will be
reasonably well balanced and that some will be fairly unbalanced. For
example, Exercise 7.2-6 asks you to show that about 80% of the time
PARTITION produces a split that is at least as balanced as 9 to 1, and
about 20% of the time it produces a split that is less balanced than 9
to 1.

[art]

Figure 7.5 (a) Two levels of a recursion tree for quicksort. The
partitioning at the root costs n and produces a “bad” split: two
subarrays of sizes 0 and n – 1. The partitioning of the subarray of size
n – 1 costs n – 1 and produces a “good” split: subarrays of size (n –
1)/2 – 1 and (n – 1)/2. (b) A single level of a recursion tree that is
well balanced. In both parts, the partitioning cost for the subproblems
shown with blue shading is Θ(n). Yet the subproblems remaining to be
solved in (a), shown with tan shading, are no larger than the
corresponding subproblems remaining to be solved in (b).

In the average case, PARTITION produces a mix of “good” and “bad”
splits. In a recursion tree for an average-case execution of PARTITION,
the good and bad splits are distributed randomly throughout the tree.
Suppose for the sake of intuition that the good and bad splits alternate
levels in the tree, and that the good splits are best-case splits and
the bad splits are worst-case splits. Figure 7.5(a) shows the splits at
two consecutive levels in the recursion tree. At the root of the tree,
the cost is n for partitioning, and the subarrays produced have sizes n
– 1 and 0: the worst case. At the next level, the subarray of size n – 1
undergoes best-case partitioning into subarrays of size (n – 1)/2 – 1
and (n – 1)/2. Let’s assume that the base-case cost is 1 for the
subarray of size 0.

The combination of the bad split followed by the good split produces
three subarrays of sizes 0, (n – 1)/2 – 1, and (n – 1)/2 at a combined
partitioning cost of Θ(n) + Θ(n – 1) = Θ(n). This situation is at most a
constant factor worse than that in Figure 7.5(b), namely, where a single
level of partitioning produces two subarrays of size (n – 1)/2, at a
cost of Θ(n). Yet this latter situation is balanced! Intuitively, the
Θ(n – 1) cost of the bad split in Figure 7.5(a) can be absorbed into the
Θ(n) cost of the good split, and the resulting split is good. Thus, the
running time of quicksort, when levels alternate between good and bad
splits, is like the running time for good splits alone: still O(n lg n),
but with a slightly larger constant hidden by the O-notation. We’ll
analyze the expected running time of a randomized version of quicksort
rigorously in Section 7.4.2.

Exercises

7.2-1

Use the substitution method to prove that the recurrence T (n) = T (n
– 1) + Θ(n) has the solution T (n) = Θ(n²), as claimed at the beginning
of Section 7.2.

7.2-2

What is the running time of QUICKSORT when all elements of array A have
the same value?

7.2-3

Show that the running time of QUICKSORT is Θ(n²) when the array A
contains distinct elements and is sorted in decreasing order.

7.2-4

Banks often record transactions on an account in order of the times of
the transactions, but many people like to receive their bank statements
with checks listed in order by check number. People usually write checks
in order by check number, and merchants usually cash them with
reasonable dispatch. The problem of converting time-of-transaction
ordering to check-number ordering is therefore the problem of sorting
almost-sorted input. Explain persuasively why the procedure
INSERTION-SORT might tend to beat the procedure QUICKSORT on this
problem.

7.2-5

Suppose that the splits at every level of quicksort are in the constant
proportion α to β, where α + β = 1 and 0 < α ≤ β < 1. Show that the
minimum depth of a leaf in the recursion tree is approximately
log_(1/α) n and that the maximum depth is approximately log_(1/β) n.
(Don’t worry about integer round-off.)

7.2-6

Consider an array with distinct elements and for which all permutations
of the elements are equally likely. Argue that for any constant 0 < α ≤
1/2, the probability is approximately 1 – 2α that PARTITION produces a
split at least as balanced as 1 – α to α.

7.3      A randomized version of quicksort

In exploring the average-case behavior of quicksort, we have assumed
that all permutations of the input numbers are equally likely. This
assumption does not always hold, however, as, for example, in the
situation laid out in the premise for Exercise 7.2-4. Section 5.3 showed
that judicious randomization can sometimes be added to an algorithm to
obtain good expected performance over all inputs. For quicksort,
randomization yields a fast and practical algorithm. Many software
libraries provide a randomized version of quicksort as their algorithm
of choice for sorting large data sets.

In Section 5.3, the RANDOMIZED-HIRE-ASSISTANT procedure explicitly
permutes its input and then runs the deterministic HIRE-ASSISTANT
procedure. We could do the same for quicksort as well, but a different
randomization technique yields a simpler analysis. Instead of always
using A[r] as the pivot, a randomized version randomly chooses the pivot
from the subarray A[p : r], where each element in A[p : r] has an equal
probability of being chosen. It then exchanges that element with A[r]
before partitioning. Because the pivot is chosen randomly, we expect the
split of the input array to be reasonably well balanced on average.

The changes to PARTITION and QUICKSORT are small. The new partitioning
procedure, RANDOMIZED-PARTITION, simply swaps before performing the
partitioning. The new quicksort procedure, RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT, calls
RANDOMIZED-PARTITION instead of PARTITION. We’ll analyze this algorithm
in the next section.

RANDOMIZED-PARTITION(A, p, r)

  --- ---------------------------
  1   i = RANDOM(p, r)
  2   exchange A[r] with A[i]
  3   return PARTITION(A, p, r)
  --- ---------------------------

RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT(A, p, r)

  --- -----------------------------------
  1   if p < r
  2   q = RANDOMIZED-PARTITION(A, p, r)
  3   RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT(A, p, q – 1)
  4   RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT(A, q + 1, r)
  --- -----------------------------------

Exercises

7.3-1

Why do we analyze the expected running time of a randomized algorithm
and not its worst-case running time?

7.3-2

When RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT runs, how many calls are made to the
random-number generator RANDOM in the worst case? How about in the best
case? Give your answer in terms of Θ-notation.

7.4      Analysis of quicksort

Section 7.2 gave some intuition for the worst-case behavior of quicksort
and for why we expect the algorithm to run quickly. This section
analyzes the behavior of quicksort more rigorously. We begin with a
worst-case analysis, which applies to either QUICKSORT or
RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT, and conclude with an analysis of the expected
running time of RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT.

7.4.1    Worst-case analysis

We saw in Section 7.2 that a worst-case split at every level of
recursion in quicksort produces a Θ(n²) running time, which,
intuitively, is the worst-case running time of the algorithm. We now
prove this assertion.

We’ll use the substitution method (see Section 4.3) to show that the
running time of quicksort is O(n²). Let T (n) be the worst-case time for
the procedure QUICKSORT on an input of size n. Because the procedure
PARTITION produces two subproblems with total size n – 1, we obtain the
recurrence

[art]

We guess that T (n) ≤ cn² for some constant c > 0. Substituting this
guess into recurrence (7.1) yields

  ------- --- -----------------------------------------------------
  T (n)   ≤   max {cq² + c(n – 1 – q)² : 0 ≤ q ≤ n – 1} + Θ(n)
          =   c · max {q² + (n – 1 – q)² : 0 ≤ q ≤ n – 1} + Θ(n).
  ------- --- -----------------------------------------------------

Let’s focus our attention on the maximization. For q = 0, 1, … , n – 1,
we have

  ------------------- --- --------------------------------
  q² + (n – 1 – q)²   =   q² + (n – 1)² – 2q(n – 1) + q²
                      =   (n – 1)² + 2q(q – (n – 1))
                      ≤   (n – 1)²
  ------------------- --- --------------------------------

because q ≤ n – 1 implies that 2q(q – (n – 1)) ≤ 0. Thus every term in
the maximization is bounded by (n – 1)².

Continuing with our analysis of T (n), we obtain

  ------- --- ------------------------
  T (n)   ≤   c(n – 1)² + Θ(n)
          ≤   cn² – c(2n – 1) + Θ(n)
          ≤   cn²,
  ------- --- ------------------------

by picking the constant c large enough that the c(2n – 1) term dominates
the Θ(n) term. Thus T (n) = O(n²). Section 7.2 showed a specific case
where quicksort takes Ω(n²) time: when partitioning is maximally
unbalanced. Thus, the worst-case running time of quicksort is Θ(n²).

7.4.2    Expected running time

We have already seen the intuition behind why the expected running time
of RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT is O(n lg n): if, in each level of recursion,
the split induced by RANDOMIZED-PARTITION puts any constant fraction of
the elements on one side of the partition, then the recursion tree has
depth Θ(lg n) and O(n) work is performed at each level. Even if we add a
few new levels with the most unbalanced split possible between these
levels, the total time remains O(n lg n). We can analyze the expected
running time of RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT precisely by first understanding
how the partitioning procedure operates and then using this
understanding to derive an O(n lg n) bound on the expected running time.
This upper bound on the expected running time, combined with the Θ(n lg
n) best-case bound we saw in Section 7.2, yields a Θ(n lg n) expected
running time. We assume throughout that the values of the elements being
sorted are distinct.

Running time and comparisons

The QUICKSORT and RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT procedures differ only in how
they select pivot elements. They are the same in all other respects. We
can therefore analyze RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT by considering the QUICKSORT
and PARTITION procedures, but with the assumption that pivot elements
are selected randomly from the subarray passed to RANDOMIZED-PARTITION.
Let’s start by relating the asymptotic running time of QUICKSORT to the
number of times elements are compared (all in line 4 of PARTITION),
understanding that this analysis also applies to RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT.
Note that we are counting the number of times that array elements are
compared, not comparisons of indices.

Lemma 7.1

The running time of QUICKSORT on an n-element array is O(n + X), where X
is the number of element comparisons performed.

Proof   The running time of QUICKSORT is dominated by the time spent in
the PARTITION procedure. Each time PARTITION is called, it selects a
pivot element, which is never included in any future recursive calls to
QUICKSORT and PARTITION. Thus, there can be at most n calls to PARTITION
over the entire execution of the quicksort algorithm. Each time
QUICKSORT calls PARTITION, it also recursively calls itself twice, so
there are at most 2n calls to the QUICKSORT procedure itself.

One call to PARTITION takes O(1) time plus an amount of time that is
proportional to the number of iterations of the for loop in lines 3–6.
Each iteration of this for loop performs one comparison in line 4,
comparing the pivot element to another element of the array A.
Therefore, the total time spent in the for loop across all executions is
proportional to X. Since there are at most n calls to PARTITION and the
time spent outside the for loop is O(1) for each call, the total time
spent in PARTITION outside of the for loop is O(n). Thus the total time
for quicksort is O(n + X).

▪

Our goal for analyzing RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT, therefore, is to compute
the expected value E [X] of the random variable X denoting the total
number of comparisons performed in all calls to PARTITION. To do so, we
must understand when the quicksort algorithm compares two elements of
the array and when it does not. For ease of analysis, let’s index the
elements of the array A by their position in the sorted output, rather
than their position in the input. That is, although the elements in A
may start out in any order, we’ll refer to them by z₁, z₂, … , z_(n),
where z₁ < z₂ < ⋯ < z_(n), with strict inequality because we assume that
all elements are distinct. We denote the set {z_(i), z_(i + 1), … ,
z_(j)} by Z_(ij).

The next lemma characterizes when two elements are compared.

Lemma 7.2

During the execution of RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT on an array of n distinct
elements z₁ < z₂ < ⋯ < z_(n), an element z_(i) is compared with an
element z_(j), where i < j, if and only if one of them is chosen as a
pivot before any other element in the set Z_(ij). Moreover, no two
elements are ever compared twice.

Proof   Let’s look at the first time that an element x ∈ Z_(ij) is
chosen as a pivot during the execution of the algorithm. There are three
cases to consider. If x is neither z_(i) nor z_(j)—that is, z_(i) < x <
z_(j)—then z_(i) and z_(j) are not compared at any subsequent time,
because they fall into different sides of the partition around x. If x =
z_(i), then PARTITION compares z_(i) with every other item in Z_(ij).
Similarly, if x = z_(j), then PARTITION compares z_(j) with every other
item in Z_(ij). Thus, z_(i) and z_(j) are compared if and only if the
first element to be chosen as a pivot from Z_(ij) is either z_(i) or
z_(j). In the latter two cases, where one of z_(i) and z_(j) is chosen
as a pivot, since the pivot is removed from future comparisons, it is
never compared again with the other element.

▪

As an example of this lemma, consider an input to quicksort of the
numbers 1 through 10 in some arbitrary order. Suppose that the first
pivot element is 7. Then the first call to PARTITION separates the
numbers into two sets: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and {8, 9, 10}. In the
process, the pivot element 7 is compared with all other elements, but no
number from the first set (e.g., 2) is or ever will be compared with any
number from the second set (e.g., 9). The values 7 and 9 are compared
because 7 is the first item from Z_(7,9) to be chosen as a pivot. In
contrast, 2 and 9 are never compared because the first pivot element
chosen from Z_(2,9) is 7.

The next lemma gives the probability that two elements are compared.

Lemma 7.3

Consider an execution of the procedure RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT on an array
of n distinct elements z₁ < z₂ < ⋯ < z_(n). Given two arbitrary elements
z_(i) and z_(j) where i < j, the probability that they are compared is
2/(j – i + 1).

Proof   Let’s look at the tree of recursive calls that
RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT makes, and consider the sets of elements provided
as input to each call. Initially, the root set contains all the elements
of Z_(ij), since the root set contains every element in A. The elements
belonging to Z_(ij) all stay together for each recursive call of
RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT until PARTITION chooses some element x ∈ Z_(ij) as
a pivot. From that point on, the pivot x appears in no subsequent input
set. The first time that RANDOMIZED-SELECT chooses a pivot x ∈ Z_(ij)
from a set containing all the elements of Z_(ij), each element in Z_(ij)
is equally likely to be x because the pivot is chosen uniformly at
random. Since |Z_(ij)| = j – i + 1, the probability is 1/(j – i + 1)
that any given element in Z_(ij) is the first pivot chosen from Z_(ij).
Thus, by Lemma 7.2, we have

  ----------------------------------- --- -----------------------------------------------------------
  Pr {z_(i) is compared with z_(j)}   =   Pr {z_(i) or z_(j) is the first pivot chosen from Z_(ij)}
                                      =   Pr {z_(i) is the first pivot chosen from Z_(ij)}
                                          + Pr {z_(j) is the first pivot chosen from Z_(ij)}
                                      =   [art],
  ----------------------------------- --- -----------------------------------------------------------

where the second line follows from the first because the two events are
mutually exclusive.

▪

We can now complete the analysis of randomized quicksort.

Theorem 7.4

The expected running time of RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT on an input of n
distinct elements is O(n lg n).

Proof   The analysis uses indicator random variables (see Section 5.2).
Let the n distinct elements be z₁ < z₂ < ⋯ < z_(n), and for 1 ≤ i < j ≤
n, define the indicator random variable X_(ij) = I {z_(i) is compared
with z_(j)}. From Lemma 7.2, each pair is compared at most once, and so
we can express X as follows:

[art]

By taking expectations of both sides and using linearity of expectation
(equation (C.24) on page 1192) and Lemma 5.1 on page 130, we obtain

[art]

We can evaluate this sum using a change of variables (k = j – i) and the
bound on the harmonic series in equation (A.9) on page 1142:

[art]

This bound and Lemma 7.1 allow us to conclude that the expected running
time of RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT is O(n lg n) (assuming that the element
values are distinct).

▪

Exercises

7.4-1

Show that the recurrence

T (n) = max {T (q) + T (n – q – 1) : 0 ≤ q ≤ n – 1} + Θ(n)

has a lower bound of T (n) = Ω (n²).

7.4-2

Show that quicksort’s best-case running time is Ω(n lg n).

7.4-3

Show that the expression q² + (n – q – 1)² achieves its maximum value
over q = 0, 1, … , n – 1 when q = 0 or q = n – 1.

7.4-4

Show that RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT’s expected running time is Ω(n lg n).

7.4-5

Coarsening the recursion, as we did in Problem 2-1 for merge sort, is a
common way to improve the running time of quicksort in practice. We
modify the base case of the recursion so that if the array has fewer
than k elements, the subarray is sorted by insertion sort, rather than
by continued recursive calls to quicksort. Argue that the randomized
version of this sorting algorithm runs in O(nk + n lg(n/k)) expected
time. How should you pick k, both in theory and in practice?

★ 7.4-6

Consider modifying the PARTITION procedure by randomly picking three
elements from subarray A[p : r] and partitioning about their median (the
middle value of the three elements). Approximate the probability of
getting worse than an α-to-(1–α) split, as a function of α in the range
0 < α < 1/2.

Problems

7-1     Hoare partition correctness

The version of PARTITION given in this chapter is not the original
partitioning algorithm. Here is the original partitioning algorithm,
which is due to C. A. R. Hoare.

HOARE-PARTITION(A, p, r)

  ----- -------------------------
    1   x = A[p]
    2   i = p – 1
    3   j = r + 1
    4   while TRUE
    5   repeat
    6   j = j – 1
    7   until A[j] ≤ x
    8   repeat
    9   i = i + 1
  10    until A[i] ≥ x
  11    if i < j
  12    exchange A[i] with A[j]
  13    else return j
  ----- -------------------------

a. Demonstrate the operation of HOARE-PARTITION on the array A = 〈13,
19, 9, 5, 12, 8, 7, 4, 11, 2, 6, 21〉, showing the values of the array
and the indices i and j after each iteration of the while loop in lines
4–13.

b. Describe how the PARTITION procedure in Section 7.1 differs from
HOARE-PARTITION when all elements in A[p : r] are equal. Describe a
practical advantage of HOARE-PARTITION over PARTITION for use in
quicksort.

The next three questions ask you to give a careful argument that the
procedure HOARE-PARTITION is correct. Assuming that the subarray A[p :
r] contains at least two elements, prove the following:

c. The indices i and j are such that the procedure never accesses an
element of A outside the subarray A[p : r].

d. When HOARE-PARTITION terminates, it returns a value j such that p ≤ j
< r.

e. Every element of A[p : j] is less than or equal to every element of
A[j + 1 : r] when HOARE-PARTITION terminates.

The PARTITION procedure in Section 7.1 separates the pivot value
(originally in A[r]) from the two partitions it forms. The
HOARE-PARTITION procedure, on the other hand, always places the pivot
value (originally in A[p]) into one of the two partitions A[p : j] and
A[j + 1 : r]. Since p ≤ j < r, neither partition is empty.

f. Rewrite the QUICKSORT procedure to use HOARE-PARTITION.

7-2     Quicksort with equal element values

The analysis of the expected running time of randomized quicksort in
Section 7.4.2 assumes that all element values are distinct. This problem
examines what happens when they are not.

a. Suppose that all element values are equal. What is randomized
quicksort’s running time in this case?

b. The PARTITION procedure returns an index q such that each element of
A[p : q – 1] is less than or equal to A[q] and each element of A[q + 1 :
r] is greater than A[q]. Modify the PARTITION procedure to produce a
procedure PARTITION′ (A, p, r), which permutes the elements of A[p : r]
and returns two indices q and t, where p ≤ q ≤ t ≤ r, such that

- all elements of A[q : t] are equal,
- each element of A[p : q – 1] is less than A[q], and
- each element of A[t + 1 : r] is greater than A[q].

Like PARTITION, your PARTITION′ procedure should take Θ(r – p) time.

c. Modify the RANDOMIZED-PARTITION procedure to call PARTITION′, and
name the new procedure RANDOMIZED-PARTITION′. Then modify the QUICKSORT
procedure to produce a procedure QUICKSORT′ (A, p, r) that calls
RANDOMIZED-PARTITION′ and recurses only on partitions where elements are
not known to be equal to each other.

d. Using QUICKSORT′, adjust the analysis in Section 7.4.2 to avoid the
assumption that all elements are distinct.

7-3     Alternative quicksort analysis

An alternative analysis of the running time of randomized quicksort
focuses on the expected running time of each individual recursive call
to RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT, rather than on the number of comparisons
performed. As in the analysis of Section 7.4.2, assume that the values
of the elements are distinct.

a. Argue that, given an array of size n, the probability that any
particular element is chosen as the pivot is 1/n. Use this probability
to define indicator random variables X_(i) = I {ith smallest element is
chosen as the pivot}. What is E [X_(i)]?

b. Let T (n) be a random variable denoting the running time of quicksort
on an array of size n. Argue that

[art]

c. Show how to rewrite equation (7.2) as

[art]

d. Show that

[art]

for n ≥ 2. (Hint: Split the summation into two parts, one summation for
q = 1, 2, … , ⌈n/2⌉ – 1 and one summation for q = ⌈n/2⌉ , … , n – 1.)

e. Using the bound from equation (7.4), show that the recurrence in
equation (7.3) has the solution E [T (n)] = O(n lg n). (Hint: Show, by
substitution, that E [T (n)] ≤ an lg n for sufficiently large n and for
some positive constant a.)

7-4     Stooge sort

Professors Howard, Fine, and Howard have proposed a deceptively simple
sorting algorithm, named stooge sort in their honor, appearing on the
following page.

a. Argue that the call STOOGE-SORT(A, 1, n) correctly sorts the array
A[1 : n].

b. Give a recurrence for the worst-case running time of STOOGE-SORT and
a tight asymptotic (Θ-notation) bound on the worst-case running time.

c. Compare the worst-case running time of STOOGE-SORT with that of
insertion sort, merge sort, heapsort, and quicksort. Do the professors
deserve tenure?

STOOGE-SORT(A, p, r)

  --- -------------------------- ---------------------------
  1   if A[p] > A[r]             
  2   exchange A[p] with A[r]    
  3   if p + 1 < r               
  4   k = ⌊(r – p + 1)/3⌋        // round down
  5   STOOGE-SORT(A, p, r – k)   // first two-thirds
  6   STOOGE-SORT(A, p + k, r)   // last two-thirds
  7   STOOGE-SORT(A, p, r – k)   // first two-thirds again
  --- -------------------------- ---------------------------

7-5 Stack depth for quicksort

The QUICKSORT procedure of Section 7.1 makes two recursive calls to
itself. After QUICKSORT calls PARTITION, it recursively sorts the low
side of the partition and then it recursively sorts the high side of the
partition. The second recursive call in QUICKSORT is not really
necessary, because the procedure can instead use an iterative control
structure. This transformation technique, called tail-recursion
elimination, is provided automatically by good compilers. Applying
tail-recursion elimination transforms QUICKSORT into the TRE-QUICKSORT
procedure.

TRE-QUICKSORT(A, p, r)

  --- ------------------------------------------
  1   while p < r
  2   // Partition and then sort the low side.
  3   q = PARTITION(A, p, r)
  4   TRE-QUICKSORT(A, p, q – 1)
  5   p = q + 1
  --- ------------------------------------------

a. Argue that TRE-QUICKSORT(A, 1, n) correctly sorts the array A[1 : n].

Compilers usually execute recursive procedures by using a stack that
contains pertinent information, including the parameter values, for each
recursive call. The information for the most recent call is at the top
of the stack, and the information for the initial call is at the bottom.
When a procedure is called, its information is pushed onto the stack,
and when it terminates, its information is popped. Since we assume that
array parameters are represented by pointers, the information for each
procedure call on the stack requires O(1) stack space. The stack depth
is the maximum amount of stack space used at any time during a
computation.

b. Describe a scenario in which TRE-QUICKSORT’s stack depth is Θ(n) on
an n-element input array.

c. Modify TRE-QUICKSORT so that the worst-case stack depth is Θ(lg n).
Maintain the O(n lg n) expected running time of the algorithm.

7-6     Median-of-3 partition

One way to improve the RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT procedure is to partition
around a pivot that is chosen more carefully than by picking a random
element from the subarray. A common approach is the median-of-3 method:
choose the pivot as the median (middle element) of a set of 3 elements
randomly selected from the subarray. (See Exercise 7.4-6.) For this
problem, assume that the n elements in the input subarray A[p : r] are
distinct and that n ≥ 3. Denote the sorted version of A[p : r] by z₁,
z₂, … , z_(n). Using the median-of-3 method to choose the pivot element
x, define p_(i) = Pr {x = z_(i)}.

a. Give an exact formula for p_(i) as a function of n and i for i = 2,
3, … , n – 1. (Observe that p₁ = p_(n) = 0.)

b. By what amount does the median-of-3 method increase the likelihood of
choosing the pivot to be x = z_(⌊(n + 1)/2⌋), the median of A[p : r],
compared with the ordinary implementation? Assume that n → ∞, and give
the limiting ratio of these probabilities.

c. Suppose that we define a “good” split to mean choosing the pivot as x
= z_(i), where n/3 ≤ i ≤ 2n/3. By what amount does the median-of-3
method increase the likelihood of getting a good split compared with the
ordinary implementation? (Hint: Approximate the sum by an integral.)

d. Argue that in the Ω(n lg n) running time of quicksort, the
median-of-3 method affects only the constant factor.

7-7     Fuzzy sorting of intervals

Consider a sorting problem in which you do not know the numbers exactly.
Instead, for each number, you know an interval on the real line to which
it belongs. That is, you are given n closed intervals of the form
[a_(i), b_(i)], where a_(i) ≤ b_(i). The goal is to fuzzy-sort these
intervals: to produce a permutation 〈i₁, i₂, … , i_(n)〉 of the
intervals such that for j = 1, 2, … , n, there exist [art] satisfying c₁
≤ c₂ ≤ ⋯ ≤ c_(n).

a. Design a randomized algorithm for fuzzy-sorting n intervals. Your
algorithm should have the general structure of an algorithm that
quicksorts the left endpoints (the a_(i) values), but it should take
advantage of overlapping intervals to improve the running time. (As the
intervals overlap more and more, the problem of fuzzy-sorting the
intervals becomes progressively easier. Your algorithm should take
advantage of such overlapping, to the extent that it exists.)

b. Argue that your algorithm runs in Θ(n lg n) expected time in general,
but runs in Θ(n) expected time when all of the intervals overlap (i.e.,
when there exists a value x such that x ∈ [a_(i), b_(i)] for all i).
Your algorithm should not be checking for this case explicitly, but
rather, its performance should naturally improve as the amount of
overlap increases.

Chapter notes

Quicksort was invented by Hoare [219], and his version of PARTITION
appears in Problem 7-1. Bentley [51, p. 117] attributes the PARTITION
procedure given in Section 7.1 to N. Lomuto. The analysis in Section 7.4
based on an analysis due to Motwani and Raghavan [336]. Sedgewick [401]
and Bentley [51] provide good references on the details of
implementation and how they matter.

McIlroy [323] shows how to engineer a “killer adversary” that produces
an array on which virtually any implementation of quicksort takes Θ(n²)
time.

¹ You can enforce the assumption that the values in an array A are
distinct at the cost of Θ(n) additional space and only constant overhead
in running time by converting each input value A[i] to an ordered pair
(A[i], i) with (A[i], i) < (A[j], j) if A[i] < A[j] or if A[i] = A[j]
and i < j. There are also more practical variants of quicksort that work
well when elements are not distinct.

8          Sorting in Linear Time

We have now seen a handful of algorithms that can sort n numbers in O(n
lg n) time. Whereas merge sort and heapsort achieve this upper bound in
the worst case, quicksort achieves it on average. Moreover, for each of
these algorithms, we can produce a sequence of n input numbers that
causes the algorithm to run in Ω(n lg n) time.

These algorithms share an interesting property: the sorted order they
determine is based only on comparisons between the input elements. We
call such sorting algorithms comparison sorts. All the sorting
algorithms introduced thus far are comparison sorts.

In Section 8.1, we’ll prove that any comparison sort must make Ω(n lg n)
comparisons in the worst case to sort n elements. Thus, merge sort and
heapsort are asymptotically optimal, and no comparison sort exists that
is faster by more than a constant factor.

Sections 8.2, 8.3, and 8.4 examine three sorting algorithms—counting
sort, radix sort, and bucket sort—that run in linear time on certain
types of inputs. Of course, these algorithms use operations other than
comparisons to determine the sorted order. Consequently, the Ω(n lg n)
lower bound does not apply to them.

8.1      Lower bounds for sorting

A comparison sort uses only comparisons between elements to gain order
information about an input sequence 〈a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)〉. That is,
given two elements a_(i) and a_(j), it performs one of the tests a_(i) <
a_(j), a_(i) ≤ a_(j), a_(i) = a_(j), a_(i) ≥ a_(j), or a_(i) > a_(j) to
determine their relative order. It may not inspect the values of the
elements or gain order information about them in any other way.

Since we are proving a lower bound, we assume without loss of generality
in this section that all the input elements are distinct. After all, a
lower bound for distinct elements applies when elements may or may not
be distinct. Consequently, comparisons of the form a_(i) = a_(j) are
useless, which means that we can assume that no comparisons for exact
equality occur. Moreover, the comparisons a_(i) ≤ a_(j), a_(i) ≥ a_(j),
a_(i) > a_(j), and a_(i) < a_(j) are all equivalent in that they yield
identical information about the relative order of a_(i) and a_(j). We
therefore assume that all comparisons have the form a_(i) ≤ a_(j).

[art]

Figure 8.1 The decision tree for insertion sort operating on three
elements. An internal node (shown in blue) annotated by i : j indicates
a comparison between a_(i) and a_(j). A leaf annotated by the
permutation 〈π(1), π(2), … , π(n)〉 indicates the ordering a_(π(1)) ≤
a_(π(2)) ≤ ⋯ ≤ a_(π(n)). The highlighted path indicates the decisions
made when sorting the input sequence 〈a₁ = 6, a₂ = 8, a₃ = 5〉. Going
left from the root node, labeled 1:2, indicates that a₁ ≤ a₂. Going
right from the node labeled 2:3 indicates that a₂ > a₃. Going right from
the node labeled 1:3 indicates that a₁ > a₃. Therefore, we have the
ordering a₃ ≤ a₁ ≤ a₂, as indicated in the leaf labeled 〈3, 1, 2〉.
Because the three input elements have 3! = 6 possible permutations, the
decision tree must have at least 6 leaves.

The decision-tree model

We can view comparison sorts abstractly in terms of decision trees. A
decision tree is a full binary tree (each node is either a leaf or has
both children) that represents the comparisons between elements that are
performed by a particular sorting algorithm operating on an input of a
given size. Control, data movement, and all other aspects of the
algorithm are ignored. Figure 8.1 shows the decision tree corresponding
to the insertion sort algorithm from Section 2.1 operating on an input
sequence of three elements.

A decision tree has each internal node annotated by i : j for some i and
j in the range 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, where n is the number of elements in the
input sequence. We also annotate each leaf by a permutation 〈π(1),
π(2), … , π(n)〉. (See Section C.1 for background on permutations.)
Indices in the internal nodes and the leaves always refer to the
original positions of the array elements at the start of the sorting
algorithm. The execution of the comparison sorting algorithm corresponds
to tracing a simple path from the root of the decision tree down to a
leaf. Each internal node indicates a comparison a_(i) ≤ a_(j). The left
subtree then dictates subsequent comparisons once we know that a_(i) ≤
a_(j), and the right subtree dictates subsequent comparisons when
a_(i) > a_(j). Arriving at a leaf, the sorting algorithm has established
the ordering a_(π(1)) ≤ a_(π(2)) ≤ ⋯ ≤ a_(π(n)). Because any correct
sorting algorithm must be able to produce each permutation of its input,
each of the n! permutations on n elements must appear as at least one of
the leaves of the decision tree for a comparison sort to be correct.
Furthermore, each of these leaves must be reachable from the root by a
downward path corresponding to an actual execution of the comparison
sort. (We call such leaves “reachable.”) Thus, we consider only decision
trees in which each permutation appears as a reachable leaf.

A lower bound for the worst case

The length of the longest simple path from the root of a decision tree
to any of its reachable leaves represents the worst-case number of
comparisons that the corresponding sorting algorithm performs.
Consequently, the worst-case number of comparisons for a given
comparison sort algorithm equals the height of its decision tree. A
lower bound on the heights of all decision trees in which each
permutation appears as a reachable leaf is therefore a lower bound on
the running time of any comparison sort algorithm. The following theorem
establishes such a lower bound.

Theorem 8.1

Any comparison sort algorithm requires Ω(n lg n) comparisons in the
worst case.

Proof   From the preceding discussion, it suffices to determine the
height of a decision tree in which each permutation appears as a
reachable leaf. Consider a decision tree of height h with l reachable
leaves corresponding to a comparison sort on n elements. Because each of
the n! permutations of the input appears as one or more leaves, we have
n! ≤ l. Since a binary tree of height h has no more than 2^(h) leaves,
we have

n! ≤ l ≤ 2^(h),

which, by taking logarithms, implies

  --- --- ------------ -----------------------------------------------------
  h   ≥   lg(n!)       (since the lg function is monotonically increasing)
      =   Ω (n lg n)   (by equation (3.28) on page 67).
  --- --- ------------ -----------------------------------------------------

▪

Corollary 8.2

Heapsort and merge sort are asymptotically optimal comparison sorts.

Proof   The O(n lg n) upper bounds on the running times for heapsort and
merge sort match the Ω(n lg n) worst-case lower bound from Theorem 8.1.

▪

Exercises

8.1-1

What is the smallest possible depth of a leaf in a decision tree for a
comparison sort?

8.1-2

Obtain asymptotically tight bounds on lg(n!) without using Stirling’s
approximation. Instead, evaluate the summation [art] using techniques
from Section A.2.

8.1-3

Show that there is no comparison sort whose running time is linear for
at least half of the n! inputs of length n. What about a fraction of 1/n
of the inputs of length n? What about a fraction 1/2^(n)?

8.1-4

You are given an n-element input sequence, and you know in advance that
it is partly sorted in the following sense. Each element initially in
position i such that i mod 4 = 0 is either already in its correct
position, or it is one place away from its correct position. For
example, you know that after sorting, the element initially in position
12 belongs in position 11, 12, or 13. You have no advance information
about the other elements, in positions i where i mod 4 ≠ 0. Show that an
Ω(n lg n) lower bound on comparison-based sorting still holds in this
case.

8.2      Counting sort

Counting sort assumes that each of the n input elements is an integer in
the range 0 to k, for some integer k. It runs in Θ(n + k) time, so that
when k = O(n), counting sort runs in Θ(n) time.

Counting sort first determines, for each input element x, the number of
elements less than or equal to x. It then uses this information to place
element x directly into its position in the output array. For example,
if 17 elements are less than or equal to x, then x belongs in output
position 17. We must modify this scheme slightly to handle the situation
in which several elements have the same value, since we do not want them
all to end up in the same position.

The COUNTING-SORT procedure on the facing page takes as input an array
A[1 : n], the size n of this array, and the limit k on the nonnegative
integer values in A. It returns its sorted output in the array B[1 : n]
and uses an array C [0 : k] for temporary working storage.

COUNTING-SORT(A, n, k)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | let B[1 : n] and C [0 : k] be |                               |
|     | new arrays                    |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | for i = 0 to k                |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | C [i] = 0                     |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | for j = 1 to n                |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | C [A[j]] = C [A[j]] + 1       |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   6 | // C [i] now contains the number of elements equal to i.      |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   7 | for i = 1 to k                |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   8 | C [i] = C [i] + C [i – 1]     |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | // C [i] now contains the number of elements less than or     |
|     | equal to i.                                                   |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10  | // Copy A to B, starting from the end of A.                   |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 11  | for j = n downto 1            |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 12  | B[C [A[j]]] = A[j]            |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 13  | C [A[j]] = C [A[j]] – 1       | // to handle duplicate values |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 14  | return B                      |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+

Figure 8.2 illustrates counting sort. After the for loop of lines 2–3
initializes the array C to all zeros, the for loop of lines 4–5 makes a
pass over the array A to inspect each input element. Each time it finds
an input element whose value is i, it increments C [i]. Thus, after line
5, C [i] holds the number of input elements equal to i for each integer
i = 0, 1, … , k. Lines 7–8 determine for each i = 0, 1, … , k how many
input elements are less than or equal to i by keeping a running sum of
the array C.

Finally, the for loop of lines 11–13 makes another pass over A, but in
reverse, to place each element A[j] into its correct sorted position in
the output array B. If all n elements are distinct, then when line 11 is
first entered, for each A[j], the value C [A[j]] is the correct final
position of A[j] in the output array, since there are C [A[j]] elements
less than or equal to A[j]. Because the elements might not be distinct,
the loop decrements C [A[j]] each time it places a value A[j] into B.
Decrementing C [A[j]] causes the previous element in A with a value
equal to A[j], if one exists, to go to the position immediately before
A[j] in the output array B.

How much time does counting sort require? The for loop of lines 2–3
takes Θ(k) time, the for loop of lines 4–5 takes Θ(n) time, the for loop
of lines 7–8 takes Θ(k) time, and the for loop of lines 11–13 takes Θ(n)
time. Thus, the overall time is Θ(k + n). In practice, we usually use
counting sort when we have k = O(n), in which case the running time is
Θ(n).

Counting sort can beat the lower bound of Ω(n lg n) proved in Section
8.1 because it is not a comparison sort. In fact, no comparisons between
input elements occur anywhere in the code. Instead, counting sort uses
the actual values of the elements to index into an array. The Ω(n lg n)
lower bound for sorting does not apply when we depart from the
comparison sort model.

[art]

Figure 8.2 The operation of COUNTING-SORT on an input array A[1 : 8],
where each element of A is a nonnegative integer no larger than k = 5.
(a) The array A and the auxiliary array C after line 5. (b) The array C
after line 8. (c)–(e) The output array B and the auxiliary array C after
one, two, and three iterations of the loop in lines 11–13, respectively.
Only the tan elements of array B have been filled in. (f) The final
sorted output array B.

An important property of counting sort is that it is stable: elements
with the same value appear in the output array in the same order as they
do in the input array. That is, it breaks ties between two elements by
the rule that whichever element appears first in the input array appears
first in the output array. Normally, the property of stability is
important only when satellite data are carried around with the element
being sorted. Counting sort’s stability is important for another reason:
counting sort is often used as a subroutine in radix sort. As we shall
see in the next section, in order for radix sort to work correctly,
counting sort must be stable.

Exercises

8.2-1

Using Figure 8.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of COUNTING-SORT
on the array A = 〈6, 0, 2, 0, 1, 3, 4, 6, 1, 3, 2〉.

8.2-2

Prove that COUNTING-SORT is stable.

8.2-3

Suppose that we were to rewrite the for loop header in line 11 of the
COUNTING-SORT as

  ---- ----------------
  11   for j = 1 to n
  ---- ----------------

Show that the algorithm still works properly, but that it is not stable.
Then rewrite the pseudocode for counting sort so that elements with the
same value are written into the output array in order of increasing
index and the algorithm is stable.

8.2-4

Prove the following loop invariant for COUNTING-SORT:

At the start of each iteration of the for loop of lines 11–13, the last
element in A with value i that has not yet been copied into B belongs in
B[C [i]].

8.2-5

Suppose that the array being sorted contains only integers in the range
0 to k and that there are no satellite data to move with those keys.
Modify counting sort to use just the arrays A and C, putting the sorted
result back into array A instead of into a new array B.

8.2-6

Describe an algorithm that, given n integers in the range 0 to k,
preprocesses its input and then answers any query about how many of the
n integers fall into a range [a : b] in O(1) time. Your algorithm should
use Θ(n + k) preprocessing time.

8.2-7

Counting sort can also work efficiently if the input values have
fractional parts, but the number of digits in the fractional part is
small. Suppose that you are given n numbers in the range 0 to k, each
with at most d decimal (base 10) digits to the right of the decimal
point. Modify counting sort to run in Θ(n + 10^(d) k) time.

8.3      Radix sort

Radix sort is the algorithm used by the card-sorting machines you now
find only in computer museums. The cards have 80 columns, and in each
column a machine can punch a hole in one of 12 places. The sorter can be
mechanically “programmed” to examine a given column of each card in a
deck and distribute the card into one of 12 bins depending on which
place has been punched. An operator can then gather the cards bin by
bin, so that cards with the first place punched are on top of cards with
the second place punched, and so on.

[art]

Figure 8.3 The operation of radix sort on seven 3-digit numbers. The
leftmost column is the input. The remaining columns show the numbers
after successive sorts on increasingly significant digit positions. Tan
shading indicates the digit position sorted on to produce each list from
the previous one.

For decimal digits, each column uses only 10 places. (The other two
places are reserved for encoding nonnumeric characters.) A d-digit
number occupies a field of d columns. Since the card sorter can look at
only one column at a time, the problem of sorting n cards on a d-digit
number requires a sorting algorithm.

Intuitively, you might sort numbers on their most significant (leftmost)
digit, sort each of the resulting bins recursively, and then combine the
decks in order. Unfortunately, since the cards in 9 of the 10 bins must
be put aside to sort each of the bins, this procedure generates many
intermediate piles of cards that you would have to keep track of. (See
Exercise 8.3-6.)

Radix sort solves the problem of card sorting—counterintuitively—by
sorting on the least significant digit first. The algorithm then
combines the cards into a single deck, with the cards in the 0 bin
preceding the cards in the 1 bin preceding the cards in the 2 bin, and
so on. Then it sorts the entire deck again on the second-least
significant digit and recombines the deck in a like manner. The process
continues until the cards have been sorted on all d digits. Remarkably,
at that point the cards are fully sorted on the d-digit number. Thus,
only d passes through the deck are required to sort. Figure 8.3 shows
how radix sort operates on a “deck” of seven 3-digit numbers.

In order for radix sort to work correctly, the digit sorts must be
stable. The sort performed by a card sorter is stable, but the operator
must be careful not to change the order of the cards as they come out of
a bin, even though all the cards in a bin have the same digit in the
chosen column.

In a typical computer, which is a sequential random-access machine, we
sometimes use radix sort to sort records of information that are keyed
by multiple fields. For example, we might wish to sort dates by three
keys: year, month, and day. We could run a sorting algorithm with a
comparison function that, given two dates, compares years, and if there
is a tie, compares months, and if another tie occurs, compares days.
Alternatively, we could sort the information three times with a stable
sort: first on day (the “least significant” part), next on month, and
finally on year.

The code for radix sort is straightforward. The RADIX-SORT procedure
assumes that each element in array A[1 : n] has d digits, where digit 1
is the lowest-order digit and digit d is the highest-order digit.

RADIX-SORT(A, n, d)

  --- -----------------------------------------------------
  1   for i = 1 to d
  2   use a stable sort to sort array A[1 : n] on digit i
  --- -----------------------------------------------------

Although the pseudocode for RADIX-SORT does not specify which stable
sort to use, COUNTING-SORT is commonly used. If you use COUNTING-SORT as
the stable sort, you can make RADIX-SORT a little more efficient by
revising COUNTING-SORT to take a pointer to the output array as a
parameter, having RADIX-SORT preallocate this array, and alternating
input and output between the two arrays in successive iterations of the
for loop in RADIX-SORT.

Lemma 8.3

Given n d-digit numbers in which each digit can take on up to k possible
values, RADIX-SORT correctly sorts these numbers in Θ(d(n + k)) time if
the stable sort it uses takes Θ(n + k) time.

Proof   The correctness of radix sort follows by induction on the column
being sorted (see Exercise 8.3-3). The analysis of the running time
depends on the stable sort used as the intermediate sorting algorithm.
When each digit lies in the range 0 to k – 1 (so that it can take on k
possible values), and k is not too large, counting sort is the obvious
choice. Each pass over n d-digit numbers then takes Θ(n + k) time. There
are d passes, and so the total time for radix sort is Θ(d(n + k)).

▪

When d is constant and k = O(n), we can make radix sort run in linear
time. More generally, we have some flexibility in how to break each key
into digits.

Lemma 8.4

Given n b-bit numbers and any positive integer r ≤ b, RADIX-SORT
correctly sorts these numbers in Θ((b/r)(n + 2^(r))) time if the stable
sort it uses takes Θ(n + k) time for inputs in the range 0 to k.

Proof   For a value r ≤ b, view each key as having d = ⌈b/r⌉ digits of r
bits each. Each digit is an integer in the range 0 to 2^(r) – 1, so that
we can use counting sort with k = 2^(r) – 1. (For example, we can view a
32-bit word as having four 8-bit digits, so that b = 32, r = 8, k =
2^(r) – 1 = 255, and d = b/r = 4.) Each pass of counting sort takes
Θ(n + k) = Θ(n + 2^(r)) time and there are d passes, for a total running
time of Θ(d(n + 2^(r))) = Θ((b/r)(n + 2^(r))).

▪

Given n and b, what value of r ≤ b minimizes the expression (b/r)(n +
2^(r))? As r decreases, the factor b/r increases, but as r increases so
does 2^(r). The answer depends on whether b < ⌊lg n⌋. If b < ⌊lg n⌋,
then r ≤ b implies (n + 2^(r)) = Θ(n). Thus, choosing r = b yields a
running time of (b/b)(n + 2^(b)) = Θ(n), which is asymptotically
optimal. If b ≥ ⌊lg n⌋, then choosing r = ⌊lg n⌋ gives the best running
time to within a constant factor, which we can see as follows.¹ Choosing
r = ⌊lg n⌋ yields a running time of Θ(bn/lg n). As r increases above ⌊lg
n⌋, the 2^(r) term in the numerator increases faster than the r term in
the denominator, and so increasing r above ⌊lg n⌋ yields a running time
of Ω(bn / lg n). If instead r were to decrease below ⌊lg n⌋, then the
b/r term increases and the n + 2^(r) term remains at Θ(n).

Is radix sort preferable to a comparison-based sorting algorithm, such
as quicksort? If b = O(lg n), as is often the case, and r ≈ lg n, then
radix sort’s running time is Θ(n), which appears to be better than
quicksort’s expected running time of Θ(n lg n). The constant factors
hidden in the Θ-notation differ, however. Although radix sort may make
fewer passes than quicksort over the n keys, each pass of radix sort may
take significantly longer. Which sorting algorithm to prefer depends on
the characteristics of the implementations, of the underlying machine
(e.g., quicksort often uses hardware caches more effectively than radix
sort), and of the input data. Moreover, the version of radix sort that
uses counting sort as the intermediate stable sort does not sort in
place, which many of the Θ(n lg n)-time comparison sorts do. Thus, when
primary memory storage is at a premium, an in-place algorithm such as
quicksort could be the better choice.

Exercises

8.3-1

Using Figure 8.3 as a model, illustrate the operation of RADIX-SORT on
the following list of English words: COW, DOG, SEA, RUG, ROW, MOB, BOX,
TAB, BAR, EAR, TAR, DIG, BIG, TEA, NOW, FOX.

8.3-2

Which of the following sorting algorithms are stable: insertion sort,
merge sort, heapsort, and quicksort? Give a simple scheme that makes any
comparison sort stable. How much additional time and space does your
scheme entail?

8.3-3

Use induction to prove that radix sort works. Where does your proof need
the assumption that the intermediate sort is stable?

8.3-4

Suppose that COUNTING-SORT is used as the stable sort within RADIX-SORT.
If RADIX-SORT calls COUNTING-SORT d times, then since each call of
COUNTING-SORT makes two passes over the data (lines 4–5 and 11–13),
altogether 2d passes over the data occur. Describe how to reduce the
total number of passes to d + 1.

8.3-5

Show how to sort n integers in the range 0 to n³ – 1 in O(n) time.

★ 8.3-6

In the first card-sorting algorithm in this section, which sorts on the
most significant digit first, exactly how many sorting passes are needed
to sort d-digit decimal numbers in the worst case? How many piles of
cards does an operator need to keep track of in the worst case?

8.4      Bucket sort

Bucket sort assumes that the input is drawn from a uniform distribution
and has an average-case running time of O(n). Like counting sort, bucket
sort is fast because it assumes something about the input. Whereas
counting sort assumes that the input consists of integers in a small
range, bucket sort assumes that the input is generated by a random
process that distributes elements uniformly and independently over the
interval [0, 1). (See Section C.2 for a definition of a uniform
distribution.)

Bucket sort divides the interval [0, 1) into n equal-sized subintervals,
or buckets, and then distributes the n input numbers into the buckets.
Since the inputs are uniformly and independently distributed over [0,
1), we do not expect many numbers to fall into each bucket. To produce
the output, we simply sort the numbers in each bucket and then go
through the buckets in order, listing the elements in each.

The BUCKET-SORT procedure on the next page assumes that the input is an
array A[1 : n] and that each element A[i] in the array satisfies 0 ≤
A[i] < 1. The code requires an auxiliary array B[0 : n – 1] of linked
lists (buckets) and assumes that there is a mechanism for maintaining
such lists. (Section 10.2 describes how to implement basic operations on
linked lists.) Figure 8.4 shows the operation of bucket sort on an input
array of 10 numbers.

[art]

Figure 8.4 The operation of BUCKET-SORT for n = 10. (a) The input array
A[1 : 10]. (b) The array B[0 : 9] of sorted lists (buckets) after line 7
of the algorithm, with slashes indicating the end of each bucket. Bucket
i holds values in the half-open interval [i/10, (i + 1)/10). The sorted
output consists of a concatenation of the lists B[0], B[1], … , B[9] in
order.

BUCKET-SORT(A, n)

  --- ------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   let B[0 : n – 1] be a new array
  2   for i = 0 to n – 1
  3   make B[i] an empty list
  4   for i = 1 to n
  5   insert A[i] into list B[⌊n · A[i]⌋]
  6   for i = 0 to n – 1
  7   sort list B[i] with insertion sort
  8   concatenate the lists B[0], B[1], … , B[n – 1] together in order
  9   return the concatenated lists
  --- ------------------------------------------------------------------

To see that this algorithm works, consider two elements A[i] and A[j].
Assume without loss of generality that A[i] ≤ A[j]. Since ⌊n · A[i]⌋ ≤
⌊n · A[j]⌋, either element A[i] goes into the same bucket as A[j] or it
goes into a bucket with a lower index. If A[i] and A[j] go into the same
bucket, then the for loop of lines 6–7 puts them into the proper order.
If A[i] and A[j] go into different buckets, then line 8 puts them into
the proper order. Therefore, bucket sort works correctly.

To analyze the running time, observe that, together, all lines except
line 7 take O(n) time in the worst case. We need to analyze the total
time taken by the n calls to insertion sort in line 7.

To analyze the cost of the calls to insertion sort, let n_(i) be the
random variable denoting the number of elements placed in bucket B[i].
Since insertion sort runs in quadratic time (see Section 2.2), the
running time of bucket sort is

[art]

We now analyze the average-case running time of bucket sort, by
computing the expected value of the running time, where we take the
expectation over the input distribution. Taking expectations of both
sides and using linearity of expectation (equation (C.24) on page 1192),
we have

[art]

We claim that

[art]

for i = 0, 1, … , n – 1. It is no surprise that each bucket i has the
same value of [art], since each value in the input array A is equally
likely to fall in any bucket.

To prove equation (8.3), view each random variable n_(i) as the number
of successes in n Bernoulli trials (see Section C.4). Success in a trial
occurs when an element goes into bucket B[i], with a probability p = 1/n
of success and q = 1 – 1/n of failure. A binomial distribution counts
n_(i), the number of successes, in the n trials. By equations (C.41) and
(C.44) on pages 1199–1200, we have E [n_(i)] = np = n(1/n) = 1 and Var
[n_(i)] = npq = 1 – 1/n. Equation (C.31) on page 1194 gives

  ------- --- --------------------------
  [art]   =   Var [n_(i)] + E² [n_(i)]
          =   (1 – 1/n) + 1²
          =   2 – 1/n,
  ------- --- --------------------------

which proves equation (8.3). Using this expected value in equation
(8.2), we get that the average-case running time for bucket sort is
Θ(n) + n · O(2 – 1/n) = Θ(n).

Even if the input is not drawn from a uniform distribution, bucket sort
may still run in linear time. As long as the input has the property that
the sum of the squares of the bucket sizes is linear in the total number
of elements, equation (8.1) tells us that bucket sort runs in linear
time.

Exercises

8.4-1

Using Figure 8.4 as a model, illustrate the operation of BUCKET-SORT on
the array A = 〈.79, .13, .16, .64, .39, .20, .89, .53, .71, .42〉.

8.4-2

Explain why the worst-case running time for bucket sort is Θ(n²). What
simple change to the algorithm preserves its linear average-case running
time and makes its worst-case running time O(n lg n)?

8.4-3

Let X be a random variable that is equal to the number of heads in two
flips of a fair coin. What is E [X²]? What is E² [X]?

8.4-4

An array A of size n > 10 is filled in the following way. For each
element A[i], choose two random variables x_(i) and y_(i) uniformly and
independently from [0, 1). Then set

[art]

Modify bucket sort so that it sorts the array A in O(n) expected time.

★ 8.4-5

You are given n points in the unit disk, p_(i) = (x_(i), y_(i)), such
that [art] for i = 1, 2, … , n. Suppose that the points are uniformly
distributed, that is, the probability of finding a point in any region
of the disk is proportional to the area of that region. Design an
algorithm with an average-case running time of Θ(n) to sort the n points
by their distances [art] from the origin. (Hint: Design the bucket sizes
in BUCKET-SORT to reflect the uniform distribution of the points in the
unit disk.)

★ 8.4-6

A probability distribution function P(x) for a random variable X is
defined by P(x) = Pr {X ≤ x}. Suppose that you draw a list of n random
variables X₁, X₂, … , X_(n) from a continuous probability distribution
function P that is computable in O(1) time (given y you can find x such
that P(x) = y in O(1) time). Give an algorithm that sorts these numbers
in linear average-case time.

Problems

8-1     Probabilistic lower bounds on comparison sorting

In this problem, you will prove a probabilistic Ω(n lg n) lower bound on
the running time of any deterministic or randomized comparison sort on n
distinct input elements. You’ll begin by examining a deterministic
comparison sort A with decision tree T_(A). Assume that every
permutation of A’s inputs is equally likely.

a. Suppose that each leaf of T_(A) is labeled with the probability that
it is reached given a random input. Prove that exactly n! leaves are
labeled 1/n! and that the rest are labeled 0.

b. Let D(T) denote the external path length of a decision tree T—the sum
of the depths of all the leaves of T. Let T be a decision tree with k >
1 leaves, and let LT and RT be the left and right subtrees of T. Show
that D(T) = D(LT) + D(RT) + k.

c. Let d(k) be the minimum value of D(T) over all decision trees T with
k > 1 leaves. Show that d(k) = min {d(i) + d(k – i) + k : 1 ≤ i ≤ k –
1}. (Hint: Consider a decision tree T with k leaves that achieves the
minimum. Let i₀ be the number of leaves in LT and k – i₀ the number of
leaves in RT.)

d. Prove that for a given value of k > 1 and i in the range 1 ≤ i ≤ k –
1, the function i lg i + (k – i) lg(k – i) is minimized at i = k/2.
Conclude that d(k) = Ω (k lg k).

e. Prove that D(T_(A)) = Ω (n! lg(n!)), and conclude that the
average-case time to sort n elements is Ω(n lg n).

Now consider a randomized comparison sort B. We can extend the
decision-tree model to handle randomization by incorporating two kinds
of nodes: ordinary comparison nodes and “randomization” nodes. A
randomization node models a random choice of the form RANDOM(1, r) made
by algorithm B. The node has r children, each of which is equally likely
to be chosen during an execution of the algorithm.

f. Show that for any randomized comparison sort B, there exists a
deterministic comparison sort A whose expected number of comparisons is
no more than those made by B.

8-2     Sorting in place in linear time

You have an array of n data records to sort, each with a key of 0 or 1.
An algorithm for sorting such a set of records might possess some subset
of the following three desirable characteristics:

1.  The algorithm runs in O(n) time.
2.  The algorithm is stable.
3.  The algorithm sorts in place, using no more than a constant amount
    of storage space in addition to the original array.

a. Give an algorithm that satisfies criteria 1 and 2 above.

b. Give an algorithm that satisfies criteria 1 and 3 above.

c. Give an algorithm that satisfies criteria 2 and 3 above.

d. Can you use any of your sorting algorithms from parts (a)–(c) as the
sorting method used in line 2 of RADIX-SORT, so that RADIX-SORT sorts n
records with b-bit keys in O(bn) time? Explain how or why not.

e. Suppose that the n records have keys in the range from 1 to k. Show
how to modify counting sort so that it sorts the records in place in
O(n + k) time. You may use O(k) storage outside the input array. Is your
algorithm stable?

8-3     Sorting variable-length items

a. You are given an array of integers, where different integers may have
different numbers of digits, but the total number of digits over all the
integers in the array is n. Show how to sort the array in O(n) time.

b. You are given an array of strings, where different strings may have
different numbers of characters, but the total number of characters over
all the strings is n. Show how to sort the strings in O(n) time. (The
desired order is the standard alphabetical order: for example, a < ab <
b.)

8-4     Water jugs

You are given n red and n blue water jugs, all of different shapes and
sizes. All the red jugs hold different amounts of water, as do all the
blue jugs, and you cannot tell from the size of a jug how much water it
holds. Moreover, for every jug of one color, there is a jug of the other
color that holds the same amount of water.

Your task is to group the jugs into pairs of red and blue jugs that hold
the same amount of water. To do so, you may perform the following
operation: pick a pair of jugs in which one is red and one is blue, fill
the red jug with water, and then pour the water into the blue jug. This
operation tells you whether the red jug or the blue jug can hold more
water, or that they have the same volume. Assume that such a comparison
takes one time unit. Your goal is to find an algorithm that makes a
minimum number of comparisons to determine the grouping. Remember that
you may not directly compare two red jugs or two blue jugs.

a. Describe a deterministic algorithm that uses Θ(n²) comparisons to
group the jugs into pairs.

b. Prove a lower bound of Ω(n lg n) for the number of comparisons that
an algorithm solving this problem must make.

c. Give a randomized algorithm whose expected number of comparisons is
O(n lg n), and prove that this bound is correct. What is the worst-case
number of comparisons for your algorithm?

8-5     Average sorting

Suppose that, instead of sorting an array, we just require that the
elements increase on average. More precisely, we call an n-element array
A k-sorted if, for all i = 1, 2, … , n – k, the following holds:

[art]

a. What does it mean for an array to be 1-sorted?

b. Give a permutation of the numbers 1, 2, … , 10 that is 2-sorted, but
not sorted.

c. Prove that an n-element array is k-sorted if and only if A[i] ≤ A[i +
k] for all i = 1, 2, … , n – k.

d. Give an algorithm that k-sorts an n-element array in O(n lg(n/k))
time.

We can also show a lower bound on the time to produce a k-sorted array,
when k is a constant.

e. Show how to sort a k-sorted array of length n in O(n lg k) time.
(Hint: Use the solution to Exercise 6.5-11.)

f. Show that when k is a constant, k-sorting an n-element array requires
Ω(n lg n) time. (Hint: Use the solution to part (e) along with the lower
bound on comparison sorts.)

8-6     Lower bound on merging sorted lists

The problem of merging two sorted lists arises frequently. We have seen
a procedure for it as the subroutine MERGE in Section 2.3.1. In this
problem, you will prove a lower bound of 2n – 1 on the worst-case number
of comparisons required to merge two sorted lists, each containing n
items. First, you will show a lower bound of 2n – o(n) comparisons by
using a decision tree.

a. Given 2n numbers, compute the number of possible ways to divide them
into two sorted lists, each with n numbers.

b. Using a decision tree and your answer to part (a), show that any
algorithm that correctly merges two sorted lists must perform at least
2n – o(n) comparisons.

Now you will show a slightly tighter 2n – 1 bound.

c. Show that if two elements are consecutive in the sorted order and
from different lists, then they must be compared.

d. Use your answer to part (c) to show a lower bound of 2n – 1
comparisons for merging two sorted lists.

8-7     The 0-1 sorting lemma and columnsort

A compare-exchange operation on two array elements A[i] and A[j], where
i < j, has the form

COMPARE-EXCHANGE(A, i, j)

  --- -------------------------
  1   if A[i] > A[j]
  2   exchange A[i] with A[j]
  --- -------------------------

After the compare-exchange operation, we know that A[i] ≤ A[j].

An oblivious compare-exchange algorithm operates solely by a sequence of
prespecified compare-exchange operations. The indices of the positions
compared in the sequence must be determined in advance, and although
they can depend on the number of elements being sorted, they cannot
depend on the values being sorted, nor can they depend on the result of
any prior compare-exchange operation. For example, the
COMPARE-EXCHANGE-INSERTION-SORT procedure on the facing page shows a
variation of insertion sort as an oblivious compare-exchange algorithm.
(Unlike the INSERTION-SORT procedure on page 19, the oblivious version
runs in Θ(n²) time in all cases.)

The 0-1 sorting lemma provides a powerful way to prove that an oblivious
compare-exchange algorithm produces a sorted result. It states that if
an oblivious compare-exchange algorithm correctly sorts all input
sequences consisting of only 0s and 1s, then it correctly sorts all
inputs containing arbitrary values.

COMPARE-EXCHANGE-INSERTION-SORT(A, n)

  --- -------------------------------
  1   for i = 2 to n
  2   for j = i – 1 downto 1
  3   COMPARE-EXCHANGE(A, j, j + 1)
  --- -------------------------------

You will prove the 0-1 sorting lemma by proving its contrapositive: if
an oblivious compare-exchange algorithm fails to sort an input
containing arbitrary values, then it fails to sort some 0-1 input.
Assume that an oblivious compare-exchange algorithm X fails to correctly
sort the array A[1 : n]. Let A[p] be the smallest value in A that
algorithm X puts into the wrong location, and let A[q] be the value that
algorithm X moves to the location into which A[p] should have gone.
Define an array B[1 : n] of 0s and 1s as follows:

[art]

a. Argue that A[q] > A[p], so that B[p] = 0 and B[q] = 1.

b. To complete the proof of the 0-1 sorting lemma, prove that algorithm
X fails to sort array B correctly.

Now you will use the 0-1 sorting lemma to prove that a particular
sorting algorithm works correctly. The algorithm, columnsort, works on a
rectangular array of n elements. The array has r rows and s columns (so
that n = rs), subject to three restrictions:

- r must be even,
- s must be a divisor of r, and
- r ≥ 2s².

When columnsort completes, the array is sorted in column-major order:
reading down each column in turn, from left to right, the elements
monotonically increase.

Columnsort operates in eight steps, regardless of the value of n. The
odd steps are all the same: sort each column individually. Each even
step is a fixed permutation. Here are the steps:

1.  Sort each column.
2.  Transpose the array, but reshape it back to r rows and s columns. In
    other words, turn the leftmost column into the top r/s rows, in
    order; turn the next column into the next r/s rows, in order; and so
    on.
3.  Sort each column.
4.  Perform the inverse of the permutation performed in step 2.
5.  Sort each column.
6.  Shift the top half of each column into the bottom half of the same
    column, and shift the bottom half of each column into the top half
    of the next column to the right. Leave the top half of the leftmost
    column empty. Shift the bottom half of the last column into the top
    half of a new rightmost column, and leave the bottom half of this
    new column empty.
7.  Sort each column.
8.  Perform the inverse of the permutation performed in step 6.

[art]

Figure 8.5 The steps of columnsort. (a) The input array with 6 rows and
3 columns. (This example does not obey the r ≥ 2s² requirement, but it
works.) (b) After sorting each column in step 1. (c) After transposing
and reshaping in step 2. (d) After sorting each column in step 3. (e)
After performing step 4, which inverts the permutation from step 2. (f)
After sorting each column in step 5. (g) After shifting by half a column
in step 6. (h) After sorting each column in step 7. (i) After performing
step 8, which inverts the permutation from step 6. Steps 6–8 sort the
bottom half of each column with the top half of the next column. After
step 8, the array is sorted in column-major order.

You can think of steps 6–8 as a single step that sorts the bottom half
of each column and the top half of the next column. Figure 8.5 shows an
example of the steps of columnsort with r = 6 and s = 3. (Even though
this example violates the requirement that r ≥ 2s², it happens to work.)

c. Argue that we can treat columnsort as an oblivious compare-exchange
algorithm, even if we do not know what sorting method the odd steps use.

Although it might seem hard to believe that columnsort actually sorts,
you will use the 0-1 sorting lemma to prove that it does. The 0-1
sorting lemma applies because we can treat columnsort as an oblivious
compare-exchange algorithm. A couple of definitions will help you apply
the 0-1 sorting lemma. We say that an area of an array is clean if we
know that it contains either all 0s or all 1s or if it is empty.
Otherwise, the area might contain mixed 0s and 1s, and it is dirty. From
here on, assume that the input array contains only 0s and 1s, and that
we can treat it as an array with r rows and s columns.

d. Prove that after steps 1–3, the array consists of clean rows of 0s at
the top, clean rows of 1s at the bottom, and at most s dirty rows
between them. (One of the clean rows could be empty.)

e. Prove that after step 4, the array, read in column-major order,
starts with a clean area of 0s, ends with a clean area of 1s, and has a
dirty area of at most s² elements in the middle. (Again, one of the
clean areas could be empty.)

f. Prove that steps 5–8 produce a fully sorted 0-1 output. Conclude that
columnsort correctly sorts all inputs containing arbitrary values.

g. Now suppose that s does not divide r. Prove that after steps 1–3, the
array consists of clean rows of 0s at the top, clean rows of 1s at the
bottom, and at most 2s –1 dirty rows between them. (Once again, one of
the clean areas could be empty.) How large must r be, compared with s,
for columnsort to correctly sort when s does not divide r?

h. Suggest a simple change to step 1 that allows us to maintain the
requirement that r ≥ 2s² even when s does not divide r, and prove that
with your change, columnsort correctly sorts.

Chapter notes

The decision-tree model for studying comparison sorts was introduced by
Ford and Johnson [150]. Knuth’s comprehensive treatise on sorting [261]
covers many variations on the sorting problem, including the
information-theoretic lower bound on the complexity of sorting given
here. Ben-Or [46] studied lower bounds for sorting using generalizations
of the decision-tree model.

Knuth credits H. H. Seward with inventing counting sort in 1954, as well
as with the idea of combining counting sort with radix sort. Radix
sorting starting with the least significant digit appears to be a folk
algorithm widely used by operators of mechanical card-sorting machines.
According to Knuth, the first published reference to the method is a
1929 document by L. J. Comrie describing punched-card equipment. Bucket
sorting has been in use since 1956, when the basic idea was proposed by
Isaac and Singleton [235].

Munro and Raman [338] give a stable sorting algorithm that performs
O(n^(1+ϵ)) comparisons in the worst case, where 0 < ϵ ≤ 1 is any fixed
constant. Although any of the O(n lg n)-time algorithms make fewer
comparisons, the algorithm by Munro and Raman moves data only O(n) times
and operates in place.

The case of sorting n b-bit integers in o(n lg n) time has been
considered by many researchers. Several positive results have been
obtained, each under slightly different assumptions about the model of
computation and the restrictions placed on the algorithm. All the
results assume that the computer memory is divided into addressable
b-bit words. Fredman and Willard [157] introduced the fusion tree data
structure and used it to sort n integers in O(n lg n/lg lg n) time. This
bound was later improved to [art] time by Andersson [17]. These
algorithms require the use of multiplication and several precomputed
constants. Andersson, Hagerup, Nilsson, and Raman [18] have shown how to
sort n integers in O(n lg lg n) time without using multiplication, but
their method requires storage that can be unbounded in terms of n. Using
multiplicative hashing, we can reduce the storage needed to O(n), but
then the O(n lg lg n) worst-case bound on the running time becomes an
expected-time bound. Generalizing the exponential search trees of
Andersson [17], Thorup [434] gave an O(n(lg lg n)²)-time sorting
algorithm that does not use multiplication or randomization, and it uses
linear space. Combining these techniques with some new ideas, Han [207]
improved the bound for sorting to O(n lg lg n lg lg lg n) time. Although
these algorithms are important theoretical breakthroughs, they are all
fairly complicated and at the present time seem unlikely to compete with
existing sorting algorithms in practice.

The columnsort algorithm in Problem 8-7 is by Leighton [286].

¹ The choice of r = ⌊lg n⌋ assumes that n > 1. If n ≤ 1, there is
nothing to sort.

9          Medians and Order Statistics

The ith order statistic of a set of n elements is the ith smallest
element. For example, the minimum of a set of elements is the first
order statistic (i = 1), and the maximum is the nth order statistic (i =
n). A median, informally, is the “halfway point” of the set. When n is
odd, the median is unique, occurring at i = (n + 1)/2. When n is even,
there are two medians, the lower median occurring at i = n/2 and the
upper median occurring at i = n/2 + 1. Thus, regardless of the parity of
n, medians occur at i = ⌊(n + 1)/2⌋ and i = ⌈(n + 1)/2⌉. For simplicity
in this text, however, we consistently use the phrase “the median” to
refer to the lower median.

This chapter addresses the problem of selecting the ith order statistic
from a set of n distinct numbers. We assume for convenience that the set
contains distinct numbers, although virtually everything that we do
extends to the situation in which a set contains repeated values. We
formally specify the selection problem as follows:

Input: A set A of n distinct numbers¹ and an integer i, with 1 ≤ i ≤ n.

Output: The element x ∈ A that is larger than exactly i – 1 other
elements of A.

We can solve the selection problem in O(n lg n) time simply by sorting
the numbers using heapsort or merge sort and then outputting the ith
element in the sorted array. This chapter presents asymptotically faster
algorithms.

Section 9.1 examines the problem of selecting the minimum and maximum of
a set of elements. More interesting is the general selection problem,
which we investigate in the subsequent two sections. Section 9.2
analyzes a practical randomized algorithm that achieves an O(n) expected
running time, assuming distinct elements. Section 9.3 contains an
algorithm of more theoretical interest that achieves the O(n) running
time in the worst case.

9.1      Minimum and maximum

How many comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum of a set of
n elements? To obtain an upper bound of n – 1 comparisons, just examine
each element of the set in turn and keep track of the smallest element
seen so far. The MINIMUM procedure assumes that the set resides in array
A[1 : n].

MINIMUM(A, n)

  --- ----------------
  1   min = A[1]
  2   for i = 2 to n
  3   if min > A[i]
  4   min = A[i]
  5   return min
  --- ----------------

It’s no more difficult to find the maximum with n – 1 comparisons.

Is this algorithm for minimum the best we can do? Yes, because it turns
out that there’s a lower bound of n – 1 comparisons for the problem of
determining the minimum. Think of any algorithm that determines the
minimum as a tournament among the elements. Each comparison is a match
in the tournament in which the smaller of the two elements wins. Since
every element except the winner must lose at least one match, we can
conclude that n – 1 comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum.
Hence the algorithm MINIMUM is optimal with respect to the number of
comparisons performed.

Simultaneous minimum and maximum

Some applications need to find both the minimum and the maximum of a set
of n elements. For example, a graphics program may need to scale a set
of (x, y) data to fit onto a rectangular display screen or other
graphical output device. To do so, the program must first determine the
minimum and maximum value of each coordinate.

Of course, we can determine both the minimum and the maximum of n
elements using Θ(n) comparisons. We simply find the minimum and maximum
independently, using n – 1 comparisons for each, for a total of 2n – 2 =
Θ(n) comparisons.

Although 2n – 2 comparisons is asymptotically optimal, it is possible to
improve the leading constant. We can find both the minimum and the
maximum using at most 3 ⌊n/2⌋ comparisons. The trick is to maintain both
the minimum and maximum elements seen thus far. Rather than processing
each element of the input by comparing it against the current minimum
and maximum, at a cost of 2 comparisons per element, process elements in
pairs. Compare pairs of elements from the input first with each other,
and then compare the smaller with the current minimum and the larger to
the current maximum, at a cost of 3 comparisons for every 2 elements.

How you set up initial values for the current minimum and maximum
depends on whether n is odd or even. If n is odd, set both the minimum
and maximum to the value of the first element, and then process the rest
of the elements in pairs. If n is even, perform 1 comparison on the
first 2 elements to determine the initial values of the minimum and
maximum, and then process the rest of the elements in pairs as in the
case for odd n.

Let’s count the total number of comparisons. If n is odd, then 3 ⌊n/2⌋
comparisons occur. If n is even, 1 initial comparison occurs, followed
by another 3(n – 2)/2 comparisons, for a total of 3n/2 – 2. Thus, in
either case, the total number of comparisons is at most 3 ⌊n/2⌋.

Exercises

9.1-1

Show that the second smallest of n elements can be found with n + ⌈lg n⌉
– 2 comparisons in the worst case. (Hint: Also find the smallest
element.)

9.1-2

Given n > 2 distinct numbers, you want to find a number that is neither
the minimum nor the maximum. What is the smallest number of comparisons
that you need to perform?

9.1-3

A racetrack can run races with five horses at a time to determine their
relative speeds. For 25 horses, it takes six races to determine the
fastest horse, assuming transitivity (see page 1159). What’s the minimum
number of races it takes to determine the fastest three horses out of
25?

★ 9.1-4

Prove the lower bound of ⌈3n/2⌉ – 2 comparisons in the worst case to
find both the maximum and minimum of n numbers. (Hint: Consider how many
numbers are potentially either the maximum or minimum, and investigate
how a comparison affects these counts.)

9.2      Selection in expected linear time

The general selection problem—finding the ith order statistic for any
value of i—appears more difficult than the simple problem of finding a
minimum. Yet, surprisingly, the asymptotic running time for both
problems is the same: Θ(n). This section presents a divide-and-conquer
algorithm for the selection problem. The algorithm RANDOMIZED-SELECT is
modeled after the quicksort algorithm of Chapter 7. Like quicksort it
partitions the input array recursively. But unlike quicksort, which
recursively processes both sides of the partition, RANDOMIZED-SELECT
works on only one side of the partition. This difference shows up in the
analysis: whereas quicksort has an expected running time of Θ(n lg n),
the expected running time of RANDOMIZED-SELECT is Θ(n), assuming that
the elements are distinct.

RANDOMIZED-SELECT uses the procedure RANDOMIZED-PARTITION introduced in
Section 7.3. Like RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT, it is a randomized algorithm,
since its behavior is determined in part by the output of a
random-number generator. The RANDOMIZED-SELECT procedure returns the ith
smallest element of the array A[p : r], where 1 ≤ i ≤ r – p + 1.

RANDOMIZED-SELECT(A, p, r, i)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | if p == r                                                       |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | return A[p]                    | // 1 ≤ i ≤ r – p + 1 when p == |
|   |                                | r means that i = 1             |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | q = RANDOMIZED-PARTITION(A, p, r)                               |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4 | k = q – p + 1                                                   |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5 | if i == k                                                       |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 6 | return A[q]                    | // the pivot value is the      |
|   |                                | answer                         |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 7 | elseif i < k                                                    |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 8 | return RANDOMIZED-SELECT(A, p, q – 1, i)                        |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9 | else return RANDOMIZED-SELECT(A, q + 1, r, i – k)               |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

Figure 9.1 illustrates how the RANDOMIZED-SELECT procedure works. Line 1
checks for the base case of the recursion, in which the subarray A[p :
r] consists of just one element. In this case, i must equal 1, and line
2 simply returns A[p] as the ith smallest element. Otherwise, the call
to RANDOMIZED-PARTITION in line 3 partitions the array A[p : r] into two
(possibly empty) subarrays A[p : q – 1] and A[q + 1 : r] such that each
element of A[p : q – 1] is less than or equal to A[q], which in turn is
less than each element of A[q + 1 : r]. (Although our analysis assumes
that the elements are distinct, the procedure still yields the correct
result even if equal elements are present.) As in quicksort, we’ll refer
to A[q] as the pivot element. Line 4 computes the number k of elements
in the subarray A[p : q], that is, the number of elements in the low
side of the partition, plus 1 for the pivot element. Line 5 then checks
whether A[q] is the ith smallest element. If it is, then line 6 returns
A[q]. Otherwise, the algorithm determines in which of the two subarrays
A[p: q – 1] and A[q + 1 : r] the ith smallest element lies. If i < k,
then the desired element lies on the low side of the partition, and line
8 recursively selects it from the subarray. If i > k, however, then the
desired element lies on the high side of the partition. Since we already
know k values that are smaller than the ith smallest element of A[p :
r]—namely, the elements of A[p : q]—the desired element is the (i – k)th
smallest element of A[q + 1 : r], which line 9 finds recursively. The
code appears to allow recursive calls to subarrays with 0 elements, but
Exercise 9.2-1 asks you to show that this situation cannot happen.

[art]

Figure 9.1 The action of RANDOMIZED-SELECT as successive partitionings
narrow the subarray A[p: r], showing the values of the parameters p, r,
and i at each recursive call. The subarray A[p : r] in each recursive
step is shown in tan, with the dark tan element selected as the pivot
for the next partitioning. Blue elements are outside A[p : r]. The
answer is the tan element in the bottom array, where p = r = 5 and i
= 1. The array designations A⁽⁰⁾, A⁽¹⁾, … , A⁽⁵⁾, the partitioning
numbers, and whether the partitioning is helpful are explained on the
following page.

The worst-case running time for RANDOMIZED-SELECT is Θ(n²), even to find
the minimum, because it could be extremely unlucky and always partition
around the largest remaining element before identifying the ith smallest
when only one element remains. In this worst case, each recursive step
removes only the pivot from consideration. Because partitioning n
elements takes Θ(n) time, the recurrence for the worst-case running time
is the same as for QUICKSORT: T (n) = T (n – 1) + Θ(n), with the
solution T (n) = Θ(n²). We’ll see that the algorithm has a linear
expected running time, however, and because it is randomized, no
particular input elicits the worst-case behavior.

To see the intuition behind the linear expected running time, suppose
that each time the algorithm randomly selects a pivot element, the pivot
lies somewhere within the second and third quartiles—the “middle
half”—of the remaining elements in sorted order. If the ith smallest
element is less than the pivot, then all the elements greater than the
pivot are ignored in all future recursive calls. These ignored elements
include at least the uppermost quartile, and possibly more. Likewise, if
the ith smallest element is greater than the pivot, then all the
elements less than the pivot—at least the first quartile—are ignored in
all future recursive calls. Either way, therefore, at least 1/4 of the
remaining elements are ignored in all future recursive calls, leaving at
most 3/4 of the remaining elements in play: residing in the subarray A[p
: r]. Since RANDOMIZED-PARTITION takes Θ(n) time on a subarray of n
elements, the recurrence for the worst-case running time is T (n) = T
(3n/4) + Θ(n). By case 3 of the master method (Theorem 4.1 on page 102),
this recurrence has solution T (n) = Θ(n).

Of course, the pivot does not necessarily fall into the middle half
every time. Since the pivot is selected at random, the probability that
it falls into the middle half is about 1/2 each time. We can view the
process of selecting the pivot as a Bernoulli trial (see Section C.4)
with success equating to the pivot residing in the middle half. Thus the
expected number of trials needed for success is given by a geometric
distribution: just two trials on average (equation (C.36) on page 1197).
In other words, we expect that half of the partitionings reduce the
number of elements still in play by at least 3/4 and that half of the
partitionings do not help as much. Consequently, the expected number of
partitionings at most doubles from the case when the pivot always falls
into the middle half. The cost of each extra partitioning is less than
the one that preceded it, so that the expected running time is still
Θ(n).

To make the above argument rigorous, we start by defining the random
variable A^((j)) as the set of elements of A that are still in play
after j partitionings (that is, within the subarray A[p : r] after j
calls of RANDOMIZED-SELECT), so that A⁽⁰⁾ consists of all the elements
in A. Since each partitioning removes at least one element—the
pivot—from being in play, the sequence |A⁽⁰⁾|, |A⁽¹⁾|, |A⁽²⁾|, …
strictly decreases. Set A^((j–1)) is in play before the j th
partitioning, and set A^((j)) remains in play afterward. For
convenience, assume that the initial set A⁽⁰⁾ is the result of a 0th
“dummy” partitioning.

Let’s call the j th partitioning helpful if |A^((j))| ≤
(3/4)|A^((j–1))|. Figure 9.1 shows the sets A^((j)) and whether
partitionings are helpful for an example array. A helpful partitioning
corresponds to a successful Bernoulli trial. The following lemma shows
that a partitioning is at least as likely to be helpful as not.

Lemma 9.1

A partitioning is helpful with probability at least 1/2.

Proof   Whether a partitioning is helpful depends on the randomly chosen
pivot. We discussed the “middle half” in the informal argument above.
Let’s more precisely define the middle half of an n-element subarray as
all but the smallest ⌈n/4⌉ – 1 and greatest ⌈n/4⌉ – 1 elements (that is,
all but the first ⌈n/4⌉ – 1 and last ⌈n/4⌉ – 1 elements if the subarray
were sorted). We’ll prove that if the pivot falls into the middle half,
then the pivot leads to a helpful partitioning, and we’ll also prove
that the probability of the pivot falling into the middle half is at
least 1/2.

Regardless of where the pivot falls, either all the elements greater
than it or all the elements less than it, along with the pivot itself,
will no longer be in play after partitioning. If the pivot falls into
the middle half, therefore, at least ⌈n/4⌉ – 1 elements less than the
pivot or ⌈n/4⌉ – 1 elements greater than the pivot, plus the pivot, will
no longer be in play after partitioning. That is, at least ⌈n/4⌉
elements will no longer be in play. The number of elements remaining in
play will be at most n – ⌈n/4⌉, which equals ⌊3n/4⌋ by Exercise 3.3-2 on
page 70. Since ⌊3n/4⌋ ≤ 3n/4, the partitioning is helpful.

To determine a lower bound on the probability that a randomly chosen
pivot falls into the middle half, we determine an upper bound on the
probability that it does not. That probability is

[art]

Thus, the pivot has a probability of at least 1/2 of falling into the
middle half, and so the probability is at least 1/2 that a partitioning
is helpful.

▪

We can now bound the expected running time of RANDOMIZED-SELECT.

Theorem 9.2

The procedure RANDOMIZED-SELECT on an input array of n distinct elements
has an expected running time of Θ(n).

Proof   Since not every partitioning is necessarily helpful, let’s give
each partitioning an index starting at 0 and denote by 〈h₀, h₁, h₂, … ,
h_(m)〉 the sequence of partitionings that are helpful, so that the
h_(k)th partitioning is helpful for k = 0, 1, 2, … , m. Although the
number m of helpful partitionings is a random variable, we can bound it,
since after at most ⌈log_(4/3) n⌉ helpful partitionings, only one
element remains in play. Consider the dummy 0th partitioning as helpful,
so that h₀ = 0. Denote [art] by n_(k), where n₀ = |A⁽⁰⁾| is the original
problem size. Since the h_(k)th partitioning is helpful and the sizes of
the sets A^((j)) strictly decrease, we have [art] for k = 1, 2, … , m.
By iterating n_(k) ≤ (3/4) n_(k–1), we have that n_(k) ≤ (3/4)^(k)n₀ for
k = 0, 1, 2, … , m.

[art]

Figure 9.2 The sets within each generation in the proof of Theorem 9.2.
Vertical lines represent the sets, with the height of each line
indicating the size of the set, which equals the number of elements in
play. Each generation starts with a set [art], which is the result of a
helpful partitioning. These sets are drawn in black and are at most 3/4
the size of the sets to their immediate left. Sets drawn in orange are
not the first within a generation. A generation may contain just one
set. The sets in generation k are [art], [art]. The sets [art] are
defined so that [art]. If the partitioning gets all the way to
generation h_(m), set [art] has at most one element in play.

As Figure 9.2 depicts, we break up the sequence of sets A^((j)) into
m generations consisting of consecutively partitioned sets, starting
with the result [art] of a helpful partitioning and ending with the last
set [art] before the next helpful partitioning, so that the sets in
generation k are [art], [art]. Then for each set of elements A^((j)) in
the kth generation, we have that [art].

Next, we define the random variable

X_(k) = h_(k + 1) – h_(k)

for k = 0, 1, 2, … , m – 1. That is, X_(k) is the number of sets in the
kth generation, so that the sets in the kth generation are [art], [art].

By Lemma 9.1, the probability that a partitioning is helpful is at least
1/2. The probability is actually even higher, since a partitioning is
helpful even if the pivot does not fall into the middle half but the ith
smallest element happens to lie in the smaller side of the partitioning.
We’ll just use the lower bound of 1/2, however, and then equation (C.36)
gives that E [X_(k)] ≤ 2 for k = 0, 1, 2, … , m – 1.

Let’s derive an upper bound on how many comparisons are made altogether
during partitioning, since the running time is dominated by the
comparisons. Since we are calculating an upper bound, assume that the
recursion goes all the way until only one element remains in play. The j
th partitioning takes the set A^((j–1)) of elements in play, and it
compares the randomly chosen pivot with all the other |A^((j–1))| – 1
elements, so that the jth partitioning makes fewer than |A^((j–1))|
comparisons. The sets in the kth generation have sizes [art]. Thus, the
total number of comparisons during partitioning is less than

[art]

Since E [X_(k)] ≤ 2, we have that the expected total number of
comparisons during partitioning is less than

[art]

Since n₀ is the size of the original array A, we conclude that the
expected number of comparisons, and thus the expected running time, for
RANDOMIZED-SELECT is O(n). All n elements are examined in the first call
of RANDOMIZED-PARTITION, giving a lower bound of Ω(n). Hence the
expected running time is Θ(n).

▪

Exercises

9.2-1

Show that RANDOMIZED-SELECT never makes a recursive call to a 0-length
array.

9.2-2

Write an iterative version of RANDOMIZED-SELECT.

9.2-3

Suppose that RANDOMIZED-SELECT is used to select the minimum element of
the array A = 〈2, 3, 0, 5, 7, 9, 1, 8, 6, 4〉. Describe a sequence of
partitions that results in a worst-case performance of
RANDOMIZED-SELECT.

9.2-4

Argue that the expected running time of RANDOMIZED-SELECT does not
depend on the order of the elements in its input array A[p : r]. That
is, the expected running time is the same for any permutation of the
input array A[p : r]. (Hint: Argue by induction on the length n of the
input array.)

9.3      Selection in worst-case linear time

We’ll now examine a remarkable and theoretically interesting selection
algorithm whose running time is Θ(n) in the worst case. Although the
RANDOMIZED-SELECT algorithm from Section 9.2 achieves linear expected
time, we saw that its running time in the worst case was quadratic. The
selection algorithm presented in this section achieves linear time in
the worst case, but it is not nearly as practical as RANDOMIZED-SELECT.
It is mostly of theoretical interest.

Like the expected linear-time RANDOMIZED-SELECT, the worst-case
linear-time algorithm SELECT finds the desired element by recursively
partitioning the input array. Unlike RANDOMIZED-SELECT, however,
SELECT guarantees a good split by choosing a provably good pivot when
partitioning the array. The cleverness in the algorithm is that it finds
the pivot recursively. Thus, there are two invocations of SELECT: one to
find a good pivot, and a second to recursively find the desired order
statistic.

The partitioning algorithm used by SELECT is like the deterministic
partitioning algorithm PARTITION from quicksort (see Section 7.1), but
modified to take the element to partition around as an additional input
parameter. Like PARTITION, the PARTITION-AROUND algorithm returns the
index of the pivot. Since it’s so similar to PARTITION, the pseudocode
for PARTITION-AROUND is omitted.

The SELECT procedure takes as input a subarray A[p : r] of n = r – p + 1
elements and an integer i in the range 1 ≤ i ≤ n. It returns the ith
smallest element of A. The pseudocode is actually more understandable
than it might appear at first.

SELECT(A, p, r, i)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | while (r – p + 1) mod 5 ≠ 0   |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | for j = p + 1 to r            | // put the minimum into A[p]  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | if A[p] > A[j]                |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | exchange A[p] with A[j]       |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | // If we want the minimum of A[p : r], we’re done.            |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   6 | if i == 1                     |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   7 | return A[p]                   |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   8 | // Otherwise, we want the (i – 1)st element of A[p + 1 : r].  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | p = p + 1                     |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10  | i = i – 1                     |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 11  | g = (r – p + 1)/5             | // number of 5-element groups |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 12  | for j = p to p + g – 1        | // sort each group            |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 13  | sort 〈A[j], A[j + g], A[j + 2g], A[j + 3g], A[j + 4g]〉 in   |
|     | place                                                         |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14  | // All group medians now lie in the middle fifth of A[p : r]. |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15  | // Find the pivot x recursively as the median of the group    |
|     | medians.                                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16  | x = SELECT(A, p + 2g, p + 3g – 1, ⌈g/2⌉)                      |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 17  | q = PARTITION-AROUND(A, p, r, | // partition around the pivot |
|     | x)                            |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 18  | // The rest is just like lines 3–9 of RANDOMIZED-SELECT.      |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 19  | k = q – p + 1                 |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 20  | if i == k                     |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 21  | return A[q]                   | // the pivot value is the     |
|     |                               | answer                        |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 22  | elseif i < k                  |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 23  | return SELECT(A, p, q – 1, i) |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 24  | else return SELECT(A, q + 1,  |                               |
|     | r, i – k)                     |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+

The pseudocode starts by executing the while loop in lines 1–10 to
reduce the number r – p + 1 of elements in the subarray until it is
divisible by 5. The while loop executes 0 to 4 times, each time
rearranging the elements of A[p : r] so that A[p] contains the minimum
element. If i = 1, which means that we actually want the minimum
element, then the procedure simply returns it in line 7. Otherwise,
SELECT eliminates the minimum from the subarray A[p : r] and iterates to
find the (i – 1)st element in A[p + 1 : r]. Lines 9–10 do so by
incrementing p and decrementing i. If the while loop completes all of
its iterations without returning a result, the procedure executes the
core of the algorithm in lines 11–24, assured that the number r – p + 1
of elements in A[p : r] is evenly divisible by 5.

[art]

Figure 9.3 The relationships between elements (shown as circles)
immediately after line 17 of the selection algorithm SELECT. There are g
= (r – p + 1)/5 groups of 5 elements, each of which occupies a column.
For example, the leftmost column contains elements A[p], A[p + g], A[p +
2g], A[p + 3g], A[p + 4g], and the next column contains A[p + 1], A[p +
g + 1], A[p + 2g + 1], A[p + 3g + 1], A[p + 4g + 1]. The medians of the
groups are red, and the pivot x is labeled. Arrows go from smaller
elements to larger. The elements on the blue background are all known to
be less than or equal to x and cannot fall into the high side of the
partition around x. The elements on the yellow background are known to
be greater than or equal to x and cannot fall into the low side of the
partition around x. The pivot x belongs to both the blue and yellow
regions and is shown on a green background. The elements on the white
background could lie on either side of the partition.

The next part of the algorithm implements the following idea,
illustrated in Figure 9.3. Divide the elements in A[p : r] into g = (r –
p + 1)/5 groups of 5 elements each. The first 5-element group is

〈A[p], A[p + g], A[p + 2g], A[p + 3g], A[p + 4g]〉,

the second is

〈A[p + 1], A[p + g + 1], A[p + 2g + 1], A[p + 3g + 1], A[p + 4g + 1]〉,

and so forth until the last, which is

〈A[p + g – 1], A[p + 2g – 1], A[p + 3g – 1], A[p + 4g – 1], A[r]〉.

(Note that r = p + 5g – 1.) Line 13 puts each group in order using, for
example, insertion sort (Section 2.1), so that for j = p, p + 1, … , p +
g – 1, we have

A[j] ≤ A[j + g] ≤ A[j + 2g] ≤ A[j + 3g] ≤ A[j + 4g].

Each vertical column in Figure 9.3 depicts a sorted group of 5 elements.
The median of each 5-element group is A[j + 2g], and thus all the
5-element medians, shown in red, lie in the range A[p + 2g : p + 3g –
1].

Next, line 16 determines the pivot x by recursively calling SELECT to
find the median (specifically, the ⌈g/2⌉th smallest) of the g group
medians. Line 17 uses the modified PARTITION-AROUND algorithm to
partition the elements of A[p : r] around x, returning the index q of x,
so that A[q] = x, elements in A[p : q] are all at most x, and elements
in A[q : r] are greater than or equal to x.

The remainder of the code mirrors that of RANDOMIZED-SELECT. If the
pivot x is the ith largest, the procedure returns it. Otherwise, the
procedure recursively calls itself on either A[p : q – 1] or A[q + 1 :
r], depending on the value of i.

Let’s analyze the running time of SELECT and see how the judicious
choice of the pivot x plays into a guarantee on its worst-case running
time.

Theorem 9.3

The running time of SELECT on an input of n elements is Θ(n).

Proof   Define T (n) as the worst-case time to run SELECT on any input
subarray A[p : r] of size at most n, that is, for which r – p + 1 ≤ n.
By this definition, T (n) is monotonically increasing.

We first determine an upper bound on the time spent outside the
recursive calls in lines 16, 23, and 24. The while loop in lines 1–10
executes 0 to 4 times, which is O(1) times. Since the dominant time
within the loop is the computation of the minimum in lines 2–4, which
takes Θ(n) time, lines 1–10 execute in O(1) · Θ(n) = O(n) time. The
sorting of the 5-element groups in lines 12–13 takes Θ(n) time because
each 5-element group takes Θ(1) time to sort (even using an
asymptotically inefficient sorting algorithm such as insertion sort),
and there are g elements to sort, where n/5 – 1 < g ≤ n/5. Finally, the
time to partition in line 17 is Θ(n), as Exercise 7.1-3 on page 187 asks
you to show. Because the remaining bookkeeping only costs Θ(1) time, the
total amount of time spent outside of the recursive calls is O(n) +
Θ(n) + Θ(n) + Θ(1) = Θ(n).

Now let’s determine the running time for the recursive calls. The
recursive call to find the pivot in line 16 takes T (g) ≤ T (n/5) time,
since g ≤ n/5 and T (n) monotonically increases. Of the two recursive
calls in lines 23 and 24, at most one is executed. But we’ll see that no
matter which of these two recursive calls to SELECT actually executes,
the number of elements in the recursive call turns out to be at most
7n/10, and hence the worst-case cost for lines 23 and 24 is at most T
(7n/10). Let’s now show that the machinations with group medians and the
choice of the pivot x as the median of the group medians guarantees this
property.

Figure 9.3 helps to visualize what’s going on. There are g ≤ n/5 groups
of 5 elements, with each group shown as a column sorted from bottom to
top. The arrows show the ordering of elements within the columns. The
columns are ordered from left to right with groups to the left of x’s
group having a group median less than x and those to the right of x’s
group having a group median greater than x. Although the relative order
within each group matters, the relative order among groups to the left
of x’s column doesn’t really matter, and neither does the relative order
among groups to the right of x’s column. The important thing is that the
groups to the left have group medians less than x (shown by the
horizontal arrows entering x), and that the groups to the right have
group medians greater than x (shown by the horizontal arrows leaving x).
Thus, the yellow region contains elements that we know are greater than
or equal to x, and the blue region contains elements that we know are
less than or equal to x.

These two regions each contain at least 3g/2 elements. The number of
group medians in the yellow region is ⌊g/2⌋ + 1, and for each group
median, two additional elements are greater than it, making a total of
3(⌊g/2⌋ + 1) ≥ 3g/2 elements. Similarly, the number of group medians in
the blue region is ⌈g/2⌉, and for each group median, two additional
elements are less than it, making a total of 3 ⌈g/2 ⌉ ≥ 3g/2.

The elements in the yellow region cannot fall into the low side of the
partition around x, and those in the blue region cannot fall into the
high side. The elements in neither region—those lying on a white
background—could fall into either side of the partition. But since the
low side of the partition excludes the elements in the yellow region,
and there are a total of 5g elements, we know that the low side of the
partition can contain at most 5g – 3g/2 = 7g/2 ≤ 7n/10 elements.
Likewise, the high side of the partition excludes the elements in the
blue region, and a similar calculation shows that it also contains at
most 7n/10 elements.

All of which leads to the following recurrence for the worst-case
running time of SELECT:

[art]

We can show that T (n) = O(n) by substitution.² More specifically, we’ll
prove that T (n) ≤ cn for some suitably large constant c > 0 and all n >
0. Substituting this inductive hypothesis into the right-hand side of
recurrence (9.1) and assuming that n ≥ 5 yields

  ------- --- --------------------------
  T (n)   ≤   c(n/5) + c(7n/10) + Θ(n)
          ≤   9cn/10 + Θ(n)
          =   cn – cn/10 + Θ(n)
          ≤   cn
  ------- --- --------------------------

if c is chosen large enough that c/10 dominates the upper-bound constant
hidden by the Θ(n). In addition to this constraint, we can pick c large
enough that T (n) ≤ cn for all n ≤ 4, which is the base case of the
recursion within SELECT. The running time of SELECT is therefore O(n) in
the worst case, and because line 13 alone takes Θ(n) time, the total
time is Θ(n).

▪

As in a comparison sort (see Section 8.1), SELECT and RANDOMIZED-SELECT
determine information about the relative order of elements only by
comparing elements. Recall from Chapter 8 that sorting requires Ω(n lg
n) time in the comparison model, even on average (see Problem 8-1). The
linear-time sorting algorithms in Chapter 8 make assumptions about the
type of the input. In contrast, the linear-time selection algorithms in
this chapter do not require any assumptions about the input’s type, only
that the elements are distinct and can be pairwise compared according to
a linear order. The algorithms in this chapter are not subject to the
Ω(n lg n) lower bound, because they manage to solve the selection
problem without sorting all the elements. Thus, solving the selection
problem by sorting and indexing, as presented in the introduction to
this chapter, is asymptotically inefficient in the comparison model.

Exercises

9.3-1

In the algorithm SELECT, the input elements are divided into groups of
5. Show that the algorithm works in linear time if the input elements
are divided into groups of 7 instead of 5.

9.3-2

Suppose that the preprocessing in lines 1–10 of SELECT is replaced by a
base case for n ≥ n₀, where n₀ is a suitable constant; that g is chosen
as ⌊r – p + 1)/5⌋; and that the elements in A[5g : n] belong to no
group. Show that although the recurrence for the running time becomes
messier, it still solves to Θ(n).

9.3-3

Show how to use SELECT as a subroutine to make quicksort run in O(n lg
n) time in the worst case, assuming that all elements are distinct.

[art]

Figure 9.4 Professor Olay needs to determine the position of the
east-west oil pipeline that minimizes the total length of the
north-south spurs.

★ 9.3-4

Suppose that an algorithm uses only comparisons to find the ith smallest
element in a set of n elements. Show that it can also find the i – 1
smaller elements and the n – i larger elements without performing any
additional comparisons.

9.3-5

Show how to determine the median of a 5-element set using only 6
comparisons.

9.3-6

You have a “black-box” worst-case linear-time median subroutine. Give a
simple, linear-time algorithm that solves the selection problem for an
arbitrary order statistic.

9.3-7

Professor Olay is consulting for an oil company, which is planning a
large pipeline running east to west through an oil field of n wells. The
company wants to connect a spur pipeline from each well directly to the
main pipeline along a shortest route (either north or south), as shown
in Figure 9.4. Given the x- and y-coordinates of the wells, how should
the professor pick an optimal location of the main pipeline to minimize
the total length of the spurs? Show how to determine an optimal location
in linear time.

9.3-8

The kth quantiles of an n-element set are the k – 1 order statistics
that divide the sorted set into k equal-sized sets (to within 1). Give
an O(n lg k)-time algorithm to list the kth quantiles of a set.

9.3-9

Describe an O(n)-time algorithm that, given a set S of n distinct
numbers and a positive integer k ≤ n, determines the k numbers in S that
are closest to the median of S.

9.3-10

Let X[1 : n] and Y [1 : n] be two arrays, each containing n numbers
already in sorted order. Give an O(lg n)-time algorithm to find the
median of all 2n elements in arrays X and Y. Assume that all 2n numbers
are distinct.

Problems

9-1     Largest i numbers in sorted order

You are given a set of n numbers, and you wish to find the i largest in
sorted order using a comparison-based algorithm. Describe the algorithm
that implements each of the following methods with the best asymptotic
worst-case running time, and analyze the running times of the algorithms
in terms of n and i.

a. Sort the numbers, and list the i largest.

b. Build a max-priority queue from the numbers, and call EXTRACT-MAX i
times.

c. Use an order-statistic algorithm to find the ith largest number,
partition around that number, and sort the i largest numbers.

9-2     Variant of randomized selection

Professor Mendel has proposed simplifying RANDOMIZED-SELECT by
eliminating the check for whether i and k are equal. The simplified
procedure is SIMPLER-RANDOMIZED-SELECT.

SIMPLER-RANDOMIZED-SELECT(A, p, r, i)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | if p == r                                                       |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | return A[p]                    | // 1 ≤ i ≤ r – p + 1 means     |
|   |                                | that i = 1                     |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | q = RANDOMIZED-PARTITION(A, p, r)                               |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4 | k = q – p + 1                                                   |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5 | if i ≤ k                                                        |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6 | return SIMPLER-RANDOMIZED-SELECT(A, p, q, i)                    |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 7 | else return SIMPLER-RANDOMIZED-SELECT(A, q + 1, r, i – k)       |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

a. Argue that in the worst case, SIMPLER-RANDOMIZED-SELECT never
terminates.

b. Prove that the expected running time of SIMPLER-RANDOMIZED-SELECT is
still O(n).

9-3     Weighted median

Consider n elements x₁, x₂, … , x_(n) with positive weights w₁, w₂, … ,
w_(n) such that [art]. The weighted (lower) median is an element x_(k)
satisfying

[art]

and

[art]

For example, consider the following elements x_(i) and weights w_(i):

  ------- ------ ------ ------- ------ ------ ------- -----
  i       1      2      3       4      5      6       7
  x_(i)   3      8      2       5      4      1       6
  w_(i)   0.12   0.35   0.025   0.08   0.15   0.075   0.2
  ------- ------ ------ ------- ------ ------ ------- -----

For these elements, the median is x₅ = 4, but the weighted median is x₇
= 6. To see why the weighted median is x₇, observe that the elements
less than x₇ are x₁, x₃, x₄, x₅, and x₆, and the sum w₁ + w₃ + w₄ + w₅ +
w₆ = 0.45, which is less than 1/2. Furthermore, only element x₂ is
greater than x₇, and w₂ = 0.35, which is no greater than 1/2.

a. Argue that the median of x₁, x₂, … , x_(n) is the weighted median of
the x_(i) with weights w_(i) = 1/n for i = 1, 2, … , n.

b. Show how to compute the weighted median of n elements in O(n lg n)
worst-case time using sorting.

c. Show how to compute the weighted median in Θ(n) worst-case time using
a linear-time median algorithm such as SELECT from Section 9.3.

The post-office location problem is defined as follows. The input is n
points p₁, p₂, … , p_(n) with associated weights w₁, w₂, … , w_(n). A
solution is a point p (not necessarily one of the input points) that
minimizes the sum [art], where d(a, b) is the distance between points a
and b.

d. Argue that the weighted median is a best solution for the
one-dimensional post-office location problem, in which points are simply
real numbers and the distance between points a and b is d(a, b) = |a –
b|.

e. Find the best solution for the two-dimensional post-office location
problem, in which the points are (x, y) coordinate pairs and the
distance between points a = (x₁, y₁) and b = (x₂, y₂) is the Manhattan
distance given by d(a, b) = |x₁ – x₂| + |y₁ – y₂|.

9-4     Small order statistics

Let’s denote by S(n) the worst-case number of comparisons used by SELECT
to select the ith order statistic from n numbers. Although S(n) = Θ(n),
the constant hidden by the Θ-notation is rather large. When i is small
relative to n, there is an algorithm that uses SELECT as a subroutine
but makes fewer comparisons in the worst case.

a. Describe an algorithm that uses U_(i)(n) comparisons to find the ith
smallest of n elements, where

[art]

(Hint: Begin with ⌊n/2⌋ disjoint pairwise comparisons, and recurse on
the set containing the smaller element from each pair.)

b. Show that, if i < n/2, then U_(i)(n) = n + O(S(2i) lg(n/i)).

c. Show that if i is a constant less than n/2, then U_(i)(n) = n + O(lg
n).

d. Show that if i = n/k for k ≥ 2, then U_(i)(n) = n + O(S(2n/k) lg k).

9-5     Alternative analysis of randomized selection

In this problem, you will use indicator random variables to analyze the
procedure RANDOMIZED-SELECT in a manner akin to our analysis of
RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT in Section 7.4.2.

As in the quicksort analysis, we assume that all elements are distinct,
and we rename the elements of the input array A as z₁, z₂, … , z_(n),
where z_(i) is the ith smallest element. Thus the call
RANDOMIZED-SELECT(A, 1, n, i) returns z_(i).

For 1 ≤ j < k ≤ n, let

  --------- --- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  X_(ijk)   =   I {z_(j) is compared with z_(k) sometime during the execution of the algorithm to find z_(i)}.
  --------- --- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

a. Give an exact expression for E [X_(ijk)]. (Hint: Your expression may
have different values, depending on the values of i, j, and k.)

b. Let X_(i) denote the total number of comparisons between elements of
array A when finding z_(i). Show that

[art]

c. Show that E [X_(i)] ≤ 4n.

d. Conclude that, assuming all elements of array A are distinct,
RANDOMIZED-SELECT runs in O(n) expected time.

9-6     Select with groups of 3

Exercise 9.3-1 asks you to show that the SELECT algorithm still runs in
linear time if the elements are divided into groups of 7. This problem
asks about dividing into groups of 3.

a. Show that SELECT runs in linear time if you divide the elements into
groups whose size is any odd constant greater than 3.

b. Show that SELECT runs in O(n lg n) time if you divide the elements
into groups of size 3.

Because the bound in part (b) is just an upper bound, we do not know
whether the groups-of-3 strategy actually runs in O(n) time. But by
repeating the groups-of-3 idea on the middle group of medians, we can
pick a pivot that guarantees O(n) time. The SELECT3 algorithm on the
next page determines the ith smallest of an input array of n > 1
distinct elements.

c. Describe in English how the SELECT3 algorithm works. Include in your
description one or more suitable diagrams.

d. Show that SELECT3 runs in O(n) time in the worst case.

Chapter notes

The worst-case linear-time median-finding algorithm was devised by Blum,
Floyd, Pratt, Rivest, and Tarjan [62]. The fast randomized version is
due to Hoare [218]. Floyd and Rivest [147] have developed an improved
randomized version that partitions around an element recursively
selected from a small sample of the elements.

SELECT3(A, p, r, i)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | while (r – p + 1) mod 9 ≠ 0                                   |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | for j = p + 1 to r            | // put the minimum into A[p]  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | if A[p] > A[j]                                                |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   4 | exchange A[p] with A[j]                                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   5 | // If we want the minimum of A[p : r], we’re done.            |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   6 | if i == 1                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   7 | return A[p]                                                   |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   8 | // Otherwise, we want the (i – 1)st element of A[p + 1 : r].  |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   9 | p = p + 1                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10  | i = i – 1                                                     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 11  | g = (r – p + 1)/3             | // number of 3-element groups |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 12  | for j = p to p + g – 1        | // run through the groups     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 13  | sort 〈A[j], A[j + g], A[j + 2g]〉 in place                   |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14  | // All group medians now lie in the middle third of A[p : r]. |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 15  | g′ = g/3                      | // number of 3-element        |
|     |                               | subgroups                     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 16  | for j = p + g to p + g + g′ – | // sort the subgroups         |
|     | 1                             |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 17  | sort 〈A[j], A[j + g′], A[j + 2g′]〉 in place                 |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18  | // All subgroup medians now lie in the middle ninth of A[p :  |
|     | r].                                                           |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19  | // Find the pivot x recursively as the median of the subgroup |
|     | medians.                                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 20  | x = SELECT3(A, p + 4g′, p + 5g′ – 1, ⌈g′/2⌉)                  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 21  | q = PARTITION-AROUND(A, p, r, | // partition around the pivot |
|     | x)                            |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 22  | // The rest is just like lines 19–24 of SELECT.               |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 23  | k = q – p + 1                                                 |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 24  | if i == k                                                     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 25  | return A[q]                   | // the pivot value is the     |
|     |                               | answer                        |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 26  | elseif i < k                                                  |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 27  | return SELECT3(A, p, q – 1, i)                                |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 28  | else return SELECT3(A, q + 1, r, i – k)                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

It is still unknown exactly how many comparisons are needed to determine
the median. Bent and John [48] gave a lower bound of 2n comparisons for
median finding, and Schönhage, Paterson, and Pippenger [397] gave an
upper bound of 3n. Dor and Zwick have improved on both of these bounds.
Their upper bound [123] is slightly less than 2.95n, and their lower
bound [124] is (2 + ϵ)n, for a small positive constant ϵ, thereby
improving slightly on related work by Dor et al. [122]. Paterson [354]
describes some of these results along with other related work.

Problem 9-6 was inspired by a paper by Chen and Dumitrescu [84].

¹ As in the footnote on page 182, you can enforce the assumption that
the numbers are distinct by converting each input value A[i] to an
ordered pair (A[i], i) with (A[i], i) < (A[j], j) if either A[i] < A[j]
or A[i] = A[j] and i < j.

² We could also use the Akra-Bazzi method from Section 4.7, which
involves calculus, to solve this recurrence. Indeed, a similar
recurrence (4.24) on page 117 was used to illustrate that method.

Part III    Data Structures

 

 

Introduction

Sets are as fundamental to computer science as they are to mathematics.
Whereas mathematical sets are unchanging, the sets manipulated by
algorithms can grow, shrink, or otherwise change over time. We call such
sets dynamic. The next four chapters present some basic techniques for
representing finite dynamic sets and manipulating them on a computer.

Algorithms may require several types of operations to be performed on
sets. For example, many algorithms need only the ability to insert
elements into, delete elements from, and test membership in a set. We
call a dynamic set that supports these operations a dictionary. Other
algorithms require more complicated operations. For example,
min-priority queues, which Chapter 6 introduced in the context of the
heap data structure, support the operations of inserting an element into
and extracting the smallest element from a set. The best way to
implement a dynamic set depends upon the operations that you need to
support.

Elements of a dynamic set

In a typical implementation of a dynamic set, each element is
represented by an object whose attributes can be examined and
manipulated given a pointer to the object. Some kinds of dynamic sets
assume that one of the object’s attributes is an identifying key. If the
keys are all different, we can think of the dynamic set as being a set
of key values. The object may contain satellite data, which are carried
around in other object attributes but are otherwise unused by the set
implementation. It may also have attributes that are manipulated by the
set operations. These attributes may contain data or pointers to other
objects in the set.

Some dynamic sets presuppose that the keys are drawn from a totally
ordered set, such as the real numbers, or the set of all words under the
usual alphabetic ordering. A total ordering allows us to define the
minimum element of the set, for example, or to speak of the next element
larger than a given element in a set.

Operations on dynamic sets

Operations on a dynamic set can be grouped into two categories: queries,
which simply return information about the set, and modifying operations,
which change the set. Here is a list of typical operations. Any specific
application will usually require only a few of these to be implemented.

SEARCH(S, k)

A query that, given a set S and a key value k, returns a pointer x to an
element in S such that x.key = k, or NIL if no such element belongs to
S.

INSERT(S, x)

A modifying operation that adds the element pointed to by x to the set
S. We usually assume that any attributes in element x needed by the set
implementation have already been initialized.

DELETE(S, x)

A modifying operation that, given a pointer x to an element in the set
S, removes x from S. (Note that this operation takes a pointer to an
element x, not a key value.)

MINIMUM(S) and MAXIMUM(S)

Queries on a totally ordered set S that return a pointer to the element
of S with the smallest (for MINIMUM) or largest (for MAXIMUM) key.

SUCCESSOR(S, x)

A query that, given an element x whose key is from a totally ordered set
S, returns a pointer to the next larger element in S, or NIL if x is the
maximum element.

PREDECESSOR(S, x)

A query that, given an element x whose key is from a totally ordered set
S, returns a pointer to the next smaller element in S, or NIL if x is
the minimum element.

In some situations, we can extend the queries SUCCESSOR and PREDECESSOR
so that they apply to sets with nondistinct keys. For a set on n keys,
the normal presumption is that a call to MINIMUM followed by n – 1 calls
to SUCCESSOR enumerates the elements in the set in sorted order.

We usually measure the time taken to execute a set operation in terms of
the size of the set. For example, Chapter 13 describes a data structure
that can support any of the operations listed above on a set of size n
in O(lg n) time.

Of course, you can always choose to implement a dynamic set with an
array. The advantage of doing so is that the algorithms for the
dynamic-set operations are simple. The downside, however, is that many
of these operations have a worst-case running time of Θ(n). If the array
is not sorted, INSERT and DELETE can take Θ(1) time, but the remaining
operations take Θ(n) time. If instead the array is maintained in sorted
order, then MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR take Θ(1) time;
SEARCH takes O(lg n) time if implemented with binary search; but INSERT
and DELETE take Θ(n) time in the worst case. The data structures studied
in this part improve on the array implementation for many of the
dynamic-set operations.

Overview of Part III

Chapters 10–13 describe several data structures that we can use to
implement dynamic sets. We’ll use many of these data structures later to
construct efficient algorithms for a variety of problems. We already saw
another important data structure—the heap—in Chapter 6.

Chapter 10 presents the essentials of working with simple data
structures such as arrays, matrices, stacks, queues, linked lists, and
rooted trees. If you have taken an introductory programming course, then
much of this material should be familiar to you.

Chapter 11 introduces hash tables, a widely used data structure
supporting the dictionary operations INSERT, DELETE, and SEARCH. In the
worst case, hash tables require Θ(n) time to perform a SEARCH operation,
but the expected time for hash-table operations is O(1). We rely on
probability to analyze hash-table operations, but you can understand how
the operations work even without probability.

Binary search trees, which are covered in Chapter 12, support all the
dynamic-set operations listed above. In the worst case, each operation
takes Θ(n) time on a tree with n elements. Binary search trees serve as
the basis for many other data structures.

Chapter 13 introduces red-black trees, which are a variant of binary
search trees. Unlike ordinary binary search trees, red-black trees are
guaranteed to perform well: operations take O(lg n) time in the worst
case. A red-black tree is a balanced search tree. Chapter 18 in Part V
presents another kind of balanced search tree, called a B-tree. Although
the mechanics of red-black trees are somewhat intricate, you can glean
most of their properties from the chapter without studying the mechanics
in detail. Nevertheless, you probably will find walking through the code
to be instructive.

10        Elementary Data Structures

In this chapter, we examine the representation of dynamic sets by simple
data structures that use pointers. Although you can construct many
complex data structures using pointers, we present only the rudimentary
ones: arrays, matrices, stacks, queues, linked lists, and rooted trees.

10.1    Simple array-based data structures: arrays, matrices, stacks,
queues

10.1.1    Arrays

We assume that, as in most programming languages, an array is stored as
a contiguous sequence of bytes in memory. If the first element of an
array has index s (for example, in an array with 1-origin indexing, s =
1), the array starts at memory address a, and each array element
occupies b bytes, then the ith element occupies bytes a + b(i – s)
through a + b(i – s + 1) – 1. Since most of the arrays in this book are
indexed starting at 1, and a few starting at 0, we can simplify these
formulas a little. When s = 1, the ith element occupies bytes a + b(i
– 1) through a + bi – 1, and when s = 0, the ith element occupies bytes
a + bi through a + b(i + 1) – 1. Assuming that the computer can access
all memory locations in the same amount of time (as in the RAM model
described in Section 2.2), it takes constant time to access any array
element, regardless of the index.

Most programming languages require each element of a particular array to
be the same size. If the elements of a given array might occupy
different numbers of bytes, then the above formulas fail to apply, since
the element size b is not a constant. In such cases, the array elements
are usually objects of varying sizes, and what actually appears in each
array element is a pointer to the object. The number of bytes occupied
by a pointer is typically the same, no matter what the pointer
references, so that to access an object in an array, the above formulas
give the address of the pointer to the object and then the pointer must
be followed to access the object itself.

[art]

Figure 10.1 Four ways to store the 2 × 3 matrix M from equation (10.1).
(a) In row-major order, in a single array. (b) In column-major order, in
a single array. (c) In row-major order, with one array per row (tan) and
a single array (blue) of pointers to the row arrays. (d) In column-major
order, with one array per column (tan) and a single array (blue) of
pointers to the column arrays.

10.1.2    Matrices

We typically represent a matrix or two-dimensional array by one or more
one-dimensional arrays. The two most common ways to store a matrix are
row-major and column-major order. Let’s consider an m × n matrix—a
matrix with m rows and n columns. In row-major order, the matrix is
stored row by row, and in column-major order, the matrix is stored
column by column. For example, consider the 2 × 3 matrix

[art]

Row-major order stores the two rows 1 2 3 and 4 5 6, whereas
column-major order stores the three columns 1 4; 2 5; and 3 6.

Parts (a) and (b) of Figure 10.1 show how to store this matrix using a
single one-dimensional array. It’s stored in row-major order in part (a)
and in column-major order in part (b). If the rows, columns, and the
single array all are indexed starting at s, then M [i, j]—the element in
row i and column j—is at array index s + (n(i – s)) + (j – s) with
row-major order and s + (m(j – s)) + (i – s) with column-major order.
When s = 1, the single-array indices are n(i – 1) + j with row-major
order and i + m(j – 1) with column-major order. When s = 0, the
single-array indices are simpler: ni + j with row-major order and i + mj
with column-major order. For the example matrix M with 1-origin
indexing, element M [2, 1] is stored at index 3(2 – 1) + 1 = 4 in the
single array using row-major order and at index 2 + 2(1 – 1) = 2 using
column-major order.

Parts (c) and (d) of Figure 10.1 show multiple-array strategies for
storing the example matrix. In part (c), each row is stored in its own
array of length n, shown in tan. Another array, with m elements, shown
in blue, points to the m row arrays. If we call the blue array A, then
A[i] points to the array storing the entries for row i of M, and array
element A[i] [j] stores matrix element M [i, j]. Part (d) shows the
column-major version of the multiple-array representation, with n
arrays, each of length m, representing the n columns. Matrix element M
[i, j] is stored in array element A[j] [i].

Single-array representations are typically more efficient on modern
machines than multiple-array representations. But multiple-array
representations can sometimes be more flexible, for example, allowing
for “ragged arrays,” in which the rows in the row-major version may have
different lengths, or symmetrically for the column-major version, where
columns may have different lengths.

Occasionally, other schemes are used to store matrices. In the block
representation, the matrix is divided into blocks, and each block is
stored contiguously. For example, a 4 × 4 matrix that is divided into 2
× 2 blocks, such as

[art]

might be stored in a single array in the order 〈1, 2, 5, 6, 3, 4, 7, 8,
9, 10, 13, 14, 11, 12, 15, 16〉.

10.1.3    Stacks and queues

Stacks and queues are dynamic sets in which the element removed from the
set by the DELETE operation is prespecified. In a stack, the element
deleted from the set is the one most recently inserted: the stack
implements a last-in, first-out, or LIFO, policy. Similarly, in a queue,
the element deleted is always the one that has been in the set for the
longest time: the queue implements a first-in, first-out, or FIFO,
policy. There are several efficient ways to implement stacks and queues
on a computer. Here, you will see how to use an array with attributes to
store them.

Stacks

The INSERT operation on a stack is often called PUSH, and the DELETE
operation, which does not take an element argument, is often called POP.
These names are allusions to physical stacks, such as the spring-loaded
stacks of plates used in cafeterias. The order in which plates are
popped from the stack is the reverse of the order in which they were
pushed onto the stack, since only the top plate is accessible.

Figure 10.2 shows how to implement a stack of at most n elements with an
array S[1 : n]. The stack has attributes S.top, indexing the most
recently inserted element, and S.size, equaling the size n of the array.
The stack consists of elements S[1 : S.top], where S[1] is the element
at the bottom of the stack and S[S.top] is the element at the top.

[art]

Figure 10.2 An array implementation of a stack S. Stack elements appear
only in the tan positions. (a) Stack S has 4 elements. The top element
is 9. (b) Stack S after the calls PUSH(S, 17) and PUSH(S, 3). (c) Stack
S after the call POP(S) has returned the element 3, which is the one
most recently pushed. Although element 3 still appears in the array, it
is no longer in the stack. The top is element 17.

When S.top = 0, the stack contains no elements and is empty. We can test
whether the stack is empty with the query operation STACK-EMPTY. Upon an
attempt to pop an empty stack, the stack underflows, which is normally
an error. If S.top exceeds S.size, the stack overflows.

The procedures STACK-EMPTY, PUSH, and POP implement each of the stack
operations with just a few lines of code. Figure 10.2 shows the effects
of the modifying operations PUSH and POP. Each of the three stack
operations takes O(1) time.

STACK-EMPTY(S)

  --- -------------------
  1   if S.top == 0
  2   return TRUE
  3   else return FALSE
  --- -------------------

PUSH(S, x)

  --- ------------------------
  1   if S.top == S.size
  2   error “overflow”
  3   else S.top = S.top + 1
  4   S[S.top] = x
  --- ------------------------

POP(S)

  --- ------------------------
  1   if STACK-EMPTY(S)
  2   error “underflow”
  3   else S.top = S.top – 1
  4   return S[S.top + 1]
  --- ------------------------

[art]

Figure 10.3 A queue implemented using an array Q[1 : 12]. Queue elements
appear only in the tan positions. (a) The queue has 5 elements, in
locations Q[7 : 11]. (b) The configuration of the queue after the calls
ENQUEUE(Q, 17), ENQUEUE(Q, 3), and ENQUEUE(Q, 5). (c) The configuration
of the queue after the call DEQUEUE(Q) returns the key value 15 formerly
at the head of the queue. The new head has key 6.

Queues

We call the INSERT operation on a queue ENQUEUE, and we call the DELETE
operation DEQUEUE. Like the stack operation POP, DEQUEUE takes no
element argument. The FIFO property of a queue causes it to operate like
a line of customers waiting for service. The queue has a head and a
tail. When an element is enqueued, it takes its place at the tail of the
queue, just as a newly arriving customer takes a place at the end of the
line. The element dequeued is always the one at the head of the queue,
like the customer at the head of the line, who has waited the longest.

Figure 10.3 shows one way to implement a queue of at most n – 1 elements
using an array Q[1 : n], with the attribute Q.size equaling the size n
of the array. The queue has an attribute Q.head that indexes, or points
to, its head. The attribute Q.tail indexes the next location at which a
newly arriving element will be inserted into the queue. The elements in
the queue reside in locations Q.head, Q.head + 1, … , Q.tail – 1, where
we “wrap around” in the sense that location 1 immediately follows
location n in a circular order. When Q.head = Q.tail, the queue is
empty. Initially, we have Q.head = Q.tail = 1. An attempt to dequeue an
element from an empty queue causes the queue to underflow. When Q.head =
Q.tail + 1 or both Q.head = 1 and Q.tail = Q.size, the queue is full,
and an attempt to enqueue an element causes the queue to overflow.

In the procedures ENQUEUE and DEQUEUE, we have omitted the error
checking for underflow and overflow. (Exercise 10.1-5 asks you to supply
these checks.) Figure 10.3 shows the effects of the ENQUEUE and DEQUEUE
operations. Each operation takes O(1) time.

ENQUEUE(Q, x)

  --- --------------------------
  1   Q[Q.tail] = x
  2   if Q.tail == Q.size
  3   Q.tail = 1
  4   else Q.tail = Q.tail + 1
  --- --------------------------

DEQUEUE(Q)

  --- --------------------------
  1   x = Q[Q.head]
  2   if Q.head == Q.size
  3   Q.head = 1
  4   else Q.head = Q.head + 1
  5   return x
  --- --------------------------

Exercises

10.1-1

Consider an m × n matrix in row-major order, where both m and n are
powers of 2 and rows and columns are indexed from 0. We can represent a
row index i in binary by the lg m bits 〈i_(lg m – 1), i_(lg m – 2), … ,
i₀〉 and a column index j in binary by the lg n bits 〈j_(lg n – 1),
j_(lg n – 2), … , j₀〉. Suppose that this matrix is a 2 × 2 block
matrix, where each block has m/2 rows and n/2 columns, and it is to be
represented by a single array with 0-origin indexing. Show how to
construct the binary representation of the (lg m + lg n)-bit index into
the single array from the binary representations of i and j.

10.1-2

Using Figure 10.2 as a model, illustrate the result of each operation in
the sequence PUSH(S, 4), PUSH(S, 1), PUSH(S, 3), POP(S), PUSH(S, 8), and
POP(S) on an initially empty stack S stored in array S[1 : 6]

10.1-3

Explain how to implement two stacks in one array A[1 : n] in such a way
that neither stack overflows unless the total number of elements in both
stacks together is n. The PUSH and POP operations should run in O(1)
time.

10.1-4

Using Figure 10.3 as a model, illustrate the result of each operation in
the sequence ENQUEUE(Q, 4), ENQUEUE(Q, 1), ENQUEUE(Q, 3), DEQUEUE(Q),
ENQUEUE(Q, 8), and DEQUEUE(Q) on an initially empty queue Q stored in
array Q[1 : 6].

10.1-5

Rewrite ENQUEUE and DEQUEUE to detect underflow and overflow of a queue.

10.1-6

Whereas a stack allows insertion and deletion of elements at only one
end, and a queue allows insertion at one end and deletion at the other
end, a deque (double-ended queue, pronounced like “deck”) allows
insertion and deletion at both ends. Write four O(1)-time procedures to
insert elements into and delete elements from both ends of a deque
implemented by an array.

10.1-7

Show how to implement a queue using two stacks. Analyze the running time
of the queue operations.

10.1-8

Show how to implement a stack using two queues. Analyze the running time
of the stack operations.

10.2    Linked lists

A linked list is a data structure in which the objects are arranged in a
linear order. Unlike an array, however, in which the linear order is
determined by the array indices, the order in a linked list is
determined by a pointer in each object. Since the elements of linked
lists often contain keys that can be searched for, linked lists are
sometimes called search lists. Linked lists provide a simple, flexible
representation for dynamic sets, supporting (though not necessarily
efficiently) all the operations listed on page 250.

As shown in Figure 10.4, each element of a doubly linked list L is an
object with an attribute key and two pointer attributes: next and prev.
The object may also contain other satellite data. Given an element x in
the list, x.next points to its successor in the linked list, and x.prev
points to its predecessor. If x.prev = NIL, the element x has no
predecessor and is therefore the first element, or head, of the list. If
x.next = NIL, the element x has no successor and is therefore the last
element, or tail, of the list. An attribute L.head points to the first
element of the list. If L.head = NIL, the list is empty.

[art]

Figure 10.4 (a) A doubly linked list L representing the dynamic set {1,
4, 9, 16}. Each element in the list is an object with attributes for the
key and pointers (shown by arrows) to the next and previous objects. The
next attribute of the tail and the prev attribute of the head are NIL,
indicated by a diagonal slash. The attribute L.head points to the head.
(b) Following the execution of LIST-PREPEND(L, x), where x.key = 25, the
linked list has an object with key 25 as the new head. This new object
points to the old head with key 9. (c) The result of calling
LIST-INSERT(x, y), where x.key = 36 and y points to the object with key
9. (d) The result of the subsequent call LIST-DELETE(L, x), where x
points to the object with key 4.

A list may have one of several forms. It may be either singly linked or
doubly linked, it may be sorted or not, and it may be circular or not.
If a list is singly linked, each element has a next pointer but not a
prev pointer. If a list is sorted, the linear order of the list
corresponds to the linear order of keys stored in elements of the list.
The minimum element is then the head of the list, and the maximum
element is the tail. If the list is unsorted, the elements can appear in
any order. In a circular list, the prev pointer of the head of the list
points to the tail, and the next pointer of the tail of the list points
to the head. You can think of a circular list as a ring of elements. In
the remainder of this section, we assume that the lists we are working
with are unsorted and doubly linked.

Searching a linked list

The procedure LIST-SEARCH(L, k) finds the first element with key k in
list L by a simple linear search, returning a pointer to this element.
If no object with key k appears in the list, then the procedure returns
NIL. For the linked list in Figure 10.4(a), the call LIST-SEARCH(L, 4)
returns a pointer to the third element, and the call LIST-SEARCH(L, 7)
returns NIL. To search a list of n objects, the LIST-SEARCH procedure
takes Θ(n) time in the worst case, since it may have to search the
entire list.

LIST-SEARCH(L, k)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   x = L.head
  2   while x ≠ NIL and x.key ≠ k
  3   x = x.next
  4   return x
  --- -----------------------------

Inserting into a linked list

Given an element x whose key attribute has already been set, the
LIST-PREPEND procedure adds x to the front of the linked list, as shown
in Figure 10.4(b). (Recall that our attribute notation can cascade, so
that L.head.prev denotes the prev attribute of the object that L.head
points to.) The running time for LIST-PREPEND on a list of n elements is
O(1).

LIST-PREPEND(L, x)

  --- -----------------
  1   x.next = L.head
  2   x.prev = NIL
  3   if L.head ≠ NIL
  4   L.head.prev = x
  5   L.head = x
  --- -----------------

You can insert anywhere within a linked list. As Figure 10.4(c) shows,
if you have a pointer y to an object in the list, the LIST-INSERT
procedure on the facing page “splices” a new element x into the list,
immediately following y, in O(1) time. Since LIST-INSERT never
references the list object L, it is not supplied as a parameter.

LIST-INSERT(x, y)

  --- -----------------
  1   x.next = y.next
  2   x.prev = y
  3   if y.next ≠ NIL
  4   y.next.prev = x
  5   y.next = x
  --- -----------------

Deleting from a linked list

The procedure LIST-DELETE removes an element x from a linked list L. It
must be given a pointer to x, and it then “‘splices” x out of the list
by updating pointers. To delete an element with a given key, first call
LIST-SEARCH to retrieve a pointer to the element. Figure 10.4(d) shows
how an element is deleted from a linked list. LIST-DELETE runs in O(1)
time, but to delete an element with a given key, the call to LIST-SEARCH
makes the worst-case running time be Θ(n).

LIST-DELETE(L, x)

  --- ----------------------
  1   if x.prev ≠ NIL
  2   x.prev.next = x.next
  3   else L.head = x.next
  4   if x.next ≠ NIL
  5   x.next.prev = x.prev
  --- ----------------------

Insertion and deletion are faster operations on doubly linked lists than
on arrays. If you want to insert a new first element into an array or
delete the first element in an array, maintaining the relative order of
all the existing elements, then each of the existing elements needs to
be moved by one position. In the worst case, therefore, insertion and
deletion take Θ(n) time in an array, compared with O(1) time for a
doubly linked list. (Exercise 10.2-1 asks you to show that deleting an
element from a singly linked list takes Θ(n) time in the worst case.)
If, however, you want to find the kth element in the linear order, it
takes just O(1) time in an array regardless of k, but in a linked list,
you’d have to traverse k elements, taking Θ(k) time.

Sentinels

The code for LIST-DELETE is simpler if you ignore the boundary
conditions at the head and tail of the list:

[art]

Figure 10.5 A circular, doubly linked list with a sentinel. The sentinel
L.nil, in blue, appears between the head and tail. The attribute L.head
is no longer needed, since the head of the list is L.nil.next. (a) An
empty list. (b) The linked list from Figure 10.4(a), with key 9 at the
head and key 1 at the tail. (c) The list after executing LIST-INSERT′
(x, L.nil), where x.key = 25. The new object becomes the head of the
list. (d) The list after deleting the object with key 1. The new tail is
the object with key 4. (e) The list after executing LIST-INSERT′ (x, y),
where x.key = 36 and y points to the object with key 9.

LIST-DELETE′ (x)

  --- ----------------------
  1   x.prev.next = x.next
  2   x.next.prev = x.prev
  --- ----------------------

A sentinel is a dummy object that allows us to simplify boundary
conditions. In a linked list L, the sentinel is an object L.nil that
represents NIL but has all the attributes of the other objects in the
list. References to NIL are replaced by references to the sentinel
L.nil. As shown in Figure 10.5, this change turns a regular doubly
linked list into a circular, doubly linked list with a sentinel, in
which the sentinel L.nil lies between the head and tail. The attribute
L.nil.next points to the head of the list, and L.nil.prev points to the
tail. Similarly, both the next attribute of the tail and the prev
attribute of the head point to L.nil. Since L.nil.next points to the
head, the attribute L.head is eliminated altogether, with references to
it replaced by references to L.nil.next. Figure 10.5(a) shows that an
empty list consists of just the sentinel, and both L.nil.next and
L.nil.prev point to L.nil.

To delete an element from the list, just use the two-line procedure
LIST-DELETE′ from before. Just as LIST-INSERT never references the list
object L, neither does LIST-DELETE′. You should never delete the
sentinel L.nil unless you are deleting the entire list!

The LIST-INSERT′ procedure inserts an element x into the list following
object y. No separate procedure for prepending is necessary: to insert
at the head of the list, let y be L.nil; and to insert at the tail, let
y be L.nil.prev. Figure 10.5 shows the effects of LIST-INSERT′ and
LIST-DELETE′ on a sample list.

LIST-INSERT′ (x, y)

  --- -----------------
  1   x.next = y.next
  2   x.prev = y
  3   y.next.prev = x
  4   y.next = x
  --- -----------------

Searching a circular, doubly linked list with a sentinel has the same
asymptotic running time as without a sentinel, but it is possible to
decrease the constant factor. The test in line 2 of LIST-SEARCH makes
two comparisons: one to check whether the search has run off the end of
the list and, if not, one to check whether the key resides in the
current element x. Suppose that you know that the key is somewhere in
the list. Then you do not need to check whether the search runs off the
end of the list, thereby eliminating one comparison in each iteration of
the while loop.

The sentinel provides a place to put the key before starting the search.
The search starts at the head L.nil.next of list L, and it stops if it
finds the key somewhere in the list. Now the search is guaranteed to
find the key, either in the sentinel or before reaching the sentinel. If
the key is found before reaching the sentinel, then it really is in the
element where the search stops. If, however, the search goes through all
the elements in the list and finds the key only in the sentinel, then
the key is not really in the list, and the search returns NIL. The
procedure LIST-SEARCH′ embodies this idea. (If your sentinel requires
its key attribute to be NIL, then you might want to assign L.nil.key =
NIL before line 5.)

LIST-SEARCH′ (L, k)

  --- ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
  1   L.nil.key = k     // store the key in the sentinel to guarantee it is in list
  2   x = L.nil.next    // start at the head of the list
  3   while x.key ≠ k   
  4   x = x.next        
  5   if x == L.nil     // found k in the sentinel
  6   return NIL        // k was not really in the list
  7   else return x     // found k in element x
  --- ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

Sentinels often simplify code and, as in searching a linked list, they
might speed up code by a small constant factor, but they don’t typically
improve the asymptotic running time. Use them judiciously. When there
are many small lists, the extra storage used by their sentinels can
represent significant wasted memory. In this book, we use sentinels only
when they significantly simplify the code.

Exercises

10.2-1

Explain why the dynamic-set operation INSERT on a singly linked list can
be implemented in O(1) time, but the worst-case time for DELETE is Θ(n).

10.2-2

Implement a stack using a singly linked list. The operations PUSH and
POP should still take O(1) time. Do you need to add any attributes to
the list?

10.2-3

Implement a queue using a singly linked list. The operations ENQUEUE and
DEQUEUE should still take O(1) time. Do you need to add any attributes
to the list?

10.2-4

The dynamic-set operation UNION takes two disjoint sets S₁ and S₂ as
input, and it returns a set S = S₁ ⋃ S₂ consisting of all the elements
of S₁ and S₂. The sets S₁ and S₂ are usually destroyed by the operation.
Show how to support UNION in O(1) time using a suitable list data
structure.

10.2-5

Give a Θ(n)-time nonrecursive procedure that reverses a singly linked
list of n elements. The procedure should use no more than constant
storage beyond that needed for the list itself.

★ 10.2-6

Explain how to implement doubly linked lists using only one pointer
value x.np per item instead of the usual two (next and prev). Assume
that all pointer values can be interpreted as k-bit integers, and define
x.np = x.next XOR x.prev, the k-bit “exclusive-or” of x.next and x.prev.
The value NIL is represented by 0. Be sure to describe what information
you need to access the head of the list. Show how to implement the
SEARCH, INSERT, and DELETE operations on such a list. Also show how to
reverse such a list in O(1) time.

10.3    Representing rooted trees

Linked lists work well for representing linear relationships, but not
all relationships are linear. In this section, we look specifically at
the problem of representing rooted trees by linked data structures. We
first look at binary trees, and then we present a method for rooted
trees in which nodes can have an arbitrary number of children.

We represent each node of a tree by an object. As with linked lists, we
assume that each node contains a key attribute. The remaining attributes
of interest are pointers to other nodes, and they vary according to the
type of tree.

Binary trees

Figure 10.6 shows how to use the attributes p, left, and right to store
pointers to the parent, left child, and right child of each node in a
binary tree T. If x.p = NIL, then x is the root. If node x has no left
child, then x.left = NIL, and similarly for the right child. The root of
the entire tree T is pointed to by the attribute T.root. If T.root =
NIL, then the tree is empty.

Rooted trees with unbounded branching

It’s simple to extend the scheme for representing a binary tree to any
class of trees in which the number of children of each node is at most
some constant k: replace the left and right attributes by child₁,
child₂, … , child_(k). This scheme no longer works when the number of
children of a node is unbounded, however, since we do not know how many
attributes to allocate in advance. Moreover, if k, the number of
children, is bounded by a large constant but most nodes have a small
number of children, we may waste a lot of memory.

Fortunately, there is a clever scheme to represent trees with arbitrary
numbers of children. It has the advantage of using only O(n) space for
any n-node rooted tree. The left-child, right-sibling representation
appears in Figure 10.7. As before, each node contains a parent pointer
p, and T.root points to the root of tree T. Instead of having a pointer
to each of its children, however, each node x has only two pointers:

1.  x.left-child points to the leftmost child of node x, and
2.  x.right-sibling points to the sibling of x immediately to its right.

If node x has no children, then x.left-child = NIL, and if node x is the
rightmost child of its parent, then x.right-sibling = NIL.

[art]

Figure 10.6 The representation of a binary tree T. Each node x has the
attributes x.p (top), x.left (lower left), and x.right (lower right).
The key attributes are not shown.

[art]

Figure 10.7 The left-child, right-sibling representation of a tree T.
Each node x has attributes x.p (top), x.left-child (lower left), and
x.right-sibling (lower right). The key attributes are not shown.

Other tree representations

We sometimes represent rooted trees in other ways. In Chapter 6, for
example, we represented a heap, which is based on a complete binary
tree, by a single array along with an attribute giving the index of the
last node in the heap. The trees that appear in Chapter 19 are traversed
only toward the root, and so only the parent pointers are present: there
are no pointers to children. Many other schemes are possible. Which
scheme is best depends on the application.

Exercises

10.3-1

Draw the binary tree rooted at index 6 that is represented by the
following attributes:

  ------- ----- ------ -------
  index   key   left   right
  1       17    8      9
  2       14    NIL    NIL
  3       12    NIL    NIL
  4       20    10     NIL
  5       33    2      NIL
  6       15    1      4
  7       28    NIL    NIL
  8       22    NIL    NIL
  9       13    3      7
  10      25    NIL    5
  ------- ----- ------ -------

10.3-2

Write an O(n)-time recursive procedure that, given an n-node binary
tree, prints out the key of each node in the tree.

10.3-3

Write an O(n)-time nonrecursive procedure that, given an n-node binary
tree, prints out the key of each node in the tree. Use a stack as an
auxiliary data structure.

10.3-4

Write an O(n)-time procedure that prints out all the keys of an
arbitrary rooted tree with n nodes, where the tree is stored using the
left-child, right-sibling representation.

★ 10.3-5

Write an O(n)-time nonrecursive procedure that, given an n-node binary
tree, prints out the key of each node. Use no more than constant extra
space outside of the tree itself and do not modify the tree, even
temporarily, during the procedure.

★ 10.3-6

The left-child, right-sibling representation of an arbitrary rooted tree
uses three pointers in each node: left-child, right-sibling, and parent.
From any node, its parent can be accessed in constant time and all its
children can be accessed in time linear in the number of children. Show
how to use only two pointers and one boolean value in each node x so
that x’s parent or all of x’s children can be accessed in time linear in
the number of x’s children.

Problems

10-1     Comparisons among lists

For each of the four types of lists in the following table, what is the
asymptotic worst-case running time for each dynamic-set operation
listed?

  ------------- ------------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------- -----------------------
                unsorted, singly linked   sorted, singly linked   unsorted, doubly linked   sorted, doubly linked
  SEARCH                                                                                    
  INSERT                                                                                    
  DELETE                                                                                    
  SUCCESSOR                                                                                 
  PREDECESSOR                                                                               
  MINIMUM                                                                                   
  MAXIMUM                                                                                   
  ------------- ------------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------- -----------------------

10-2     Mergeable heaps using linked lists

A mergeable heap supports the following operations: MAKE-HEAP (which
creates an empty mergeable heap), INSERT, MINIMUM, EXTRACT-MIN, and
UNION.¹ Show how to implement mergeable heaps using linked lists in each
of the following cases. Try to make each operation as efficient as
possible. Analyze the running time of each operation in terms of the
size of the dynamic set(s) being operated on.

a. Lists are sorted.

b. Lists are unsorted.

c. Lists are unsorted, and dynamic sets to be merged are disjoint.

10-3     Searching a sorted compact list

We can represent a singly linked list with two arrays, key and next.
Given the index i of an element, its value is stored in key[i], and the
index of its successor is given by next[i], where next[i] = NIL for the
last element. We also need the index head of the first element in the
list. An n-element list stored in this way is compact if it is stored
only in positions 1 through n of the key and next arrays.

Let’s assume that all keys are distinct and that the compact list is
also sorted, that is, key[i] < key[next[i]] for all i = 1, 2, … , n such
that next[i] ≠ NIL. Under these assumptions, you will show that the
randomized algorithm COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH searches the list for key k in
[art] expected time.

COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH(key, next, head, n, k)

  ----- -----------------------------------
    1   i = head
    2   while i ≠ NIL and key[i] < k
    3   j = RANDOM(1, n)
    4   if key[i] < key[j] and key[j] ≤ k
    5   i = j
    6   if key[i] == k
    7   return i
    8   i = next[i]
    9   if i == NIL or key[i] > k
  10    return NIL
  11    else return i
  ----- -----------------------------------

If you ignore lines 3–7 of the procedure, you can see that it’s an
ordinary algorithm for searching a sorted linked list, in which index i
points to each position of the list in turn. The search terminates once
the index i “falls off” the end of the list or once key[i] ≥ k. In the
latter case, if key[i] = k, the procedure has found a key with the value
k. If, however, key[i] > k, then the search will never find a key with
the value k, so that terminating the search was the correct action.

Lines 3–7 attempt to skip ahead to a randomly chosen position j. Such a
skip helps if key[j] is larger than key[i] and no larger than k. In such
a case, j marks a position in the list that i would reach during an
ordinary list search. Because the list is compact, we know that any
choice of j between 1 and n indexes some element in the list.

Instead of analyzing the performance of COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH directly,
you will analyze a related algorithm, COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH, which
executes two separate loops. This algorithm takes an additional
parameter t, which specifies an upper bound on the number of iterations
of the first loop.

COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH′ (key, next, head, n, k, t)

  ----- -----------------------------------
    1   i = head
    2   for q = 1 to t
    3   j = RANDOM(1, n)
    4   if key[i] < key[j] and key[j] ≤ k
    5   i = j
    6   if key[i] == k
    7   return i
    8   while i ≠ NIL and key[i] < k
    9   i = next[i]
  10    if i == NIL or key[i] > k
  11    return NIL
  12    else return i
  ----- -----------------------------------

To compare the execution of the two algorithms, assume that the sequence
of calls of RANDOM(1, n) yields the same sequence of integers for both
algorithms.

a. Argue that for any value of t, COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH(key, next, head,
n, k) and COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH′ (key, next, head, n, k, t) return the
same result and that the number of iterations of the while loop of lines
2–8 in COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH is at most the total number of iterations of
both the for and while loops in COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH′.

In the call COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH′ (key, next, head, n, k, t), let X_(t)
be the random variable that describes the distance in the linked list
(that is, through the chain of next pointers) from position i to the
desired key k after t iterations of the for loop of lines 2–7 have
occurred.

b. Argue that COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH′ (key, next, head, n, k, t) has an
expected running time of O(t + E [X_(t)]).

c. Show that [art]. (Hint: Use equation (C.28) on page 1193.)

d. Show that [art]. (Hint: Use inequality (A.18) on page 1150.)

e. Prove that E [X_(t)] ≤ n/(t + 1).

f. Show that COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH′ (key, next, head, n, k, t) has an
expected running time of O(t + n/t).

g. Conclude that COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH runs in [art] expected time.

h. Why do we assume that all keys are distinct in COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH?
Argue that random skips do not necessarily help asymptotically when the
list contains repeated key values.

Chapter notes

Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [6] and Knuth [259] are excellent references
for elementary data structures. Many other texts cover both basic data
structures and their implementation in a particular programming
language. Examples of these types of textbooks include Goodrich and
Tamassia [196], Main [311], Shaffer [406], and Weiss [452, 453, 454].
The book by Gonnet and Baeza-Yates [193] provides experimental data on
the performance of many data-structure operations.

The origin of stacks and queues as data structures in computer science
is unclear, since corresponding notions already existed in mathematics
and paper-based business practices before the introduction of digital
computers. Knuth [259] cites A. M. Turing for the development of stacks
for subroutine linkage in 1947.

Pointer-based data structures also seem to be a folk invention.
According to Knuth, pointers were apparently used in early computers
with drum memories. The A-1 language developed by G. M. Hopper in 1951
represented algebraic formulas as binary trees. Knuth credits the IPL-II
language, developed in 1956 by A. Newell, J. C. Shaw, and H. A. Simon,
for recognizing the importance and promoting the use of pointers. Their
IPL-III language, developed in 1957, included explicit stack operations.

¹ Because we have defined a mergeable heap to support MINIMUM and
EXTRACT-MIN, we can also refer to it as a mergeable min-heap.
Alternatively, if it supports MAXIMUM and EXTRACT-MAX, it is a mergeable
max-heap.

11        Hash Tables

Many applications require a dynamic set that supports only the
dictionary operations INSERT, SEARCH, and DELETE. For example, a
compiler that translates a programming language maintains a symbol
table, in which the keys of elements are arbitrary character strings
corresponding to identifiers in the language. A hash table is an
effective data structure for implementing dictionaries. Although
searching for an element in a hash table can take as long as searching
for an element in a linked list—Θ(n) time in the worst case—in practice,
hashing performs extremely well. Under reasonable assumptions, the
average time to search for an element in a hash table is O(1). Indeed,
the built-in dictionaries of Python are implemented with hash tables.

A hash table generalizes the simpler notion of an ordinary array.
Directly addressing into an ordinary array takes advantage of the O(1)
access time for any array element. Section 11.1 discusses direct
addressing in more detail. To use direct addressing, you must be able to
allocate an array that contains a position for every possible key.

When the number of keys actually stored is small relative to the total
number of possible keys, hash tables become an effective alternative to
directly addressing an array, since a hash table typically uses an array
of size proportional to the number of keys actually stored. Instead of
using the key as an array index directly, we compute the array index
from the key. Section 11.2 presents the main ideas, focusing on
“chaining” as a way to handle “collisions,” in which more than one key
maps to the same array index. Section 11.3 describes how to compute
array indices from keys using hash functions. We present and analyze
several variations on the basic theme. Section 11.4 looks at “open
addressing,” which is another way to deal with collisions. The bottom
line is that hashing is an extremely effective and practical technique:
the basic dictionary operations require only O(1) time on the average.
Section 11.5 discusses the hierarchical memory systems of modern
computer systems have and illustrates how to design hash tables that
work well in such systems.

11.1    Direct-address tables

Direct addressing is a simple technique that works well when the
universe U of keys is reasonably small. Suppose that an application
needs a dynamic set in which each element has a distinct key drawn from
the universe U = {0, 1, …, m − 1}, where m is not too large.

To represent the dynamic set, you can use an array, or direct-address
table, denoted by T[0 : m − 1], in which each position, or slot,
corresponds to a key in the universe U. Figure 11.1 illustrates this
approach. Slot k points to an element in the set with key k. If the set
contains no element with key k, then T[k] = NIL.

The dictionary operations DIRECT-ADDRESS-SEARCH, DIRECT-ADDRESS-INSERT,
and DIRECT-ADDRESS-DELETE on the following page are trivial to
implement. Each takes only O(1) time.

For some applications, the direct-address table itself can hold the
elements in the dynamic set. That is, rather than storing an element’s
key and satellite data in an object external to the direct-address
table, with a pointer from a slot in the table to the object, save space
by storing the object directly in the slot. To indicate an empty slot,
use a special key. Then again, why store the key of the object at all?
The index of the object is its key! Of course, then you’d need some way
to tell whether slots are empty.

[art]

Figure 11.1 How to implement a dynamic set by a direct-address table T.
Each key in the universe U = {0, 1, …, 9} corresponds to an index into
the table. The set K = {2, 3, 5, 8} of actual keys determines the slots
in the table that contain pointers to elements. The other slots, in
blue, contain NIL.

DIRECT-ADDRESS-SEARCH(T, k)

  --- -------------
  1   return T[k]
  --- -------------

DIRECT-ADDRESS-INSERT(T, x)

  --- --------------
  1   T[x.key] = x
  --- --------------

DIRECT-ADDRESS-DELETE(T, x)

  --- ----------------
  1   T[x.key] = NIL
  --- ----------------

Exercises

11.1-1

A dynamic set S is represented by a direct-address table T of length m.
Describe a procedure that finds the maximum element of S. What is the
worst-case performance of your procedure?

11.1-2

A bit vector is simply an array of bits (each either 0 or 1). A bit
vector of length m takes much less space than an array of m pointers.
Describe how to use a bit vector to represent a dynamic set of distinct
elements drawn from the set {0, 1, …, m − 1} and with no satellite data.
Dictionary operations should run in O(1) time.

11.1-3

Suggest how to implement a direct-address table in which the keys of
stored elements do not need to be distinct and the elements can have
satellite data. All three dictionary operations (INSERT, DELETE, and
SEARCH) should run in O(1) time. (Don’t forget that DELETE takes as an
argument a pointer to an object to be deleted, not a key.)

★ 11.1-4

Suppose that you want to implement a dictionary by using direct
addressing on a huge array. That is, if the array size is m and the
dictionary contains at most n elements at any one time, then m ≫ n. At
the start, the array entries may contain garbage, and initializing the
entire array is impractical because of its size. Describe a scheme for
implementing a direct-address dictionary on a huge array. Each stored
object should use O(1) space; the operations SEARCH, INSERT, and DELETE
should take O(1) time each; and initializing the data structure should
take O(1) time. (Hint: Use an additional array, treated somewhat like a
stack whose size is the number of keys actually stored in the
dictionary, to help determine whether a given entry in the huge array is
valid or not.)

11.2    Hash tables

The downside of direct addressing is apparent: if the universe U is
large or infinite, storing a table T of size |U| may be impractical, or
even impossible, given the memory available on a typical computer.
Furthermore, the set K of keys actually stored may be so small relative
to U that most of the space allocated for T would be wasted.

When the set K of keys stored in a dictionary is much smaller than the
universe U of all possible keys, a hash table requires much less storage
than a direct-address table. Specifically, the storage requirement
reduces to Θ(|K|) while maintaining the benefit that searching for an
element in the hash table still requires only O(1) time. The catch is
that this bound is for the average-case time,¹ whereas for direct
addressing it holds for the worst-case time.

With direct addressing, an element with key k is stored in slot k, but
with hashing, we use a hash function h to compute the slot number from
the key k, so that the element goes into slot h(k). The hash function h
maps the universe U of keys into the slots of a hash table T[0 : m − 1]:

h : U → {0, 1, …, m − 1},

where the size m of the hash table is typically much less than |U|. We
say that an element with key k hashes to slot h(k), and we also say that
h(k) is the hash value of key k. Figure 11.2 illustrates the basic idea.
The hash function reduces the range of array indices and hence the size
of the array. Instead of a size of |U|, the array can have size m. An
example of a simple, but not particularly good, hash function is h(k) =
k mod m.

There is one hitch, namely that two keys may hash to the same slot. We
call this situation a collision. Fortunately, there are effective
techniques for resolving the conflict created by collisions.

Of course, the ideal solution is to avoid collisions altogether. We
might try to achieve this goal by choosing a suitable hash function h.
One idea is to make h appear to be “random,” thus avoiding collisions or
at least minimizing their number. The very term “to hash,” evoking
images of random mixing and chopping, captures the spirit of this
approach. (Of course, a hash function h must be deterministic in that a
given input k must always produce the same output h(k).) Because |U| >
m, however, there must be at least two keys that have the same hash
value, and avoiding collisions altogether is impossible. Thus, although
a well-designed, “random”-looking hash function can reduce the number of
collisions, we still need a method for resolving the collisions that do
occur.

[art]

Figure 11.2 Using a hash function h to map keys to hash-table slots.
Because keys k₂ and k₅ map to the same slot, they collide.

The remainder of this section first presents a definition of
“independent uniform hashing,” which captures the simplest notion of
what it means for a hash function to be “random.” It then presents and
analyzes the simplest collision resolution technique, called chaining.
Section 11.4 introduces an alternative method for resolving collisions,
called open addressing.

Independent uniform hashing

An “ideal” hashing function h would have, for each possible input k in
the domain U, an output h(k) that is an element randomly and
independently chosen uniformly from the range {0, 1, …, m − 1}. Once a
value h(k) is randomly chosen, each subsequent call to h with the same
input k yields the same output h(k).

We call such an ideal hash function an independent uniform hash
function. Such a function is also often called a random oracle [43].
When hash tables are implemented with an independent uniform hash
function, we say we are using independent uniform hashing.

Independent uniform hashing is an ideal theoretical abstraction, but it
is not something that can reasonably be implemented in practice.
Nonetheless, we’ll analyze the efficiency of hashing under the
assumption of independent uniform hashing and then present ways of
achieving useful practical approximations to this ideal.

[art]

Figure 11.3 Collision resolution by chaining. Each nonempty hash-table
slot T[j] points to a linked list of all the keys whose hash value is j.
For example, h(k₁) = h(k₄) and h(k₅) = h(k₂) = h(k₇). The list can be
either singly or doubly linked. We show it as doubly linked because
deletion may be faster that way when the deletion procedure knows which
list element (not just which key) is to be deleted.

Collision resolution by chaining

At a high level, you can think of hashing with chaining as a
nonrecursive form of divide-and-conquer: the input set of n elements is
divided randomly into m subsets, each of approximate size n/m. A hash
function determines which subset an element belongs to. Each subset is
managed independently as a list.

Figure 11.3 shows the idea behind chaining: each nonempty slot points to
a linked list, and all the elements that hash to the same slot go into
that slot’s linked list. Slot j contains a pointer to the head of the
list of all stored elements with hash value j. If there are no such
elements, then slot j contains NIL.

When collisions are resolved by chaining, the dictionary operations are
straightforward to implement. They appear on the next page and use the
linked-list procedures from Section 10.2. The worst-case running time
for insertion is O(1). The insertion procedure is fast in part because
it assumes that the element x being inserted is not already present in
the table. To enforce this assumption, you can search (at additional
cost) for an element whose key is x.key before inserting. For searching,
the worst-case running time is proportional to the length of the list.
(We’ll analyze this operation more closely below.) Deletion takes O(1)
time if the lists are doubly linked, as in Figure 11.3. (Since
CHAINED-HASH-DELETE takes as input an element x and not its key k, no
search is needed. If the hash table supports deletion, then its linked
lists should be doubly linked in order to delete an item quickly. If the
lists were only singly linked, then by Exercise 10.2-1, deletion could
take time proportional to the length of the list. With singly linked
lists, both deletion and searching would have the same asymptotic
running times.)

CHAINED-HASH-INSERT(T, x)

  --- ------------------------------
  1   LIST-PREPEND(T[h(x.key)], x)
  --- ------------------------------

CHAINED-HASH-SEARCH(T, k)

  --- --------------------------------
  1   return LIST-SEARCH(T[h(k)], k)
  --- --------------------------------

CHAINED-HASH-DELETE(T, x)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   LIST-DELETE(T[h(x.key)], x)
  --- -----------------------------

Analysis of hashing with chaining

How well does hashing with chaining perform? In particular, how long
does it take to search for an element with a given key?

Given a hash table T with m slots that stores n elements, we define the
load factor α for T as n/m, that is, the average number of elements
stored in a chain. Our analysis will be in terms of α, which can be less
than, equal to, or greater than 1.

The worst-case behavior of hashing with chaining is terrible: all n keys
hash to the same slot, creating a list of length n. The worst-case time
for searching is thus Θ(n) plus the time to compute the hash function—no
better than using one linked list for all the elements. We clearly don’t
use hash tables for their worst-case performance.

The average-case performance of hashing depends on how well the hash
function h distributes the set of keys to be stored among the m slots,
on the average (meaning with respect to the distribution of keys to be
hashed and with respect to the choice of hash function, if this choice
is randomized). Section 11.3 discusses these issues, but for now we
assume that any given element is equally likely to hash into any of the
m slots. That is, the hash function is uniform. We further assume that
where a given element hashes to is independent of where any other
elements hash to. In other words, we assume that we are using
independent uniform hashing.

Because hashes of distinct keys are assumed to be independent,
independent uniform hashing is universal: the chance that any two
distinct keys k₁ and k₂ collide is at most 1/m. Universality is
important in our analysis and also in the specification of universal
families of hash functions, which we’ll see in Section 11.3.2.

For j = 0, 1, …, m − 1, denote the length of the list T[j] by n_(j), so
that

[art]

and the expected value of n_(j) is E[n_(j)] = α = n/m.

We assume that O(1) time suffices to compute the hash value h(k), so
that the time required to search for an element with key k depends
linearly on the length n_(h(k)) of the list T[h(k)]. Setting aside the
O(1) time required to compute the hash function and to access slot h(k),
we’ll consider the expected number of elements examined by the search
algorithm, that is, the number of elements in the list T[h(k)] that the
algorithm checks to see whether any have a key equal to k. We consider
two cases. In the first, the search is unsuccessful: no element in the
table has key k. In the second, the search successfully finds an element
with key k.

Theorem 11.1

In a hash table in which collisions are resolved by chaining, an
unsuccessful search takes Θ(1 + α) time on average, under the assumption
of independent uniform hashing.

Proof   Under the assumption of independent uniform hashing, any key k
not already stored in the table is equally likely to hash to any of the
m slots. The expected time to search unsuccessfully for a key k is the
expected time to search to the end of list T[h(k)], which has expected
length E[n_(h(k))] = α. Thus, the expected number of elements examined
in an unsuccessful search is α, and the total time required (including
the time for computing h(k)) is Θ(1 + α).

▪

The situation for a successful search is slightly different. An
unsuccessful search is equally likely to go to any slot of the hash
table. A successful search, however, cannot go to an empty slot, since
it is for an element that is present in one of the linked lists. We
assume that the element searched for is equally likely to be any one of
the elements in the table, so the longer the list, the more likely that
the search is for one of its elements. Even so, the expected search time
still turns out to be Θ(1 + α).

Theorem 11.2

In a hash table in which collisions are resolved by chaining, a
successful search takes Θ(1 + α) time on average, under the assumption
of independent uniform hashing.

Proof   We assume that the element being searched for is equally likely
to be any of the n elements stored in the table. The number of elements
examined during a successful search for an element x is 1 more than the
number of elements that appear before x in x’s list. Because new
elements are placed at the front of the list, elements before x in the
list were all inserted after x was inserted. Let x_(i) denote the ith
element inserted into the table, for i = 1, 2, …, n, and let k_(i) =
x_(i).key.

Our analysis uses indicator random variables extensively. For each slot
q in the table and for each pair of distinct keys k_(i) and k_(j), we
define the indicator random variable

X_(ijq) = I {the search is for x_(i), h(k_(i)) = q, and h(k_(j)) = q}.

That is, X_(ijq) = 1 when keys k_(i) and k_(j) collide at slot q and the
search is for element x_(i). Because Pr{the search is for x_(i)} = 1/n,
Pr{h(k_(i)) = q} = 1/m, Pr{h(k_(j)) = q} = 1/m, and these events are all
independent, we have that Pr{X_(ijq) = 1} = 1/nm². Lemma 5.1 on page 130
gives E[X_(ijq)] = 1/nm².

Next, we define, for each element x_(j), the indicator random variable

  ------- --- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Y_(j)   =   I {x_(j) appears in a list prior to the element being searched for}
          =   [art],
  ------- --- ---------------------------------------------------------------------

since at most one of the X_(ijq) equals 1, namely when the element x_(i)
being searched for belongs to the same list as x_(j) (pointed to by slot
q), and i < j (so that x_(i) appears after x_(j) in the list).

Our final random variable is Z, which counts how many elements appear in
the list prior to the element being searched for:

[art]

Because we must count the element being searched for as well as all
those preceding it in its list, we wish to compute E[Z + 1]. Using
linearity of expectation (equation (C.24) on page 1192), we have

[art]

Thus, the total time required for a successful search (including the
time for computing the hash function) is Θ(2 + α/2 − α/2n) = Θ(1 + α).

▪

What does this analysis mean? If the number of elements in the table is
at most proportional to the number of hash-table slots, we have n = O(m)
and, consequently, α = n/m = O(m)/m = O(1). Thus, searching takes
constant time on average. Since insertion takes O(1) worst-case time and
deletion takes O(1) worst-case time when the lists are doubly linked
(assuming that the list element to be deleted is known, and not just its
key), we can support all dictionary operations in O(1) time on average.

The analysis in the preceding two theorems depends only on two essential
properties of independent uniform hashing: uniformity (each key is
equally likely to hash to any one of the m slots), and independence (so
any two distinct keys collide with probability 1/m).

Exercises

11.2-1

You use a hash function h to hash n distinct keys into an array T of
length m. Assuming independent uniform hashing, what is the expected
number of collisions? More precisely, what is the expected cardinality
of {{k₁, k₂} : k₁ ≠ k₂ and h(k₁) = h(k₂)}?

11.2-2

Consider a hash table with 9 slots and the hash function h(k) = k mod 9.
Demonstrate what happens upon inserting the keys 5, 28, 19, 15, 20, 33,
12, 17, 10 with collisions resolved by chaining.

11.2-3

Professor Marley hypothesizes that he can obtain substantial performance
gains by modifying the chaining scheme to keep each list in sorted
order. How does the professor’s modification affect the running time for
successful searches, unsuccessful searches, insertions, and deletions?

11.2-4

Suggest how to allocate and deallocate storage for elements within the
hash table itself by creating a “free list”: a linked list of all the
unused slots. Assume that one slot can store a flag and either one
element plus a pointer or two pointers. All dictionary and free-list
operations should run in O(1) expected time. Does the free list need to
be doubly linked, or does a singly linked free list suffice?

11.2-5

You need to store a set of n keys in a hash table of size m. Show that
if the keys are drawn from a universe U with |U| > (n − 1)m, then U has
a subset of size n consisting of keys that all hash to the same slot, so
that the worst-case searching time for hashing with chaining is Θ(n).

11.2-6

You have stored n keys in a hash table of size m, with collisions
resolved by chaining, and you know the length of each chain, including
the length L of the longest chain. Describe a procedure that selects a
key uniformly at random from among the keys in the hash table and
returns it in expected time O(L · (1 + 1/α)).

11.3    Hash functions

For hashing to work well, it needs a good hash function. Along with
being efficiently computable, what properties does a good hash function
have? How do you design good hash functions?

This section first attempts to answer these questions based on two ad
hoc approaches for creating hash functions: hashing by division and
hashing by multiplication. Although these methods work well for some
sets of input keys, they are limited because they try to provide a
single fixed hash function that works well on any data—an approach
called static hashing.

We then see that provably good average-case performance for any data can
be obtained by designing a suitable family of hash functions and
choosing a hash function at random from this family at runtime,
independent of the data to be hashed. The approach we examine is called
random hashing. A particular kind of random hashing, universal hashing,
works well. As we saw with quicksort in Chapter 7, randomization is a
powerful algorithmic design tool.

What makes a good hash function?

A good hash function satisfies (approximately) the assumption of
independent uniform hashing: each key is equally likely to hash to any
of the m slots, independently of where any other keys have hashed to.
What does “equally likely” mean here? If the hash function is fixed, any
probabilities would have to be based on the probability distribution of
the input keys.

Unfortunately, you typically have no way to check this condition, unless
you happen to know the probability distribution from which the keys are
drawn. Moreover, the keys might not be drawn independently.

Occasionally you might know the distribution. For example, if you know
that the keys are random real numbers k independently and uniformly
distributed in the range 0 ≤ k < 1, then the hash function

h(k) = ⌊km⌋

satisfies the condition of independent uniform hashing.

A good static hashing approach derives the hash value in a way that you
expect to be independent of any patterns that might exist in the data.
For example, the “division method” (discussed in Section 11.3.1)
computes the hash value as the remainder when the key is divided by a
specified prime number. This method may give good results, if you
(somehow) choose a prime number that is unrelated to any patterns in the
distribution of keys.

Random hashing, described in Section 11.3.2, picks the hash function to
be used at random from a suitable family of hashing functions. This
approach removes any need to know anything about the probability
distribution of the input keys, as the randomization necessary for good
average-case behavior then comes from the (known) random process used to
pick the hash function from the family of hash functions, rather than
from the (unknown) process used to create the input keys. We recommend
that you use random hashing.

Keys are integers, vectors, or strings

In practice, a hash function is designed to handle keys that are one of
the following two types:

- A short nonnegative integer that fits in a w-bit machine word. Typical
  values for w would be 32 or 64.
- A short vector of nonnegative integers, each of bounded size. For
  example, each element might be an 8-bit byte, in which case the vector
  is often called a (byte) string. The vector might be of variable
  length.

To begin, we assume that keys are short nonnegative integers. Handling
vector keys is more complicated and discussed in Sections 11.3.5 and
11.5.2.

11.3.1    Static hashing

Static hashing uses a single, fixed hash function. The only
randomization available is through the (usually unknown) distribution of
input keys. This section discusses two standard approaches for static
hashing: the division method and the multiplication method. Although
static hashing is no longer recommended, the multiplication method also
provides a good foundation for “nonstatic” hashing—better known as
random hashing—where the hash function is chosen at random from a
suitable family of hash functions.

The division method

The division method for creating hash functions maps a key k into one of
m slots by taking the remainder of k divided by m. That is, the hash
function is

h(k) = k mod m.

For example, if the hash table has size m = 12 and the key is k = 100,
then h(k) = 4. Since it requires only a single division operation,
hashing by division is quite fast.

The division method may work well when m is a prime not too close to an
exact power of 2. There is no guarantee that this method provides good
average-case performance, however, and it may complicate applications
since it constrains the size of the hash tables to be prime.

The multiplication method

The general multiplication method for creating hash functions operates
in two steps. First, multiply the key k by a constant A in the range 0 <
A < 1 and extract the fractional part of kA. Then, multiply this value
by m and take the floor of the result. That is, the hash function is

h(k) = ⌊m (kA mod 1)⌋,

where “kA mod 1” means the fractional part of kA, that is, kA − ⌊kA⌋.
The general multiplication method has the advantage that the value of m
is not critical and you can choose it independently of how you choose
the multiplicative constant A.

[art]

Figure 11.4 The multiply-shift method to compute a hash function. The
w-bit representation of the key k is multiplied by the w-bit value a = A
· 2^(w). The ℓ highest-order bits of the lower w-bit half of the product
form the desired hash value h_(a)(k).

The multiply-shift method

In practice, the multiplication method is best in the special case where
the number m of hash-table slots is an exact power of 2, so that m =
2^(ℓ) for some integer ℓ, where ℓ ≤ w and w is the number of bits in a
machine word. If you choose a fixed w-bit positive integer a = A 2^(w),
where 0 < A < 1 as in the multiplication method so that a is in the
range 0 < a < 2^(w), you can implement the function on most computers as
follows. We assume that a key k fits into a single w-bit word.

Referring to Figure 11.4, first multiply k by the w-bit integer a. The
result is a 2w-bit value r₁2^(w) + r₀, where r₁ is the high-order w-bit
word of the product and r₀ is the low-order w-bit word of the product.
The desired ℓ-bit hash value consists of the ℓ most significant bits of
r₀. (Since r₁ is ignored, the hash function can be implemented on a
computer that produces only a w-bit product given two w-bit inputs, that
is, where the multiplication operation computes modulo 2^(w).)

In other words, you define the hash function h = h_(a), where

[art]

for a fixed nonzero w-bit value a. Since the product ka of two w-bit
words occupies 2w bits, taking this product modulo 2^(w) zeroes out the
high-order w bits (r₁), leaving only the low-order w bits (r₀). The ⋙
operator performs a logical right shift by w − ℓ bits, shifting zeros
into the vacated positions on the left, so that the ℓ most significant
bits of r₀ move into the ℓ rightmost positions. (It’s the same as
dividing by 2^(w−ℓ) and taking the floor of the result.) The resulting
value equals the ℓ most significant bits of r₀. The hash function h_(a)
can be implemented with three machine instructions: multiplication,
subtraction, and logical right shift.

As an example, suppose that k = 123456, ℓ = 14, m = 2¹⁴ = 16384, and w =
32. Suppose further that we choose a = 2654435769 (following a
suggestion of Knuth [261]). Then ka = 327706022297664 = (76300 · 2³²) +
17612864, and so r₁ = 76300 and r₀ = 17612864. The 14 most significant
bits of r₀ yield the value h_(a)(k) = 67.

Even though the multiply-shift method is fast, it doesn’t provide any
guarantee of good average-case performance. The universal hashing
approach presented in the next section provides such a guarantee. A
simple randomized variant of the multiply-shift method works well on the
average, when the program begins by picking a as a randomly chosen odd
integer.

11.3.2    Random hashing

Suppose that a malicious adversary chooses the keys to be hashed by some
fixed hash function. Then the adversary can choose n keys that all hash
to the same slot, yielding an average retrieval time of Θ(n). Any static
hash function is vulnerable to such terrible worst-case behavior. The
only effective way to improve the situation is to choose the hash
function randomly in a way that is independent of the keys that are
actually going to be stored. This approach is called random hashing. A
special case of this approach, called universal hashing, can yield
provably good performance on average when collisions are handled by
chaining, no matter which keys the adversary chooses.

To use random hashing, at the beginning of program execution you select
the hash function at random from a suitable family of functions. As in
the case of quicksort, randomization guarantees that no single input
always evokes worst-case behavior. Because you randomly select the hash
function, the algorithm can behave differently on each execution, even
for the same set of keys to be hashed, guaranteeing good average-case
performance.

Let H be a finite family of hash functions that map a given universe U
of keys into the range {0, 1, …, m − 1}. Such a family is said to be
universal if for each pair of distinct keys k₁, k₂ ∈ U, the number of
hash functions h ∈ H for which h(k₁) = h(k₂) is at most |H|/m. In other
words, with a hash function randomly chosen from H, the chance of a
collision between distinct keys k₁ and k₂ is no more than the chance 1/m
of a collision if h(k₁) and h(k₂) were randomly and independently chosen
from the set {0, 1, …, m − 1}.

Independent uniform hashing is the same as picking a hash function
uniformly at random from a family of m^(n) hash functions, each member
of that family mapping the n keys to the m hash values in a different
way.

Every independent uniform random family of hash function is universal,
but the converse need not be true: consider the case where U = {0, 1, …,
m − 1} and the only hash function in the family is the identity
function. The probability that two distinct keys collide is zero, even
though each key is hashes to a fixed value.

The following corollary to Theorem 11.2 on page 279 says that universal
hashing provides the desired payoff: it becomes impossible for an
adversary to pick a sequence of operations that forces the worst-case
running time.

Corollary 11.3

Using universal hashing and collision resolution by chaining in an
initially empty table with m slots, it takes Θ(s) expected time to
handle any sequence of s INSERT, SEARCH, and DELETE operations
containing n = O(m) INSERT operations.

Proof   The INSERT and DELETE operations take constant time. Since the
number n of insertions is O(m), we have that α = O(1). Furthermore, the
expected time for each SEARCH operation is O(1), which can be seen by
examining the proof of Theorem 11.2. That analysis depends only on
collision probabilities, which are 1/m for any pair k₁, k₂ of keys by
the choice of an independent uniform hash function in that theorem.
Using a universal family of hash functions here instead of using
independent uniform hashing changes the probability of collision from
1/m to at most 1/m. By linearity of expectation, therefore, the expected
time for the entire sequence of s operations is O(s). Since each
operation takes Ω(1) time, the Θ(s) bound follows.

▪

11.3.3    Achievable properties of random hashing

There is a rich literature on the properties a family H of hash
functions can have, and how they relate to the efficiency of hashing. We
summarize a few of the most interesting ones here.

Let H be a family of hash functions, each with domain U and range {0, 1,
…, m − 1}, and let h be any hash function that is picked uniformly at
random from H. The probabilities mentioned are probabilities over the
picks of h.

- The family H is uniform if for any key k in U and any slot q in the
  range {0, 1, …, m − 1}, the probability that h(k) = q is 1/m.
- The family H is universal if for any distinct keys k₁ and k₂ in U, the
  probability that h(k₁) = h(k₂) is at most 1/m.
- The family H of hash functions is ϵ-universal if for any distinct keys
  k₁ and k₂ in U, the probability that h(k₁) = h(k₂) is at most ϵ.
  Therefore, a universal family of hash functions is also
  1/m-universal.²
- The family H is d-independent if for any distinct keys k₁, k₂, …,
  k_(d) in U and any slots q₁, q₂, …, q_(d), not necessarily distinct,
  in {0, 1, …, m − 1} the probability that h(k_(i)) = q_(i) for i = 1,
  2, …, d is 1/m^(d).

Universal hash-function families are of particular interest, as they are
the simplest type supporting provably efficient hash-table operations
for any input data set. Many other interesting and desirable properties,
such as those noted above, are also possible and allow for efficient
specialized hash-table operations.

11.3.4    Designing a universal family of hash functions

This section present two ways to design a universal (or ϵ-universal)
family of hash functions: one based on number theory and another based
on a randomized variant of the multiply-shift method presented in
Section 11.3.1. The first method is a bit easier to prove universal, but
the second method is newer and faster in practice.

A universal family of hash functions based on number theory

We can design a universal family of hash functions using a little number
theory. You may wish to refer to Chapter 31 if you are unfamiliar with
basic concepts in number theory.

Begin by choosing a prime number p large enough so that every possible
key k lies in the range 0 to p − 1, inclusive. We assume here that p has
a “reasonable” length. (See Section 11.3.5 for a discussion of methods
for handling long input keys, such as variable-length strings.) Let
ℤ_(p) denote the set {0, 1, …, p − 1}, and let [art] denote the set {1,
2, …, p − 1}. Since p is prime, we can solve equations modulo p with the
methods given in Chapter 31. Because the size of the universe of keys is
greater than the number of slots in the hash table (otherwise, just use
direct addressing), we have p > m.

Given any [art] and any b ∈ ℤ_(p), define the hash function h_(ab) as a
linear transformation followed by reductions modulo p and then modulo m:

[art]

For example, with p = 17 and m = 6, we have

  ------------ --- ----------------------------
  h_(3,4)(8)   =   ((3 · 8 + 4) mod 17) mod 6
               =   (28 mod 17) mod 6
               =   11 mod 6
               =   5.
  ------------ --- ----------------------------

Given p and m, the family of all such hash functions is

[art]

Each hash function h_(ab) maps ℤ_(p) to ℤ_(m). This family of hash
functions has the nice property that the size m of the output range
(which is the size of the hash table) is arbitrary—it need not be prime.
Since you can choose from among p − 1 values for a and p values for b,
the family H_(pm) contains p(p − 1) hash functions.

Theorem 11.4

The family H_(pm) of hash functions defined by equations (11.3) and
(11.4) is universal.

Proof   Consider two distinct keys k₁ and k₂ from ℤ_(p), so that k₁ ≠
k₂. For a given hash function h_(ab), let

r₁ = (ak₁ + b) mod p,

r₂ = (ak₂ + b) mod p.

We first note that r₁ ≠ r₂. Why? Since we have r₁ − r₂ = a(k₁ − k₂) (mod
p), it follows that r₁ ≠ r₂ because p is prime and both a and (k₁ − k₂)
are nonzero modulo p. By Theorem 31.6 on page 908, their product must
also be nonzero modulo p. Therefore, when computing any h_(ab) ∈ H_(pm),
distinct inputs k₁ and k₂ map to distinct values r₁ and r₂ modulo p, and
there are no collisions yet at the “mod p level.” Moreover, each of the
possible p(p − 1) choices for the pair (a, b) with a ≠ 0 yields a
different resulting pair (r₁, r₂) with r₁ ≠ r₂, since we can solve for a
and b given r₁ and r₂:

a = ((r − r₂)((k₁ − k₂)⁻¹ mod p)) mod p,

b = (r₁ − ak₁) mod p,

where ((k₁ − k₂)⁻¹ mod p) denotes the unique multiplicative inverse,
modulo p, of k₁ − k₂. For each of the p possible values of r₁, there are
only p − 1 possible values of r₂ that do not equal r₁, making only p(p
− 1) possible pairs (r₁, r₂) with r₁ ≠ r₂. Therefore, there is a
one-to-one correspondence between pairs (a, b) with a ≠ 0 and pairs (r₁,
r₂) with r₁ ≠ r₂. Thus, for any given pair of distinct inputs k₁ and k₂,
if we pick (a, b) uniformly at random from [art], the resulting pair
(r₁, r₂) is equally likely to be any pair of distinct values modulo p.

Therefore, the probability that distinct keys k₁ and k₂ collide is equal
to the probability that r₁ = r₂ (mod m) when r₁ and r₂ are randomly
chosen as distinct values modulo p. For a given value of r₁, of the p −
1 possible remaining values for r₂, the number of values r₂ such that r₂
≠ r₁ and r₂ = r₁ (mod m) is at most

[art]

The probability that r₂ collides with r₁ when reduced modulo m is at
most ((p − 1)/m)/(p − 1) = 1/m, since r₂ is equally likely to be any of
the p − 1 values in Z_(p) that are different from r₁, but at most (p −
1)/m of those values are equivalent to r₁ modulo m.

Therefore, for any pair of distinct values k₁, k₂ ∈ ℤ_(p),

Pr{h_(ab)(k₁) = h_(ab)(k₂)} ≤ 1/m,

so that H_(pm) is indeed universal.

▪

A 2/m-universal family of hash functions based on the multiply-shift
method

We recommend that in practice you use the following hash-function family
based on the multiply-shift method. It is exceptionally efficient and
(although we omit the proof) provably 2/m-universal. Define H to be the
family of multiply-shift hash functions with odd constants a:

[art]

Theorem 11.5

The family of hash functions H given by equation (11.5) is
2/m-universal.

▪

That is, the probability that any two distinct keys collide is at most
2/m. In many practical situations, the speed of computing the hash
function more than compensates for the higher upper bound on the
probability that two distinct keys collide when compared with a
universal hash function.

11.3.5    Hashing long inputs such as vectors or strings

Sometimes hash function inputs are so long that they cannot be easily
encoded modulo a reasonably sized prime number p or encoded within a
single word of, say, 64 bits. As an example, consider the class of
vectors, such as vectors of 8-bit bytes (which is how strings in many
programming languages are stored). A vector might have an arbitrary
nonnegative length, in which case the length of the input to the hash
function may vary from input to input.

Number-theoretic approaches

One way to design good hash functions for variable-length inputs is to
extend the ideas used in Section 11.3.4 to design universal hash
functions. Exercise 11.3-6 explores one such approach.

Cryptographic hashing

Another way to design a good hash function for variable-length inputs is
to use a hash function designed for cryptographic applications.
Cryptographic hash functions are complex pseudorandom functions,
designed for applications requiring properties beyond those needed here,
but are robust, widely implemented, and usable as hash functions for
hash tables.

A cryptographic hash function takes as input an arbitrary byte string
and returns a fixed-length output. For example, the NIST standard
deterministic cryptographic hash function SHA-256 [346] produces a
256-bit (32-byte) output for any input.

Some chip manufacturers include instructions in their CPU architectures
to provide fast implementations of some cryptographic functions. Of
particular interest are instructions that efficiently implement rounds
of the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), the “AES-NI” instructions.
These instructions execute in a few tens of nanoseconds, which is
generally fast enough for use with hash tables. A message authentication
code such as CBC-MAC based on AES and the use of the AES-NI instructions
could be a useful and efficient hash function. We don’t pursue the
potential use of specialized instruction sets further here.

Cryptographic hash functions are useful because they provide a way of
implementing an approximate version of a random oracle. As noted
earlier, a random oracle is equivalent to an independent uniform hash
function family. From a theoretical point of view, a random oracle is an
unachievable ideal: a deterministic function that provides a randomly
selected output for each input. Because it is deterministic, it provides
the same output if queried again for the same input. From a practical
point of view, constructions of hash function families based on
cryptographic hash functions are sensible substitutes for random
oracles.

There are many ways to use a cryptographic hash function as a hash
function. For example, we could define

h(k) = SHA-256(k) mod m.

To define a family of such hash functions one may prepend a “salt”
string a to the input before hashing it, as in

h_(a)(k) = SHA-256(a ‖ k) mod m,

where a ‖ k denotes the string formed by concatenating the strings a and
k. The literature on message authentication codes (MACs) provides
additional approaches.

Cryptographic approaches to hash-function design are becoming more
practical as computers arrange their memories in hierarchies of
differing capacities and speeds. Section 11.5 discusses one
hash-function design based on the RC6 encryption method.

Exercises

11.3-1

You wish to search a linked list of length n, where each element
contains a key k along with a hash value h(k). Each key is a long
character string. How might you take advantage of the hash values when
searching the list for an element with a given key?

11.3-2

You hash a string of r characters into m slots by treating it as a
radix-128 number and then using the division method. You can represent
the number m as a 32-bit computer word, but the string of r characters,
treated as a radix-128 number, takes many words. How can you apply the
division method to compute the hash value of the character string
without using more than a constant number of words of storage outside
the string itself?

11.3-3

Consider a version of the division method in which h(k) = k mod m, where
m = 2^(p) − 1 and k is a character string interpreted in radix 2^(p).
Show that if string x can be converted to string y by permuting its
characters, then x and y hash to the same value. Give an example of an
application in which this property would be undesirable in a hash
function.

11.3-4

Consider a hash table of size m = 1000 and a corresponding hash function
h(k) = ⌊m (kA mod 1)⌋ for [art]. Compute the locations to which the keys
61, 62, 63, 64, and 65 are mapped.

★ 11.3-5

Show that any ϵ-universal family H of hash functions from a finite set U
to a finite set Q has ϵ ≥ 1/|Q| − 1/|U|.

★ 11.3-6

Let U be the set of d-tuples of values drawn from ℤ_(p), and let Q =
ℤ_(p), where p is prime. Define the hash function h_(b) : U → Q for b ∈
ℤ_(p) on an input d-tuple 〈a₀, a₁, …, a_(d−1)〉 from U as

[art]

and let H = {h_(b) : b ∈ ℤ_(p)}. Argue that H is ϵ-universal for ϵ = (d
− 1)/p. (Hint: See Exercise 31.4-4.)

11.4    Open addressing

This section describes open addressing, a method for collision
resolution that, unlike chaining, does not make use of storage outside
of the hash table itself. In open addressing, all elements occupy the
hash table itself. That is, each table entry contains either an element
of the dynamic set or NIL. No lists or elements are stored outside the
table, unlike in chaining. Thus, in open addressing, the hash table can
“fill up” so that no further insertions can be made. One consequence is
that the load factor α can never exceed 1.

Collisions are handled as follows: when a new element is to be inserted
into the table, it is placed in its “first-choice” location if possible.
If that location is already occupied, the new element is placed in its
“second-choice” location. The process continues until an empty slot is
found in which to place the new element. Different elements have
different preference orders for the locations.

To search for an element, systematically examine the preferred table
slots for that element, in order of decreasing preference, until either
you find the desired element or you find an empty slot and thus verify
that the element is not in the table.

Of course, you could use chaining and store the linked lists inside the
hash table, in the otherwise unused hash-table slots (see Exercise
11.2-4), but the advantage of open addressing is that it avoids pointers
altogether. Instead of following pointers, you compute the sequence of
slots to be examined. The memory freed by not storing pointers provides
the hash table with a larger number of slots in the same amount of
memory, potentially yielding fewer collisions and faster retrieval.

To perform insertion using open addressing, successively examine, or
probe, the hash table until you find an empty slot in which to put the
key. Instead of being fixed in the order 0, 1, …, m − 1 (which implies a
Θ(n) search time), the sequence of positions probed depends upon the key
being inserted. To determine which slots to probe, the hash function
includes the probe number (starting from 0) as a second input. Thus, the
hash function becomes

h : U × {0, 1, …, m − 1} → {0, 1, …, m − 1}.

Open addressing requires that for every key k, the probe sequence 〈h(k,
0), h(k, 1), …, h(k, m − 1)〉 be a permutation of 〈0, 1, …, m − 1〉, so
that every hash-table position is eventually considered as a slot for a
new key as the table fills up. The HASH-INSERT procedure on the
following page assumes that the elements in the hash table T are keys
with no satellite information: the key k is identical to the element
containing key k. Each slot contains either a key or NIL (if the slot is
empty). The HASH-INSERT procedure takes as input a hash table T and a
key k that is assumed to be not already present in the hash table. It
either returns the slot number where it stores key k or flags an error
because the hash table is already full.

HASH-INSERT(T, k)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   i = 0
  2   repeat
  3   q = h(k, i)
  4   if T[q] == NIL
  5   T[q] = k
  6   return q
  7   else i = i + 1
  8   until i == m
  9   error “hash table overflow”
  --- -----------------------------

HASH-SEARCH(T, k)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   i = 0
  2   repeat
  3   q = h(k, i)
  4   if T[q] == k
  5   return q
  6   i = i + 1
  7   until T[q] == NIL or i == m
  8   return NIL
  --- -----------------------------

The algorithm for searching for key k probes the same sequence of slots
that the insertion algorithm examined when key k was inserted.
Therefore, the search can terminate (unsuccessfully) when it finds an
empty slot, since k would have been inserted there and not later in its
probe sequence. The procedure HASH-SEARCH takes as input a hash table T
and a key k, returning q if it finds that slot q contains key k, or NIL
if key k is not present in table T.

Deletion from an open-address hash table is tricky. When you delete a
key from slot q, it would be a mistake to mark that slot as empty by
simply storing NIL in it. If you did, you might be unable to retrieve
any key k for which slot q was probed and found occupied when k was
inserted. One way to solve this problem is by marking the slot, storing
in it the special value DELETED instead of NIL. The HASH-INSERT
procedure then has to treat such a slot as empty so that it can insert a
new key there. The HASH-SEARCH procedure passes over DELETED values
while searching, since slots containing DELETED were filled when the key
being searched for was inserted. Using the special value DELETED,
however, means that search times no longer depend on the load factor α,
and for this reason chaining is frequently selected as a collision
resolution technique when keys must be deleted. There is a simple
special case of open addressing, linear probing, that avoids the need to
mark slots with DELETED. Section 11.5.1 shows how to delete from a hash
table when using linear probing.

In our analysis, we assume independent uniform permutation hashing (also
confusingly known as uniform hashing in the literature): the probe
sequence of each key is equally likely to be any of the m! permutations
of 〈0, 1, …, m − 1〉. Independent uniform permutation hashing
generalizes the notion of independent uniform hashing defined earlier to
a hash function that produces not just a single slot number, but a whole
probe sequence. True independent uniform permutation hashing is
difficult to implement, however, and in practice suitable approximations
(such as double hashing, defined below) are used.

We’ll examine both double hashing and its special case, linear probing.
These techniques guarantee that 〈h(k, 0), h(k, 1), …, h(k, m − 1)〉 is
a permutation of 〈0, 1, …, m − 1〉 for each key k. (Recall that the
second parameter to the hash function h is the probe number.) Neither
double hashing nor linear probing meets the assumption of independent
uniform permutation hashing, however. Double hashing cannot generate
more than m² different probe sequences (instead of the m! that
independent uniform permutation hashing requires). Nonetheless, double
hashing has a large number of possible probe sequences and, as you might
expect, seems to give good results. Linear probing is even more
restricted, capable of generating only m different probe sequences.

Double hashing

Double hashing offers one of the best methods available for open
addressing because the permutations produced have many of the
characteristics of randomly chosen permutations. Double hashing uses a
hash function of the form

h(k, i) = (h₁(k) + ih₂(k)) mod m,

where both h₁ and h₂ are auxiliary hash functions. The initial probe
goes to position T[h₁(k)], and successive probe positions are offset
from previous positions by the amount h₂(k), modulo m. Thus, the probe
sequence here depends in two ways upon the key k, since the initial
probe position h₁(k), the step size h₂(k), or both, may vary. Figure
11.5 gives an example of insertion by double hashing.

In order for the entire hash table to be searched, the value h₂(k) must
be relatively prime to the hash-table size m. (See Exercise 11.4-5.) A
convenient way to ensure this condition is to let m be an exact power of
2 and to design h₂ so that it always produces an odd number. Another way
is to let m be prime and to design h₂ so that it always returns a
positive integer less than m. For example, you could choose m prime and
let

[art]

Figure 11.5 Insertion by double hashing. The hash table has size 13 with
h₁(k) = k mod 13 and h₂(k) = 1 + (k mod 11). Since 14 = 1 (mod 13) and
14 = 3 (mod 11), the key 14 goes into empty slot 9, after slots 1 and 5
are examined and found to be occupied.

h₁(k) = k mod m,

h₂(k) = 1 + (k mod m′),

where m′ is chosen to be slightly less than m (say, m − 1). For example,
if k = 123456, m = 701, and m′ = 700, then h₁(k) = 80 and h₂(k) = 257,
so that the first probe goes to position 80, and successive probes
examine every 257th slot (modulo m) until the key has been found or
every slot has been examined.

Although values of m other than primes or exact powers of 2 can in
principle be used with double hashing, in practice it becomes more
difficult to efficiently generate h₂(k) (other than choosing h₂(k) = 1,
which gives linear probing) in a way that ensures that it is relatively
prime to m, in part because the relative density ϕ(m)/m of such numbers
for general m may be small (see equation (31.25) on page 921).

When m is prime or an exact power of 2, double hashing produces Θ(m²)
probe sequences, since each possible (h₁(k), h₂(k)) pair yields a
distinct probe sequence. As a result, for such values of m, double
hashing appears to perform close to the “ideal” scheme of independent
uniform permutation hashing.

Linear probing

Linear probing, a special case of double hashing, is the simplest
open-addressing approach to resolving collisions. As with double
hashing, an auxiliary hash function h₁ determines the first probe
position h₁(k) for inserting an element. If slot T[h₁(k)] is already
occupied, probe the next position T[h₁(k) + 1]. Keep going as necessary,
on up to slot T[m − 1], and then wrap around to slots T[0], T[1], and so
on, but never going past slot T[h₁(k) − 1]. To view linear probing as a
special case of double hashing, just set the double-hashing step
function h₂ to be fixed at 1: h₂(k) = 1 for all k. That is, the hash
function is

[art]

for i = 0, 1, …, m − 1. The value of h₁(k) determines the entire probe
sequence, and so assuming that h₁(k) can take on any value in {0, 1, …,
m − 1}, linear probing allows only m distinct probe sequences.

We’ll revisit linear probing in Section 11.5.1.

Analysis of open-address hashing

As in our analysis of chaining in Section 11.2, we analyze open
addressing in terms of the load factor α = n/m of the hash table. With
open addressing, at most one element occupies each slot, and thus n ≤ m,
which implies α ≤ 1. The analysis below requires α to be strictly less
than 1, and so we assume that at least one slot is empty. Because
deleting from an open-address hash table does not really free up a slot,
we assume as well that no deletions occur.

For the hash function, we assume independent uniform permutation
hashing. In this idealized scheme, the probe sequence 〈h(k, 0), h(k,
1), …, h(k, m − 1)〉 used to insert or search for each key k is equally
likely to be any permutation of 〈0, 1, …, m − 1〉. Of course, any given
key has a unique fixed probe sequence associated with it. What we mean
here is that, considering the probability distribution on the space of
keys and the operation of the hash function on the keys, each possible
probe sequence is equally likely.

We now analyze the expected number of probes for hashing with open
addressing under the assumption of independent uniform permutation
hashing, beginning with the expected number of probes made in an
unsuccessful search (assuming, as stated above, that α < 1).

The bound proven, of 1/(1 − α) = 1 + α + α² + α³ + ⋯, has an intuitive
interpretation. The first probe always occurs. With probability
approximately α, the first probe finds an occupied slot, so that a
second probe happens. With probability approximately α², the first two
slots are occupied so that a third probe ensues, and so on.

Theorem 11.6

Given an open-address hash table with load factor α = n/m < 1, the
expected number of probes in an unsuccessful search is at most 1/(1 −
α), assuming independent uniform permutation hashing and no deletions.

Proof   In an unsuccessful search, every probe but the last accesses an
occupied slot that does not contain the desired key, and the last slot
probed is empty. Let the random variable X denote the number of probes
made in an unsuccessful search, and define the event A_(i), for i = 1,
2, …, as the event that an ith probe occurs and it is to an occupied
slot. Then the event {X ≥ i} is the intersection of events A₁ ⋂ A₂ ⋂ ⋯ ⋂
A_(i−1). We bound Pr{X ≥ i} by bounding Pr{A₁ ⋂ A₂ ⋂ ⋯ ⋂ A_(i−1)}. By
Exercise C.2-5 on page 1190,

  --------------------------- --- --------------------------------------------
  Pr{A₁ ⋂ A₂ ⋂ ⋯ ⋂ A_(i−1)}   =   Pr{A₁} · Pr{A₂ | A₁} · Pr {A₃ | A₁ ⋂ A₂} ⋯
                                  Pr{A_(i−1) | A₁ ⋂ A₂ ⋂ ⋯ ⋂ A_(i−2)}.
  --------------------------- --- --------------------------------------------

Since there are n elements and m slots, Pr{A₁} = n/m. For j > 1, the
probability that there is a jth probe and it is to an occupied slot,
given that the first j − 1 probes were to occupied slots, is (n − j +
1)/(m − j + 1). This probability follows because the jth probe would be
finding one of the remaining (n − (j − 1)) elements in one of the (m −
(j − 1)) unexamined slots, and by the assumption of independent uniform
permutation hashing, the probability is the ratio of these quantities.
Since n < m implies that (n − j)/(m − j) ≤ n/m for all j in the range 0
≤ j < m, it follows that for all i in the range 1 ≤ i ≤ m, we have

[art]

The product in the first line has i − 1 factors. When i = 1, the product
is 1, the identity for multiplication, and we get Pr{X ≥ 1} = 1, which
makes sense, since there must always be at least 1 probe. If each of the
first n probes is to an occupied slot, then all occupied slots have been
probed. Then, the (n + 1)st probe must be to an empty slot, which gives
Pr{X ≥ i} = 0 for i > n + 1. Now, we use equation (C.28) on page 1193 to
bound the expected number of probes:

[art]

▪

If α is a constant, Theorem 11.6 predicts that an unsuccessful search
runs in O(1) time. For example, if the hash table is half full, the
average number of probes in an unsuccessful search is at most 1/(1 − .5)
= 2. If it is 90% full, the average number of probes is at most 1/(1 −
.9) = 10.

Theorem 11.6 yields almost immediately how well the HASH-INSERT
procedure performs.

Corollary 11.7

Inserting an element into an open-address hash table with load factor α,
where α < 1, requires at most 1/(1 − α) probes on average, assuming
independent uniform permutation hashing and no deletions.

Proof   An element is inserted only if there is room in the table, and
thus α < 1. Inserting a key requires an unsuccessful search followed by
placing the key into the first empty slot found. Thus, the expected
number of probes is at most 1/(1 − α).

▪

It takes a little more work to compute the expected number of probes for
a successful search.

Theorem 11.8

Given an open-address hash table with load factor α < 1, the expected
number of probes in a successful search is at most

[art]

assuming independent uniform permutation hashing with no deletions and
assuming that each key in the table is equally likely to be searched
for.

Proof   A search for a key k reproduces the same probe sequence as when
the element with key k was inserted. If k was the (i + 1)st key inserted
into the hash table, then the load factor at the time it was inserted
was i/m, and so by Corollary 11.7, the expected number of probes made in
a search for k is at most 1/(1 − i/m) = m/(m − i). Averaging over all n
keys in the hash table gives us the expected number of probes in a
successful search:

[art]

▪

If the hash table is half full, the expected number of probes in a
successful search is less than 1.387. If the hash table is 90% full, the
expected number of probes is less than 2.559. If α = 1, then in an
unsuccessful search, all m slots must be probed. Exercise 11.4-4 asks
you to analyze a successful search when α = 1.

Exercises

11.4-1

Consider inserting the keys 10, 22, 31, 4, 15, 28, 17, 88, 59 into a
hash table of length m = 11 using open addressing. Illustrate the result
of inserting these keys using linear probing with h(k, i) = (k + i) mod
m and using double hashing with h₁(k) = k and h₂(k) = 1 + (k mod (m −
1)).

11.4-2

Write pseudocode for HASH-DELETE that fills the deleted key’s slot with
the special value DELETED, and modify HASH-SEARCH and HASH-INSERT as
needed to handle DELETED.

11.4-3

Consider an open-address hash table with independent uniform permutation
hashing and no deletions. Give upper bounds on the expected number of
probes in an unsuccessful search and on the expected number of probes in
a successful search when the load factor is 3/4 and when it is 7/8.

11.4-4

Show that the expected number of probes required for a successful search
when α = 1 (that is, when n = m), is H_(m), the mth harmonic number.

★ 11.4-5

Show that, with double hashing, if m and h₂(k) have greatest common
divisor d ≥ 1 for some key k, then an unsuccessful search for key k
examines (1/d)th of the hash table before returning to slot h₁(k). Thus,
when d = 1, so that m and h₂(k) are relatively prime, the search may
examine the entire hash table. (Hint: See Chapter 31.)

★ 11.4-6

Consider an open-address hash table with a load factor α. Approximate
the nonzero value α for which the expected number of probes in an
unsuccessful search equals twice the expected number of probes in a
successful search. Use the upper bounds given by Theorems 11.6 and 11.8
for these expected numbers of probes.

11.5    Practical considerations

Efficient hash table algorithms are not only of theoretical interest,
but also of immense practical importance. Constant factors can matter.
For this reason, this section discusses two aspects of modern CPUs that
are not included in the standard RAM model presented in Section 2.2:

Memory hierarchies: The memory of modern CPUs has a number of levels,
from the fast registers, through one or more levels of cache memory, to
the main-memory level. Each successive level stores more data than the
previous level, but access is slower. As a consequence, a complex
computation (such as a complicated hash function) that works entirely
within the fast registers can take less time than a single read
operation from main memory. Furthermore, cache memory is organized in
cache blocks of (say) 64 bytes each, which are always fetched together
from main memory. There is a substantial benefit for ensuring that
memory usage is local: reusing the same cache block is much more
efficient than fetching a different cache block from main memory.

The standard RAM model measures efficiency of a hash-table operation by
counting the number of hash-table slots probed. In practice, this metric
is only a crude approximation to the truth, since once a cache block is
in the cache, successive probes to that cache block are much faster than
probes that must access main memory.

Advanced instruction sets: Modern CPUs may have sophisticated
instruction sets that implement advanced primitives useful for
encryption or other forms of cryptography. These instructions may be
useful in the design of exceptionally efficient hash functions.

Section 11.5.1 discusses linear probing, which becomes the
collision-resolution method of choice in the presence of a memory
hierarchy. Section 11.5.2 suggests how to construct “advanced” hash
functions based on cryptographic primitives, suitable for use on
computers with hierarchical memory models.

11.5.1    Linear probing

Linear probing is often disparaged because of its poor performance in
the standard RAM model. But linear probing excels for hierarchical
memory models, because successive probes are usually to the same cache
block of memory.

Deletion with linear probing

Another reason why linear probing is often not used in practice is that
deletion seems complicated or impossible without using the special
DELETED value. Yet we’ll now see that deletion from a hash table based
on linear probing is not all that difficult, even without the DELETED
marker. The deletion procedure works for linear probing, but not for
open-address probing in general, because with linear probing keys all
follow the same simple cyclic probing sequence (albeit with different
starting points).

The deletion procedure relies on an “inverse” function to the
linear-probing hash function h(k, i) = (h₁(k) + i) mod m, which maps a
key k and a probe number i to a slot number in the hash table. The
inverse function g maps a key k and a slot number q, where 0 ≤ q < m, to
the probe number that reaches slot q:

g(k, q) = (q − h₁(k)) mod m.

If h(k, i) = q, then g(k, q) = i, and so h(k, g(k, q)) = q.

The procedure LINEAR-PROBING-HASH-DELETE on the facing page deletes the
key stored in position q from hash table T. Figure 11.6 shows how it
works. The procedure first deletes the key in position q by setting T[q]
to NIL in line 2. It then searches for a slot q′ (if any) that contains
a key that should be moved to the slot q just vacated by key k. Line 9
asks the critical question: does the key k′ in slot q′ need to be moved
to the vacated slot q in order to preserve the accessibility of k′? If
g(k′, q) < g(k′, q′), then during the insertion of k′ into the table,
slot q was examined but found to be already occupied. But now slot q,
where a search will look for k′, is empty. In this case, key k′ moves to
slot q in line 10, and the search continues, to see whether any later
key also needs to be moved to the slot q′ that was just freed up when k′
moved.

[art]

Figure 11.6 Deletion in a hash table that uses linear probing. The hash
table has size 10 with h₁(k) = k mod 10. (a) The hash table after
inserting keys in the order 74, 43, 93, 18, 82, 38, 92. (b) The hash
table after deleting the key 43 from slot 3. Key 93 moves up to slot 3
to keep it accessible, and then key 92 moves up to slot 5 just vacated
by key 93. No other keys need to be moved.

LINEAR-PROBING-HASH-DELETE(T, q)

  ----- ---------------------------- -----------------------------------------
    1   while TRUE                   
    2   T[q] = NIL                   // make slot q empty
    3   q′ = q                       // starting point for search
    4   repeat                       
    5   q′ = (q′ + 1) mod m          // next slot number with linear probing
    6   k′ = T[q′]                   // next key to try to move
    7   if k′ == NIL                 
    8   return                       // return when an empty slot is found
    9   until g(k′, q) < g(k′, q′)   // was empty slot q probed before q′?
  10    T[q] = k′                    // move k′ into slot q
  11    q = q′                       // free up slot q′
  ----- ---------------------------- -----------------------------------------

Analysis of linear probing

Linear probing is popular to implement, but it exhibits a phenomenon
known as primary clustering. Long runs of occupied slots build up,
increasing the average search time. Clusters arise because an empty slot
preceded by i full slots gets filled next with probability (i + 1)/m.
Long runs of occupied slots tend to get longer, and the average search
time increases.

In the standard RAM model, primary clustering is a problem, and general
double hashing usually performs better than linear probing. By contrast,
in a hierarchical memory model, primary clustering is a beneficial
property, as elements are often stored together in the same cache block.
Searching proceeds through one cache block before advancing to search
the next cache block. With linear probing, the running time for a key k
of HASH-INSERT, HASH-SEARCH, or LINEAR-PROBING-HASH-DELETE is at most
proportional to the distance from h₁(k) to the next empty slot.

The following theorem is due to Pagh et al. [351]. A more recent proof
is given by Thorup [438]. We omit the proof here. The need for
5-independence is by no means obvious; see the cited proofs.

Theorem 11.9

If h₁ is 5-independent and α ≤ 2/3, then it takes expected constant time
to search for, insert, or delete a key in a hash table using linear
probing.

▪

(Indeed, the expected operation time is O(1/ϵ ²) for α = 1 − ϵ.)

★ 11.5.2 Hash functions for hierarchical memory models

This section illustrates an approach for designing efficient hash tables
in a modern computer system having a memory hierarchy.

Because of the memory hierarchy, linear probing is a good choice for
resolving collisions, as probe sequences are sequential and tend to stay
within cache blocks. But linear probing is most efficient when the hash
function is complex (for example, 5-independent as in Theorem 11.9).
Fortunately, having a memory hierarchy means that complex hash functions
can be implemented efficiently.

As noted in Section 11.3.5, one approach is to use a cryptographic hash
function such as SHA-256. Such functions are complex and sufficiently
random for hash table applications. On machines with specialized
instructions, cryptographic functions can be quite efficient.

Instead, we present here a simple hash function based only on addition,
multiplication, and swapping the halves of a word. This function can be
implemented entirely within the fast registers, and on a machine with a
memory hierarchy, its latency is small compared with the time taken to
access a random slot of the hash table. It is related to the RC6
encryption algorithm and can for practical purposes be considered a
“random oracle.”

The wee hash function

Let w denote the word size of the machine (e.g., w = 64), assumed to be
even, and let a and b be w-bit unsigned (nonnegative) integers such that
a is odd. Let swap(x) denote the w-bit result of swapping the two
w/2-bit halves of w-bit input x. That is,

swap(x) = (x ⋙ (w/2)) + (x ⋘ (w/2))

where “⋙” is “logical right shift” (as in equation (11.2)) and “⋘ is
“left shift.” Define

f_(a)(k) = swap((2k² + ak) mod 2^(w)).

Thus, to compute f_(a)(k), evaluate the quadratic function 2k² + ak
modulo 2^(w) and then swap the left and right halves of the result.

Let r denote a desired number of “rounds” for the computation of the
hash function. We’ll use r = 4, but the hash function is well defined
for any nonnegative r. Denote by [art] the result of iterating f_(a) a
total of r times (that is, r rounds) starting with input value k. For
any odd a and any r ≥ 0, the function [art], although complicated, is
one-to-one (see Exercise 11.5-1). A cryptographer would view [art] as a
simple block cipher operating on w-bit input blocks, with r rounds and
key a.

We first define the wee hash function h for short inputs, where by
“short” we means “whose length t is at most w-bits,” so that the input
fits within one computer word. We would like inputs of different lengths
to be hashed differently. The wee hash function h_(a,b,t,r)(k) for
parameters a, b, and r on t-bit input k is defined as

[art]

That is, the hash value for t-bit input k is obtained by applying [art]
to k + b, then taking the final result modulo m. Adding the value b
provides hash-dependent randomization of the input, in a way that
ensures that for variable-length inputs the 0-length input does not have
a fixed hash value. Adding the value 2t to a ensures that the hash
function acts differently for inputs of different lengths. (We use 2t
rather than t to ensure that the key a + 2t is odd if a is odd.) We call
this hash function “wee” because it uses a tiny amount of memory—more
precisely, it can be implemented efficiently using only the computer’s
fast registers. (This hash function does not have a name in the
literature; it is a variant we developed for this textbook.)

Speed of the wee hash function

It is surprising how much efficiency can be bought with locality.
Experiments (unpublished, by the authors) suggest that evaluating the
wee hash function takes less time than probing a single randomly chosen
slot in a hash table. These experiments were run on a laptop (2019
MacBook Pro) with w = 64 and a = 123. For large hash tables, evaluating
the wee hash function was 2 to 10 times faster than performing a single
probe of the hash table.

The wee hash function for variable-length inputs

Sometimes inputs are long—more than one w-bit word in length—or have
variable length, as discussed in Section 11.3.5. We can extend the wee
hash function, defined above for inputs that are at most single w-bit
word in length, to handle long or variable-length inputs. Here is one
method for doing so.

Suppose that an input k has length t (measured in bits). Break k into a
sequence 〈k₁, k₂, …, k_(u)〉 of w-bit words, where u = ⌈t/w⌉, k₁
contains the least-significant w bits of k, and k_(u) contains the most
significant bits. If t is not a multiple of w, then k_(u) contains fewer
than w bits, in which case, pad out the unused high-order bits of k_(u)
with 0-bits. Define the function chop to return a sequence of the w-bit
words in k:

chop(k) = 〈k₁, k₂, …, k_(u)〉.

The most important property of the chop operation is that it is
one-to-one, given t: for any two t-bit keys k and k′, if k ≠ k′ then
chop(k) ≠ chop(k′), and k can be derived from chop(k) and t. The chop
operation also has the useful property that a single-word input key
yields a single-word output sequence: chop(k) = 〈k〉.

With the chop function in hand, we specify the wee hash function
h_(a,b,t,r)(k) for an input k of length t bits as follows:

h_(a,b,t,r)(k) = WEE(k, a, b, t, r, m),

where the procedure WEE defined on the facing page iterates through the
elements of the w-bit words returned by chop(k), applying [art] to the
sum of the current word k_(i) and the previously computed hash value so
far, finally returning the result obtained modulo m. This definition for
variable-length and long (multiple-word) inputs is a consistent
extension of the definition in equation (11.7) for short (single-word)
inputs. For practical use, we recommend that a be a randomly chosen odd
w-bit word, b be a randomly chosen w-bit word, and that r = 4.

Note that the wee hash function is really a hash function family, with
individual hash functions determined by parameters a, b, t, r, and m.
The (approximate) 5-independence of the wee hash function family for
variable-length inputs can be argued based on the assumption that the
1-word wee hash function is a random oracle and on the security of the
cipher-block-chaining message authentication code (CBC-MAC), as studied
by Bellare et al. [42]. The case here is actually simpler than that
studied in the literature, since if two messages have different lengths
t and t′, then their “keys” are different: a + 2t ≠ a + 2t′. We omit the
details.

WEE(k, a, b, t, r, m)

  --- --------------------------------
  1   u = ⌈t/w⌉
  2   〈k₁, k₂, …, k_(u)〉 = chop(k)
  3   q = b
  4   for i = 1 to u
  5   [art]
  6   return q mod m
  --- --------------------------------

This definition of a cryptographically inspired hash-function family is
meant to be realistic, yet only illustrative, and many variations and
improvements are possible. See the chapter notes for suggestions.

In summary, we see that when the memory system is hierarchical, it
becomes advantageous to use linear probing (a special case of double
hashing), since successive probes tend to stay in the same cache block.
Furthermore, hash functions that can be implemented using only the
computer’s fast registers are exceptionally efficient, so they can be
quite complex and even cryptographically inspired, providing the high
degree of independence needed for linear probing to work most
efficiently.

Exercises

★ 11.5-1

Complete the argument that for any odd positive integer a and any
integer r ≥ 0, the function [art] is one-to-one. Use a proof by
contradiction and make use of the fact that the function f_(a) works
modulo 2^(w).

★ 11.5-2

Argue that a random oracle is 5-independent.

★ 11.5-3

Consider what happens to the value [art] as we flip a single bit k_(i)
of the input value k, for various values of r. Let [art] and [art]
define the bit values k_(i) in the input (with k₀ the least-significant
bit) and the bit values b_(j) in g_(a)(k) = (2k² + ak) mod 2^(w) (where
g_(a)(k) is the value that, when its halves are swapped, becomes
f_(a)(k)). Suppose that flipping a single bit k_(i) of the input k may
cause any bit b_(j) of g_(a)(k) to flip, for j ≥ i. What is the least
value of r for which flipping the value of any single bit k_(i) may
cause any bit of the output [art] to flip? Explain.

Problems

11-1     Longest-probe bound for hashing

Suppose you are using an open-addressed hash table of size m to store n
≤ m/2 items.

a. Assuming independent uniform permutation hashing, show that for i =
1, 2, …, n, the probability is at most 2^(−p) that the ith insertion
requires strictly more than p probes.

b. Show that for i = 1, 2, …, n, the probability is O(1/n²) that the ith
insertion requires more than 2 lg n probes.

Let the random variable X_(i) denote the number of probes required by
the ith insertion. You have shown in part (b) that Pr{X_(i) > 2 lg n} =
O(1/n²). Let the random variable X = max {X_(i) : 1 ≤ i ≤ n} denote the
maximum number of probes required by any of the n insertions.

c. Show that Pr{X > 2 lg n} = O(1/n).

d. Show that the expected length E[X] of the longest probe sequence is
O(lg n).

11-2     Searching a static set

You are asked to implement a searchable set of n elements in which the
keys are numbers. The set is static (no INSERT or DELETE operations),
and the only operation required is SEARCH. You are given an arbitrary
amount of time to preprocess the n elements so that SEARCH operations
run quickly.

a. Show how to implement SEARCH in O(lg n) worst-case time using no
extra storage beyond what is needed to store the elements of the set
themselves.

b. Consider implementing the set by open-address hashing on m slots, and
assume independent uniform permutation hashing. What is the minimum
amount of extra storage m − n required to make the average performance
of an unsuccessful SEARCH operation be at least as good as the bound in
part (a)? Your answer should be an asymptotic bound on m − n in terms of
n.

11-3     Slot-size bound for chaining

Given a hash table with n slots, with collisions resolved by chaining,
suppose that n keys are inserted into the table. Each key is equally
likely to be hashed to each slot. Let M be the maximum number of keys in
any slot after all the keys have been inserted. Your mission is to prove
an O(lg n / lg lg n) upper bound on E[M], the expected value of M.

a. Argue that the probability Q_(k) that exactly k keys hash to a
particular slot is given by

[art]

b. Let P_(k) be the probability that M = k, that is, the probability
that the slot containing the most keys contains k keys. Show that P_(k)
≤ nQ_(k).

c. Show that Q_(k) < e^(k)/k^(k). Hint: Use Stirling’s approximation,
equation (3.25) on page 67.

d. Show that there exists a constant c > 1 such that [art] for k₀ = c lg
n / lg lg n. Conclude that P_(k) < 1/n² for k ≥ k₀ = c lg n / lg lg n.

e. Argue that

[art]

Conclude that E[M] = O(lg n / lg lg n).

11-4     Hashing and authentication

Let H be a family of hash functions in which each hash function h ∈ H
maps the universe U of keys to {0, 1, …, m − 1}.

a. Show that if the family H of hash functions is 2-independent, then it
is universal.

b. Suppose that the universe U is the set of n-tuples of values drawn
from ℤ_(p) = {0, 1, …, p − 1}, where p is prime. Consider an element x =
〈x₀, x₁, …, x_(n−1)〉 ∈ U. For any n-tuple a = 〈a₀, a₁, …, a_(n−1)〉 ∈
U, define the hash function h_(a) by

[art]

Let H = {h_(a) : a ∈ U}. Show that H is universal, but not
2-independent. (Hint: Find a key for which all hash functions in H
produce the same value.)

c. Suppose that we modify H slightly from part (b): for any a ∈ U and
for any b ∈ ℤ_(p), define

[art]

and [art]. Argue that H′ is 2-independent. (Hint: Consider fixed
n-tuples x ∈ U and y ∈ U, with x_(i) ≠ y_(i) for some i. What happens to
[art] and [art] as a_(i) and b range over ℤ_(p)?)

d. Alice and Bob secretly agree on a hash function h from a
2-independent family H of hash functions. Each h ∈ H maps from a
universe of keys U to ℤ_(p), where p is prime. Later, Alice sends a
message m to Bob over the internet, where m ∈ U. She authenticates this
message to Bob by also sending an authentication tag t = h(m), and Bob
checks that the pair (m, t) he receives indeed satisfies t = h(m).
Suppose that an adversary intercepts (m, t) en route and tries to fool
Bob by replacing the pair (m, t) with a different pair (m′, t′). Argue
that the probability that the adversary succeeds in fooling Bob into
accepting (m′, t′) is at most 1/p, no matter how much computing power
the adversary has, even if the adversary knows the family H of hash
functions used.

Chapter notes

The books by Knuth [261] and Gonnet and Baeza-Yates [193] are excellent
references for the analysis of hashing algorithms. Knuth credits H. P.
Luhn (1953) for inventing hash tables, along with the chaining method
for resolving collisions. At about the same time, G. M. Amdahl
originated the idea of open addressing. The notion of a random oracle
was introduced by Bellare et al. [43]. Carter and Wegman [80] introduced
the notion of universal families of hash functions in 1979.

Dietzfelbinger et al. [113] invented the multiply-shift hash function
and gave a proof of Theorem 11.5. Thorup [437] provides extensions and
additional analysis. Thorup [438] gives a simple proof that linear
probing with 5-independent hashing takes constant expected time per
operation. Thorup also describes the method for deletion in a hash table
using linear probing.

Fredman, Komlós, and Szemerédi [154] developed a perfect hashing scheme
for static sets—“perfect” because all collisions are avoided. An
extension of their method to dynamic sets, handling insertions and
deletions in amortized expected time O(1), has been given by
Dietzfelbinger et al. [114].

The wee hash function is based on the RC6 encryption algorithm [379].
Leiserson et al. [292] propose an “RC6MIX” function that is essentially
the same as the wee hash function. They give experimental evidence that
it has good randomness, and they also give a “DOTMIX” function for
dealing with variable-length inputs. Bellare et al. [42] provide an
analysis of the security of the cipher-block-chaining message
authentication code. This analysis implies that the wee hash function
has the desired pseudorandomness properties.

¹ The definition of “average-case” requires care—are we assuming an
input distribution over the keys, or are we randomizing the choice of
hash function itself? We’ll consider both approaches, but with an
emphasis on the use of a randomly chosen hash function.

² In the literature, a (c/m)-universal hash function is sometimes called
c-universal or c-approximately universal. We’ll stick with the notation
(c/m)-universal.

12        Binary Search Trees

The search tree data structure supports each of the dynamic-set
operations listed on page 250: SEARCH, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, PREDECESSOR,
SUCCESSOR, INSERT, and DELETE. Thus, you can use a search tree both as a
dictionary and as a priority queue.

Basic operations on a binary search tree take time proportional to the
height of the tree. For a complete binary tree with n nodes, such
operations run in Θ(lg n) worst-case time. If the tree is a linear chain
of n nodes, however, the same operations take Θ(n) worst-case time. In
Chapter 13, we’ll see a variation of binary search trees, red-black
trees, whose operations guarantee a height of O(lg n). We won’t prove it
here, but if you build a binary search tree on a random set of n keys,
its expected height is O(lg n) even if you don’t try to limit its
height.

After presenting the basic properties of binary search trees, the
following sections show how to walk a binary search tree to print its
values in sorted order, how to search for a value in a binary search
tree, how to find the minimum or maximum element, how to find the
predecessor or successor of an element, and how to insert into or delete
from a binary search tree. The basic mathematical properties of trees
appear in Appendix B.

12.1    What is a binary search tree?

A binary search tree is organized, as the name suggests, in a binary
tree, as shown in Figure 12.1. You can represent such a tree with a
linked data structure, as in Section 10.3. In addition to a key and
satellite data, each node object contains attributes left, right, and p
that point to the nodes corresponding to its left child, its right
child, and its parent, respectively. If a child or the parent is
missing, the appropriate attribute contains the value NIL. The tree
itself has an attribute root that points to the root node, or NIL if the
tree is empty. The root node T.root is the only node in a tree T whose
parent is NIL.

[art]

Figure 12.1 Binary search trees. For any node x, the keys in the left
subtree of x are at most x.key, and the keys in the right subtree of x
are at least x.key. Different binary search trees can represent the same
set of values. The worst-case running time for most search-tree
operations is proportional to the height of the tree. (a) A binary
search tree on 6 nodes with height 2. The top figure shows how to view
the tree conceptually, and the bottom figure shows the left, right, and
p attributes in each node, in the style of Figure 10.6 on page 266. (b)
A less efficient binary search tree, with height 4, that contains the
same keys.

The keys in a binary search tree are always stored in such a way as to
satisfy the binary-search-tree property:

Let x be a node in a binary search tree. If y is a node in the left
subtree of x, then y.key ≤ x.key. If y is a node in the right subtree of
x, then y.key ≥ x.key.

Thus, in Figure 12.1(a), the key of the root is 6, the keys 2, 5, and 5
in its left subtree are no larger than 6, and the keys 7 and 8 in its
right subtree are no smaller than 6. The same property holds for every
node in the tree. For example, looking at the root’s left child as the
root of a subtree, this subtree root has the key 5, the key 2 in its
left subtree is no larger than 5, and the key 5 in its right subtree is
no smaller than 5.

Because of the binary-search-tree property, you can print out all the
keys in a binary search tree in sorted order by a simple recursive
algorithm, called an inorder tree walk, given by the procedure
INORDER-TREE-WALK. This algorithm is so named because it prints the key
of the root of a subtree between printing the values in its left subtree
and printing those in its right subtree. (Similarly, a preorder tree
walk prints the root before the values in either subtree, and a
postorder tree walk prints the root after the values in its subtrees.)
To print all the elements in a binary search tree T, call
INORDER-TREE-WALK(T.root). For example, the inorder tree walk prints the
keys in each of the two binary search trees from Figure 12.1 in the
order 2, 5, 5, 6, 7, 8. The correctness of the algorithm follows by
induction directly from the binary-search-tree property.

INORDER-TREE-WALK(x)

  --- ----------------------------
  1   if x ≠ NIL
  2   INORDER-TREE-WALK(x.left)
  3   print x.key
  4   INORDER-TREE-WALK(x.right)
  --- ----------------------------

It takes Θ(n) time to walk an n-node binary search tree, since after the
initial call, the procedure calls itself recursively exactly twice for
each node in the tree—once for its left child and once for its right
child. The following theorem gives a formal proof that it takes linear
time to perform an inorder tree walk.

Theorem 12.1

If x is the root of an n-node subtree, then the call
INORDER-TREE-WALK(x) takes Θ(n) time.

Proof   Let T(n) denote the time taken by INORDER-TREE-WALK when it is
called on the root of an n-node subtree. Since INORDER-TREE-WALK visits
all n nodes of the subtree, we have T(n) = Ω(n). It remains to show that
T(n) = O(n).

Since INORDER-TREE-WALK takes a small, constant amount of time on an
empty subtree (for the test x ≠ NIL), we have T(0) = c for some constant
c > 0.

For n > 0, suppose that INORDER-TREE-WALK is called on a node x whose
left subtree has k nodes and whose right subtree has n − k − 1 nodes.
The time to perform INORDER-TREE-WALK(x) is bounded by T(n) ≤ T(k) + T(n
− k − 1) + d for some constant d > 0 that reflects an upper bound on the
time to execute the body of INORDER-TREE-WALK(x), exclusive of the time
spent in recursive calls.

We use the substitution method to show that T(n) = O(n) by proving that
T(n) ≤ (c + d)n + c. For n = 0, we have (c + d) · 0 + c = c = T(0). For
n > 0, we have

  ------ --- -----------------------------------------------
  T(n)   ≤   T(k) + T(n − k − 1) + d
         ≤   ((c + d)k + c) + ((c + d)(n − k − 1) + c) + d
         =   (c + d)n + c − (c + d) + c + d
         =   (c + d)n + c,
  ------ --- -----------------------------------------------

which completes the proof.

▪

Exercises

12.1-1

For the set {1, 4, 5, 10, 16, 17, 21} of keys, draw binary search trees
of heights 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.

12.1-2

What is the difference between the binary-search-tree property and the
min-heap property on page 163? Can the min-heap property be used to
print out the keys of an n-node tree in sorted order in O(n) time? Show
how, or explain why not.

12.1-3

Give a nonrecursive algorithm that performs an inorder tree walk. (Hint:
An easy solution uses a stack as an auxiliary data structure. A more
complicated, but elegant, solution uses no stack but assumes that you
can test two pointers for equality.)

12.1-4

Give recursive algorithms that perform preorder and postorder tree walks
in Θ(n) time on a tree of n nodes.

12.1-5

Argue that since sorting n elements takes Ω(n lg n) time in the worst
case in the comparison model, any comparison-based algorithm for
constructing a binary search tree from an arbitrary list of n elements
takes Ω(n lg n) time in the worst case.

12.2    Querying a binary search tree

Binary search trees can support the queries MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, SUCCESSOR,
and PREDECESSOR, as well as SEARCH. This section examines these
operations and shows how to support each one in O(h) time on any binary
search tree of height h.

Searching

To search for a node with a given key in a binary search tree, call the
TREE-SEARCH procedure. Given a pointer x to the root of a subtree and a
key k, TREE-SEARCH(x, k) returns a pointer to a node with key k if one
exists in the subtree; otherwise, it returns NIL. To search for key k in
the entire binary search tree T, call TREE-SEARCH(T.root, k).

TREE-SEARCH(x, k)

  --- -------------------------------------
  1   if x == NIL or k == x.key
  2   return x
  3   if k < x.key
  4   return TREE-SEARCH(x.left, k)
  5   else return TREE-SEARCH(x.right, k)
  --- -------------------------------------

ITERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH(x, k)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   while x ≠ NIL and k ≠ x.key
  2   if k < x.key
  3   x = x.left
  4   else x = x.right
  5   return x
  --- -----------------------------

The TREE-SEARCH procedure begins its search at the root and traces a
simple path downward in the tree, as shown in Figure 12.2(a). For each
node x it encounters, it compares the key k with x.key. If the two keys
are equal, the search terminates. If k is smaller than x.key, the search
continues in the left subtree of x, since the binary-search-tree
property implies that k cannot reside in the right subtree.
Symmetrically, if k is larger than x.key, the search continues in the
right subtree. The nodes encountered during the recursion form a simple
path downward from the root of the tree, and thus the running time of
TREE-SEARCH is O(h), where h is the height of the tree.

[art]

Figure 12.2 Queries on a binary search tree. Nodes and paths followed in
each query are colored blue. (a) A search for the key 13 in the tree
follows the path 15 → 6 → 7 → 13 from the root. (b) The minimum key in
the tree is 2, which is found by following left pointers from the root.
The maximum key 20 is found by following right pointers from the root.
(c) The successor of the node with key 15 is the node with key 17, since
it is the minimum key in the right subtree of 15. (d) The node with key
13 has no right subtree, and thus its successor is its lowest ancestor
whose left child is also an ancestor. In this case, the node with key 15
is its successor.

Since the TREE-SEARCH procedure recurses on either the left subtree or
the right subtree, but not both, we can rewrite the algorithm to
“unroll” the recursion into a while loop. On most computers, the
ITERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH procedure on the facing page is more efficient.

Minimum and maximum

To find an element in a binary search tree whose key is a minimum, just
follow left child pointers from the root until you encounter a NIL, as
shown in Figure 12.2(b). The TREE-MINIMUM procedure returns a pointer to
the minimum element in the subtree rooted at a given node x, which we
assume to be non-NIL.

TREE-MINIMUM(x)

  --- --------------------
  1   while x.left ≠ NIL
  2   x = x.left
  3   return x
  --- --------------------

TREE-MAXIMUM(x)

  --- ---------------------
  1   while x.right ≠ NIL
  2   x = x.right
  3   return x
  --- ---------------------

The binary-search-tree property guarantees that TREE-MINIMUM is correct.
If node x has no left subtree, then since every key in the right subtree
of x is at least as large as x.key, the minimum key in the subtree
rooted at x is x.key. If node x has a left subtree, then since no key in
the right subtree is smaller than x.key and every key in the left
subtree is not larger than x.key, the minimum key in the subtree rooted
at x resides in the subtree rooted at x.left.

The pseudocode for TREE-MAXIMUM is symmetric. Both TREE-MINIMUM and
TREE-MAXIMUM run in O(h) time on a tree of height h since, as in
TREE-SEARCH, the sequence of nodes encountered forms a simple path
downward from the root.

Successor and predecessor

Given a node in a binary search tree, how can you find its successor in
the sorted order determined by an inorder tree walk? If all keys are
distinct, the successor of a node x is the node with the smallest key
greater than x.key. Regardless of whether the keys are distinct, we
define the successor of a node as the next node visited in an inorder
tree walk. The structure of a binary search tree allows you to determine
the successor of a node without comparing keys. The TREE-SUCCESSOR
procedure on the facing page returns the successor of a node x in a
binary search tree if it exists, or NIL if x is the last node that would
be visited during an inorder walk.

The code for TREE-SUCCESSOR has two cases. If the right subtree of node
x is nonempty, then the successor of x is just the leftmost node in x’s
right subtree, which line 2 finds by calling TREE-MINIMUM(x.right). For
example, the successor of the node with key 15 in Figure 12.2(c) is the
node with key 17.

On the other hand, as Exercise 12.2-6 asks you to show, if the right
subtree of node x is empty and x has a successor y, then y is the lowest
ancestor of x whose left child is also an ancestor of x. In Figure
12.2(d), the successor of the node with key 13 is the node with key 15.
To find y, go up the tree from x until you encounter either the root or
a node that is the left child of its parent. Lines 4–8 of TREE-SUCCESSOR
handle this case.

TREE-SUCCESSOR(x)

  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   if x.right ≠ NIL
  2   return TREE-MINIMUM(x.right)  // leftmost node in right subtree
  3   else // find the lowest ancestor of x whose left child is an ancestor of x
  4   y = x.p
  5   while y ≠ NIL and x == y.right
  6   x = y
  7   y = y.p
  8   return y
  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The running time of TREE-SUCCESSOR on a tree of height h is O(h), since
it either follows a simple path up the tree or follows a simple path
down the tree. The procedure TREE-PREDECESSOR, which is symmetric to
TREE-SUCCESSOR, also runs in O(h) time.

In summary, we have proved the following theorem.

Theorem 12.2

The dynamic-set operations SEARCH, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, SUCCESSOR, and
PREDECESSOR can be implemented so that each one runs in O(h) time on a
binary search tree of height h.

▪

Exercises

12.2-1

You are searching for the number 363 in a binary search tree containing
numbers between 1 and 1000. Which of the following sequences cannot be
the sequence of nodes examined?

a. 2, 252, 401, 398, 330, 344, 397, 363.

b. 924, 220, 911, 244, 898, 258, 362, 363.

c. 925, 202, 911, 240, 912, 245, 363.

d. 2, 399, 387, 219, 266, 382, 381, 278, 363.

e. 935, 278, 347, 621, 299, 392, 358, 363.

12.2-2

Write recursive versions of TREE-MINIMUM and TREE-MAXIMUM.

12.2-3

Write the TREE-PREDECESSOR procedure.

12.2-4

Professor Kilmer claims to have discovered a remarkable property of
binary search trees. Suppose that the search for key k in a binary
search tree ends up at a leaf. Consider three sets: A, the keys to the
left of the search path; B, the keys on the search path; and C, the keys
to the right of the search path. Professor Kilmer claims that any three
keys a ∈ A, b ∈ B, and c ∈ C must satisfy a ≤ b ≤ c. Give a smallest
possible counterexample to the professor’s claim.

12.2-5

Show that if a node in a binary search tree has two children, then its
successor has no left child and its predecessor has no right child.

12.2-6

Consider a binary search tree T whose keys are distinct. Show that if
the right subtree of a node x in T is empty and x has a successor y,
then y is the lowest ancestor of x whose left child is also an ancestor
of x. (Recall that every node is its own ancestor.)

12.2-7

An alternative method of performing an inorder tree walk of an n-node
binary search tree finds the minimum element in the tree by calling
TREE-MINIMUM and then making n − 1 calls to TREE-SUCCESSOR. Prove that
this algorithm runs in Θ(n) time.

12.2-8

Prove that no matter what node you start at in a height-h binary search
tree, k successive calls to TREE-SUCCESSOR take O(k + h) time.

12.2-9

Let T be a binary search tree whose keys are distinct, let x be a leaf
node, and let y be its parent. Show that y.key is either the smallest
key in T larger than x.key or the largest key in T smaller than x.key.

12.3    Insertion and deletion

The operations of insertion and deletion cause the dynamic set
represented by a binary search tree to change. The data structure must
be modified to reflect this change, but in such a way that the
binary-search-tree property continues to hold. We’ll see that modifying
the tree to insert a new element is relatively straightforward, but
deleting a node from a binary search tree is more complicated.

Insertion

The TREE-INSERT procedure inserts a new node into a binary search tree.
The procedure takes a binary search tree T and a node z for which z.key
has already been filled in, z.left = NIL, and z.right = NIL. It modifies
T and some of the attributes of z so as to insert z into an appropriate
position in the tree.

TREE-INSERT(T, z)

  ----- ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------
    1   x = T.root             // node being compared with z
    2   y = NIL                // y will be parent of z
    3   while x ≠ NIL          // descend until reaching a leaf
    4   y = x                  
    5   if z.key < x.key       
    6   x = x.left             
    7   else x = x.right       
    8   z.p = y                // found the location—insert z with parent y
    9   if y == NIL            
  10    T.root = z             // tree T was empty
  11    elseif z.key < y.key   
  12    y.left = z             
  13    else y.right = z       
  ----- ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------

Figure 12.3 shows how TREE-INSERT works. Just like the procedures
TREE-SEARCH and ITERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH, TREE-INSERT begins at the root of
the tree and the pointer x traces a simple path downward looking for a
NIL to replace with the input node z. The procedure maintains the
trailing pointer y as the parent of x. After initialization, the while
loop in lines 3–7 causes these two pointers to move down the tree, going
left or right depending on the comparison of z.key with x.key, until x
becomes NIL. This NIL occupies the position where node z will go. More
precisely, this NIL is a left or right attribute of the node that will
become z’s parent, or it is T.root if tree T is currently empty. The
procedure needs the trailing pointer y, because by the time it finds the
NIL where z belongs, the search has proceeded one step beyond the node
that needs to be changed. Lines 8–13 set the pointers that cause z to be
inserted.

[art]

Figure 12.3 Inserting a node with key 13 into a binary search tree. The
simple path from the root down to the position where the node is
inserted is shown in blue. The new node and the link to its parent are
highlighted in orange.

Like the other primitive operations on search trees, the procedure
TREE-INSERT runs in O(h) time on a tree of height h.

Deletion

The overall strategy for deleting a node z from a binary search tree T
has three basic cases and, as we’ll see, one of the cases is a bit
tricky.

- If z has no children, then simply remove it by modifying its parent to
  replace z with NIL as its child.
- If z has just one child, then elevate that child to take z’s position
  in the tree by modifying z’s parent to replace z by z’s child.
- If z has two children, find z’s successor y—which must belong to z’s
  right subtree—and move y to take z’s position in the tree. The rest of
  z’s original right subtree becomes y’s new right subtree, and z’s left
  subtree becomes y’s new left subtree. Because y is z’s successor, it
  cannot have a left child, and y’s original right child moves into y’s
  original position, with the rest of y’s original right subtree
  following automatically. This case is the tricky one because, as we’ll
  see, it matters whether y is z’s right child.

The procedure for deleting a given node z from a binary search tree T
takes as arguments pointers to T and z. It organizes its cases a bit
differently from the three cases outlined previously by considering the
four cases shown in Figure 12.4.

[art]

Figure 12.4 Deleting a node z, in blue, from a binary search tree. Node
z may be the root, a left child of node q, or a right child of q. The
node that will replace node z in its position in the tree is colored
orange. (a) Node z has no left child. Replace z by its right child r,
which may or may not be NIL. (b) Node z has a left child l but no right
child. Replace z by l. (c) Node z has two children. Its left child is
node l, its right child is its successor y (which has no left child),
and y’s right child is node x. Replace z by y, updating y’s left child
to become l, but leaving x as y’s right child. (d) Node z has two
children (left child l and right child r), and its successor y ≠ r lies
within the subtree rooted at r. First replace y by its own right child
x, and set y to be r’s parent. Then set y to be q’s child and the parent
of l.

- If z has no left child, then as in part (a) of the figure, replace z
  by its right child, which may or may not be NIL. When z’s right child
  is NIL, this case deals with the situation in which z has no children.
  When z’s right child is non-NIL, this case handles the situation in
  which z has just one child, which is its right child.
- Otherwise, if z has just one child, then that child is a left child.
  As in part (b) of the figure, replace z by its left child.
- Otherwise, z has both a left and a right child. Find z’s successor y,
  which lies in z’s right subtree and has no left child (see Exercise
  12.2-5). Splice node y out of its current location and replace z by y
  in the tree. How to do so depends on whether y is z’s right child:
  - If y is z’s right child, then as in part (c) of the figure, replace
    z by y, leaving y’s right child alone.
  - Otherwise, y lies within z’s right subtree but is not z’s right
    child. In this case, as in part (d) of the figure, first replace y
    by its own right child, and then replace z by y.

As part of the process of deleting a node, subtrees need to move around
within the binary search tree. The subroutine TRANSPLANT replaces one
subtree as a child of its parent with another subtree. When TRANSPLANT
replaces the subtree rooted at node u with the subtree rooted at node v,
node u’s parent becomes node v’s parent, and u’s parent ends up having v
as its appropriate child. TRANSPLANT allows v to be NIL instead of a
pointer to a node.

TRANSPLANT(T, u, v)

  --- ----------------------
  1   if u.p == NIL
  2   T.root = v
  3   elseif u == u.p.left
  4   u.p.left = v
  5   else u.p.right = v
  6   if v ≠ NIL
  7   v.p = u.p
  --- ----------------------

Here is how TRANSPLANT works. Lines 1–2 handle the case in which u is
the root of T. Otherwise, u is either a left child or a right child of
its parent. Lines 3–4 take care of updating u.p.left if u is a left
child, and line 5 updates u.p.right if u is a right child. Because v may
be NIL, lines 6–7 update v.p only if v is non-NIL. The procedure
TRANSPLANT does not attempt to update v.left and v.right. Doing so, or
not doing so, is the responsibility of TRANSPLANT’s caller.

The procedure TREE-DELETE on the facing page uses TRANSPLANT to delete
node z from binary search tree T. It executes the four cases as follows.
Lines 1–2 handle the case in which node z has no left child (Figure
12.4(a)), and lines 3–4 handle the case in which z has a left child but
no right child (Figure 12.4(b)). Lines 5–12 deal with the remaining two
cases, in which z has two children. Line 5 finds node y, which is the
successor of z. Because z has a nonempty right subtree, its successor
must be the node in that subtree with the smallest key; hence the call
to TREE-MINIMUM(z.right). As we noted before, y has no left child. The
procedure needs to splice y out of its current location and replace z by
y in the tree. If y is z’s right child (Figure 12.4(c)), then lines
10–12 replace z as a child of its parent by y and replace y’s left child
by z’s left child. Node y retains its right child (x in Figure 12.4(c)),
and so no change to y.right needs to occur. If y is not z’s right child
(Figure 12.4(d)), then two nodes have to move. Lines 7–9 replace y as a
child of its parent by y’s right child (x in Figure 12.4(c)) and make
z’s right child (r in the figure) become y’s right child instead.
Finally, lines 10–12 replace z as a child of its parent by y and replace
y’s left child by z’s left child.

TREE-DELETE(T, z)

  ----- -------------------------------- ----------------------------------
    1   if z.left == NIL                 
    2   TRANSPLANT(T, z, z.right)        // replace z by its right child
    3   elseif z.right == NIL            
    4   TRANSPLANT(T, z, z.left)         // replace z by its left child
    5   else y = TREE-MINIMUM(z.right)   // y is z’s successor
    6   if y ≠ z.right                   // is y farther down the tree?
    7   TRANSPLANT(T, y, y.right)        // replace y by its right child
    8   y.right = z.right                // z’s right child becomes
    9   y.right.p = y                    //      y’s right child
  10    TRANSPLANT(T, z, y)              // replace z by its successor y
  11    y.left = z.left                  // and give z’s left child to y,
  12    y.left.p = y                     //      which had no left child
  ----- -------------------------------- ----------------------------------

Each line of TREE-DELETE, including the calls to TRANSPLANT, takes
constant time, except for the call to TREE-MINIMUM in line 5. Thus,
TREE-DELETE runs in O(h) time on a tree of height h.

In summary, we have proved the following theorem.

Theorem 12.3

The dynamic-set operations INSERT and DELETE can be implemented so that
each one runs in O(h) time on a binary search tree of height h.

▪

Exercises

12.3-1

Give a recursive version of the TREE-INSERT procedure.

12.3-2

Suppose that you construct a binary search tree by repeatedly inserting
distinct values into the tree. Argue that the number of nodes examined
in searching for a value in the tree is 1 plus the number of nodes
examined when the value was first inserted into the tree.

12.3-3

You can sort a given set of n numbers by first building a binary search
tree containing these numbers (using TREE-INSERT repeatedly to insert
the numbers one by one) and then printing the numbers by an inorder tree
walk. What are the worst-case and best-case running times for this
sorting algorithm?

12.3-4

When TREE-DELETE calls TRANSPLANT, under what circumstances can the
parameter v of TRANSPLANT be NIL?

12.3-5

Is the operation of deletion “commutative” in the sense that deleting x
and then y from a binary search tree leaves the same tree as deleting y
and then x? Argue why it is or give a counterexample.

12.3-6

Suppose that instead of each node x keeping the attribute x.p, pointing
to x’s parent, it keeps x.succ, pointing to x’s successor. Give
pseudocode for TREE-SEARCH, TREE-INSERT, and TREE-DELETE on a binary
search tree T using this representation. These procedures should operate
in O(h) time, where h is the height of the tree T. You may assume that
all keys in the binary search tree are distinct. (Hint: You might wish
to implement a subroutine that returns the parent of a node.)

12.3-7

When node z in TREE-DELETE has two children, you can choose node y to be
its predecessor rather than its successor. What other changes to
TREE-DELETE are necessary if you do so? Some have argued that a fair
strategy, giving equal priority to predecessor and successor, yields
better empirical performance. How might TREE-DELETE be minimally changed
to implement such a fair strategy?

Problems

12-1     Binary search trees with equal keys

Equal keys pose a problem for the implementation of binary search trees.

a. What is the asymptotic performance of TREE-INSERT when used to insert
n items with identical keys into an initially empty binary search tree?

Consider changing TREE-INSERT to test whether z.key = x.key before line
5 and to test whether z.key = y.key before line 11. If equality holds,
implement one of the following strategies. For each strategy, find the
asymptotic performance of inserting n items with identical keys into an
initially empty binary search tree. (The strategies are described for
line 5, which compares the keys of z and x. Substitute y for x to arrive
at the strategies for line 11.)

b. Keep a boolean flag x.b at node x, and set x to either x.left or
x.right based on the value of x.b, which alternates between FALSE and
TRUE each time TREE-INSERT visits x while inserting a node with the same
key as x.

c. Keep a list of nodes with equal keys at x, and insert z into the
list.

d. Randomly set x to either x.left or x.right. (Give the worst-case
performance and informally derive the expected running time.)

12-2     Radix trees

Given two strings a = a₀a₁ … a_(p) and b = b₀b₁ … b_(q), where each
a_(i) and each b_(j) belongs to some ordered set of characters, we say
that string a is lexicographically less than string b if either

1.  there exists an integer j, where 0 ≤ j ≤ min {p, q}, such that a_(i)
    = b_(i) for all i = 0, 1, …, j − 1 and a_(j) < b_(j), or
2.  p < q and a_(i) = b_(i) for all i = 0, 1, …, p.

For example, if a and b are bit strings, then 10100 < 10110 by rule 1
(letting j = 3) and 10100 < 101000 by rule 2. This ordering is similar
to that used in English-language dictionaries.

The radix tree data structure shown in Figure 12.5 (also known as a
trie) stores the bit strings 1011, 10, 011, 100, and 0. When searching
for a key a = a₀a₁ … a_(p), go left at a node of depth i if a_(i) = 0
and right if a_(i) = 1. Let S be a set of distinct bit strings whose
lengths sum to n. Show how to use a radix tree to sort S
lexicographically in Θ(n) time. For the example in Figure 12.5, the
output of the sort should be the sequence 0, 011, 10, 100, 1011.

[art]

Figure 12.5 A radix tree storing the bit strings 1011, 10, 011, 100, and
0. To determine each node’s key, traverse the simple path from the root
to that node. There is no need, therefore, to store the keys in the
nodes. The keys appear here for illustrative purposes only. Keys
corresponding to blue nodes are not in the tree. Such nodes are present
only to establish a path to other nodes.

12-3     Average node depth in a randomly built binary search tree

A randomly built binary search tree on n keys is a binary search tree
created by starting with an empty tree and inserting the keys in random
order, where each of the n! permutations of the keys is equally likely.
In this problem, you will prove that the average depth of a node in a
randomly built binary search tree with n nodes is O(lg n). The technique
reveals a surprising similarity between the building of a binary search
tree and the execution of RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT from Section 7.3.

Denote the depth of any node x in tree T by d(x, T). Then the total path
length P(T) of a tree T is the sum, over all nodes x in T, of d(x, T).

a. Argue that the average depth of a node in T is

[art]

Thus, you need to show that the expected value of P(T) is O(n lg n).

b. Let T_(L) and T_(R) denote the left and right subtrees of tree T,
respectively. Argue that if T has n nodes, then

P(T) = P(T_(L)) + P(T_(R)) + n − 1.

c. Let P(n) denote the average total path length of a randomly built
binary search tree with n nodes. Show that

[art]

d. Show how to rewrite P(n) as

[art]

e. Recalling the alternative analysis of the randomized version of
quicksort given in Problem 7-3, conclude that P(n) = O(n lg n).

Each recursive invocation of randomized quicksort chooses a random pivot
element to partition the set of elements being sorted. Each node of a
binary search tree partitions the set of elements that fall into the
subtree rooted at that node.

f. Describe an implementation of quicksort in which the comparisons to
sort a set of elements are exactly the same as the comparisons to insert
the elements into a binary search tree. (The order in which comparisons
are made may differ, but the same comparisons must occur.)

12-4     Number of different binary trees

Let b_(n) denote the number of different binary trees with n nodes. In
this problem, you will find a formula for b_(n), as well as an
asymptotic estimate.

a. Show that b₀ = 1 and that, for n ≥ 1,

[art]

b. Referring to Problem 4-5 on page 121 for the definition of a
generating function, let B(x) be the generating function

[art]

Show that B(x) = xB(x)² + 1, and hence one way to express B(x) in closed
form is

[art]

The Taylor expansion of f(x) around the point x = a is given by

[art]

where f^((k))(x) is the kth derivative of f evaluated at x.

c. Show that

[art]

(the nth Catalan number) by using the Taylor expansion of [art] around x
= 0. (If you wish, instead of using the Taylor expansion, you may use
the generalization of the binomial theorem, equation (C.4) on page 1181,
to noninteger exponents n, where for any real number n and for any
integer k, you can interpret [art] to be n(n − 1) … (n − k + 1)/k! if k
≥ 0, and 0 otherwise.)

d. Show that

[art]

Chapter notes

Knuth [261] contains a good discussion of simple binary search trees as
well as many variations. Binary search trees seem to have been
independently discovered by a number of people in the late 1950s. Radix
trees are often called “tries,” which comes from the middle letters in
the word retrieval. Knuth [261] also discusses them.

Many texts, including the first two editions of this book, describe a
somewhat simpler method of deleting a node from a binary search tree
when both of its children are present. Instead of replacing node z by
its successor y, delete node y but copy its key and satellite data into
node z. The downside of this approach is that the node actually deleted
might not be the node passed to the delete procedure. If other
components of a program maintain pointers to nodes in the tree, they
could mistakenly end up with “stale” pointers to nodes that have been
deleted. Although the deletion method presented in this edition of this
book is a bit more complicated, it guarantees that a call to delete node
z deletes node z and only node z.

Section 14.5 will show how to construct an optimal binary search tree
when you know the search frequencies before constructing the tree. That
is, given the frequencies of searching for each key and the frequencies
of searching for values that fall between keys in the tree, a set of
searches in the constructed binary search tree examines the minimum
number of nodes.

13        Red-Black Trees

Chapter 12 showed that a binary search tree of height h can support any
of the basic dynamic-set operations—such as SEARCH, PREDECESSOR,
SUCCESSOR, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, INSERT, and DELETE—in O(h) time. Thus, the
set operations are fast if the height of the search tree is small. If
its height is large, however, the set operations may run no faster than
with a linked list. Red-black trees are one of many search-tree schemes
that are “balanced” in order to guarantee that basic dynamic-set
operations take O(lg n) time in the worst case.

13.1    Properties of red-black trees

A red-black tree is a binary search tree with one extra bit of storage
per node: its color, which can be either RED or BLACK. By constraining
the node colors on any simple path from the root to a leaf, red-black
trees ensure that no such path is more than twice as long as any other,
so that the tree is approximately balanced. Indeed, as we’re about to
see, the height of a red-black tree with n keys is at most 2 lg(n + 1),
which is O(lg n).

Each node of the tree now contains the attributes color, key, left,
right, and p. If a child or the parent of a node does not exist, the
corresponding pointer attribute of the node contains the value NIL.
Think of these NILs as pointers to leaves (external nodes) of the binary
search tree and the normal, key-bearing nodes as internal nodes of the
tree.

A red-black tree is a binary search tree that satisfies the following
red-black properties:

1.  Every node is either red or black.
2.  The root is black.
3.  Every leaf (NIL) is black.
4.  If a node is red, then both its children are black.
5.  For each node, all simple paths from the node to descendant leaves
    contain the same number of black nodes.

Figure 13.1(a) shows an example of a red-black tree.

As a matter of convenience in dealing with boundary conditions in
red-black tree code, we use a single sentinel to represent NIL (see page
262). For a red-black tree T, the sentinel T.nil is an object with the
same attributes as an ordinary node in the tree. Its color attribute is
BLACK, and its other attributes—p, left, right, and key—can take on
arbitrary values. As Figure 13.1(b) shows, all pointers to NIL are
replaced by pointers to the sentinel T.nil.

Why use the sentinel? The sentinel makes it possible to treat a NIL
child of a node x as an ordinary node whose parent is x. An alternative
design would use a distinct sentinel node for each NIL in the tree, so
that the parent of each NIL is well defined. That approach needlessly
wastes space, however. Instead, just the one sentinel T.nil represents
all the NILs—all leaves and the root’s parent. The values of the
attributes p, left, right, and key of the sentinel are immaterial. The
red-black tree procedures can place whatever values in the sentinel that
yield simpler code.

We generally confine our interest to the internal nodes of a red-black
tree, since they hold the key values. The remainder of this chapter
omits the leaves in drawings of red-black trees, as shown in Figure
13.1(c).

We call the number of black nodes on any simple path from, but not
including, a node x down to a leaf the black-height of the node, denoted
bh(x). By property 5, the notion of black-height is well defined, since
all descending simple paths from the node have the same number of black
nodes. The black-height of a red-black tree is the black-height of its
root.

The following lemma shows why red-black trees make good search trees.

Lemma 13.1

A red-black tree with n internal nodes has height at most 2 lg(n + 1).

Proof   We start by showing that the subtree rooted at any node x
contains at least 2^(bh(x)) − 1 internal nodes. We prove this claim by
induction on the height of x. If the height of x is 0, then x must be a
leaf (T.nil), and the subtree rooted at x indeed contains at least
2^(bh(x)) − 1 = 2⁰ − 1 = 0 internal nodes. For the inductive step,
consider a node x that has positive height and is an internal node. Then
node x has two children, either or both of which may be a leaf. If a
child is black, then it contributes 1 to x’s black-height but not to its
own. If a child is red, then it contributes to neither x’s black-height
nor its own. Therefore, each child has a black-height of either bh(x) −
1 (if it’s black) or bh(x) (if it’s red). Since the height of a child of
x is less than the height of x itself, we can apply the inductive
hypothesis to conclude that each child has at least 2^(bh(x)−1) − 1
internal nodes. Thus, the subtree rooted at x contains at least
(2^(bh(x)−1) − 1) + (2^(bh(x)−1) − 1) + 1 = 2^(bh(x)) − 1 internal
nodes, which proves the claim.

[art]

Figure 13.1 A red-black tree. Every node in a red-black tree is either
red or black, the children of a red node are both black, and every
simple path from a node to a descendant leaf contains the same number of
black nodes. (a) Every leaf, shown as a NIL, is black. Each non-NIL node
is marked with its black-height, where NILs have black-height 0. (b) The
same red-black tree but with each NIL replaced by the single sentinel
T.nil, which is always black, and with black-heights omitted. The root’s
parent is also the sentinel. (c) The same red-black tree but with leaves
and the root’s parent omitted entirely. The remainder of this chapter
uses this drawing style.

To complete the proof of the lemma, let h be the height of the tree.
According to property 4, at least half the nodes on any simple path from
the root to a leaf, not including the root, must be black. Consequently,
the black-height of the root must be at least h/2, and thus,

n ≥ 2^(h/2) − 1.

Moving the 1 to the left-hand side and taking logarithms on both sides
yields lg(n + 1) ≥ h/2, or h ≤ 2 lg(n + 1).

▪

As an immediate consequence of this lemma, each of the dynamic-set
operations SEARCH, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR runs in
O(lg n) time on a red-black tree, since each can run in O(h) time on a
binary search tree of height h (as shown in Chapter 12) and any
red-black tree on n nodes is a binary search tree with height O(lg n).
(Of course, references to NIL in the algorithms of Chapter 12 have to be
replaced by T.nil.) Although the procedures TREE-INSERT and TREE-DELETE
from Chapter 12 run in O(lg n) time when given a red-black tree as
input, you cannot just use them to implement the dynamic-set operations
INSERT and DELETE. They do not necessarily maintain the red-black
properties, so you might not end up with a legal red-black tree. The
remainder of this chapter shows how to insert into and delete from a
red-black tree in O(lg n) time.

Exercises

13.1-1

In the style of Figure 13.1(a), draw the complete binary search tree of
height 3 on the keys {1, 2, …, 15}. Add the NIL leaves and color the
nodes in three different ways such that the black-heights of the
resulting red-black trees are 2, 3, and 4.

13.1-2

Draw the red-black tree that results after TREE-INSERT is called on the
tree in Figure 13.1 with key 36. If the inserted node is colored red, is
the resulting tree a red-black tree? What if it is colored black?

13.1-3

Define a relaxed red-black tree as a binary search tree that satisfies
red-black properties 1, 3, 4, and 5, but whose root may be either red or
black. Consider a relaxed red-black tree T whose root is red. If the
root of T is changed to black but no other changes occur, is the
resulting tree a red-black tree?

13.1-4

Suppose that every black node in a red-black tree “absorbs” all of its
red children, so that the children of any red node become children of
the black parent. (Ignore what happens to the keys.) What are the
possible degrees of a black node after all its red children are
absorbed? What can you say about the depths of the leaves of the
resulting tree?

13.1-5

Show that the longest simple path from a node x in a red-black tree to a
descendant leaf has length at most twice that of the shortest simple
path from node x to a descendant leaf.

13.1-6

What is the largest possible number of internal nodes in a red-black
tree with black-height k? What is the smallest possible number?

13.1-7

Describe a red-black tree on n keys that realizes the largest possible
ratio of red internal nodes to black internal nodes. What is this ratio?
What tree has the smallest possible ratio, and what is the ratio?

13.1-8

Argue that in a red-black tree, a red node cannot have exactly one
non-NIL child.

13.2    Rotations

The search-tree operations TREE-INSERT and TREE-DELETE, when run on a
red-black tree with n keys, take O(lg n) time. Because they modify the
tree, the result may violate the red-black properties enumerated in
Section 13.1. To restore these properties, colors and pointers within
nodes need to change.

The pointer structure changes through rotation, which is a local
operation in a search tree that preserves the binary-search-tree
property. Figure 13.2 shows the two kinds of rotations: left rotations
and right rotations. Let’s look at a left rotation on a node x, which
transforms the structure on the right side of the figure to the
structure on the left. Node x has a right child y, which must not be
T.nil. The left rotation changes the subtree originally rooted at x by
“twisting” the link between x and y to the left. The new root of the
subtree is node y, with x as y’s left child and y’s original left child
(the subtree represented by β in the figure) as x’s right child.

The pseudocode for LEFT-ROTATE appearing on the following page assumes
that x.right ≠ T.nil and that the root’s parent is T.nil. Figure 13.3
shows an example of how LEFT-ROTATE modifies a binary search tree. The
code for RIGHT-ROTATE is symmetric. Both LEFT-ROTATE and RIGHT-ROTATE
run in O(1) time. Only pointers are changed by a rotation, and all other
attributes in a node remain the same.

[art]

Figure 13.2 The rotation operations on a binary search tree. The
operation LEFT-ROTATE(T, x) transforms the configuration of the two
nodes on the right into the configuration on the left by changing a
constant number of pointers. The inverse operation RIGHT-ROTATE(T, y)
transforms the configuration on the left into the configuration on the
right. The letters α, β, and γ represent arbitrary subtrees. A rotation
operation preserves the binary-search-tree property: the keys in α
precede x.key, which precedes the keys in β, which precede y.key, which
precedes the keys in γ.

LEFT-ROTATE(T, x)

  ----- ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------
    1   y = x.right            
    2   x.right = y.left       // turn y’s left subtree into x’s right subtree
    3   if y.left ≠ T.nil      // if y’s left subtree is not empty …
    4   y.left.p = x           // … then x becomes the parent of the subtree’s root
    5   y.p = x.p              // x’s parent becomes y’s parent
    6   if x.p == T.nil        // if x was the root …
    7   T.root = y             // … then y becomes the root
    8   elseif x == x.p.left   // otherwise, if x was a left child …
    9   x.p.left = y           // … then y becomes a left child
  10    else x.p.right = y     // otherwise, x was a right child, and now y is
  11    y.left = x             // make x become y’s left child
  12    x.p = y                
  ----- ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------

Exercises

13.2-1

Write pseudocode for RIGHT-ROTATE.

[art]

Figure 13.3 An example of how the procedure LEFT-ROTATE(T, x) modifies a
binary search tree. Inorder tree walks of the input tree and the
modified tree produce the same listing of key values.

13.2-2

Argue that in every n-node binary search tree, there are exactly n − 1
possible rotations.

13.2-3

Let a, b, and c be arbitrary nodes in subtrees α, β, and γ,
respectively, in the right tree of Figure 13.2. How do the depths of a,
b, and c change when a left rotation is performed on node x in the
figure?

13.2-4

Show that any arbitrary n-node binary search tree can be transformed
into any other arbitrary n-node binary search tree using O(n) rotations.
(Hint: First show that at most n − 1 right rotations suffice to
transform the tree into a right-going chain.)

★ 13.2-5

We say that a binary search tree T₁ can be right-converted to binary
search tree T₂ if it is possible to obtain T₂ from T₁ via a series of
calls to RIGHT-ROTATE. Give an example of two trees T₁ and T₂ such that
T₁ cannot be right-converted to T₂. Then, show that if a tree T₁ can be
right-converted to T₂, it can be right-converted using O(n²) calls to
RIGHT-ROTATE.

13.3    Insertion

In order to insert a node into a red-black tree with n internal nodes in
O(lg n) time and maintain the red-black properties, we’ll need to
slightly modify the TREE-INSERT procedure on page 321. The procedure
RB-INSERT starts by inserting node z into the tree T as if it were an
ordinary binary search tree, and then it colors z red. (Exercise 13.3-1
asks you to explain why to make node z red rather than black.) To
guarantee that the red-black properties are preserved, an auxiliary
procedure RB-INSERT-FIXUP on the facing page recolors nodes and performs
rotations. The call RB-INSERT(T, z) inserts node z, whose key is assumed
to have already been filled in, into the red-black tree T.

RB-INSERT(T, z)

  ----- ----------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
    1   x = T.root              // node being compared with z
    2   y = T.nil               // y will be parent of z
    3   while x ≠ T.nil         // descend until reaching the sentinel
    4   y = x                   
    5   if z.key < x.key        
    6   x = x.left              
    7   else x = x.right        
    8   z.p = y                 // found the location—insert z with parent y
    9   if y == T.nil           
  10    T.root = z              // tree T was empty
  11    elseif z.key < y.key    
  12    y.left = z              
  13    else y.right = z        
  14    z.left = T.nil          // both of z’s children are the sentinel
  15    z.right = T.nil         
  16    z.color = RED           // the new node starts out red
  17    RB-INSERT-FIXUP(T, z)   // correct any violations of red-black properties
  ----- ----------------------- ---------------------------------------------------

The procedures TREE-INSERT and RB-INSERT differ in four ways. First, all
instances of NIL in TREE-INSERT are replaced by T.nil. Second, lines
14–15 of RB-INSERT set z.left and z.right to T.nil, in order to maintain
the proper tree structure. (TREE-INSERT assumed that z’s children were
already NIL.) Third, line 16 colors z red. Fourth, because coloring z
red may cause a violation of one of the red-black properties, line 17 of
RB-INSERT calls RB-INSERT-FIXUP(T, z) in order to restore the red-black
properties.

RB-INSERT-FIXUP(T, z)

+-----+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|   1 | while z.p.color == |                                         |
|     | RED                |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   2 | if z.p ==          | // is z’s parent a left child?          |
|     | z.p.p.left         |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   3 | y = z.p.p.right    | // y is z’s uncle                       |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   4 | if y.color == RED  | // are z’s parent and uncle both red?   |
+-----+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|   5 | z.p.color = BLACK                       | [art]              |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+                    |
|   6 | y.color = BLACK                         |                    |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+                    |
|   7 | z.p.p.color = RED                       |                    |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+                    |
|   8 | z = z.p.p                               |                    |
+-----+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|   9 | else               |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 10  | if z == z.p.right  |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 11  | z = z.p                                 | [art]              |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+                    |
| 12  | LEFT-ROTATE(T, z)                       |                    |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 13  | z.p.color = BLACK                       | [art]              |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+                    |
| 14  | z.p.p.color = RED                       |                    |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+                    |
| 15  | RIGHT-ROTATE(T, z.p.p)                  |                    |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 16  | else // same as lines 3–15, but with “right” and “left”      |
|     | exchanged                                                    |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 17  | y = z.p.p.left     |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 18  | if y.color == RED  |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 19  | z.p.color = BLACK  |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 20  | y.color = BLACK    |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 21  | z.p.p.color = RED  |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 22  | z = z.p.p          |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 23  | else               |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 24  | if z == z.p.left   |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 25  | z = z.p            |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 26  | RIGHT-ROTATE(T, z) |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 27  | z.p.color = BLACK  |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 28  | z.p.p.color = RED  |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 29  | LEFT-ROTATE(T,     |                                         |
|     | z.p.p)             |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 30  | T.root.color =     |                                         |
|     | BLACK              |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+

To understand how RB-INSERT-FIXUP works, let’s examine the code in three
major steps. First, we’ll determine which violations of the red-black
properties might arise in RB-INSERT upon inserting node z and coloring
it red. Second, we’ll consider the overall goal of the while loop in
lines 1–29. Finally, we’ll explore each of the three cases within the
while loop’s body (case 2 falls through into case 3, so these two cases
are not mutually exclusive) and see how they accomplish the goal.

In describing the structure of a red-black tree, we’ll often need to
refer to the sibling of a node’s parent. We use the term uncle for such
a node.¹ Figure 13.4 shows how RB-INSERT-FIXUP operates on a sample
red-black tree, with cases depending in part on the colors of a node,
its parent, and its uncle.

What violations of the red-black properties might occur upon the call to
RB-INSERT-FIXUP? Property 1 certainly continues to hold (every node is
either red or black), as does property 3 (every leaf is black), since
both children of the newly inserted red node are the sentinel T.nil.
Property 5, which says that the number of black nodes is the same on
every simple path from a given node, is satisfied as well, because node
z replaces the (black) sentinel, and node z is red with sentinel
children. Thus, the only properties that might be violated are property
2, which requires the root to be black, and property 4, which says that
a red node cannot have a red child. Both possible violations may arise
because z is colored red. Property 2 is violated if z is the root, and
property 4 is violated if z’s parent is red. Figure 13.4(a) shows a
violation of property 4 after the node z has been inserted.

The while loop of lines 1–29 has two symmetric possibilities: lines 3–15
deal with the situation in which node z’s parent z.p is a left child of
z’s grandparent z.p.p, and lines 17–29 apply when z’s parent is a right
child. Our proof will focus only on lines 3–15, relying on the symmetry
in lines 17–29.

We’ll show that the while loop maintains the following three-part
invariant at the start of each iteration of the loop:

a. Node z is red.

b. If z.p is the root, then z.p is black.

c. If the tree violates any of the red-black properties, then it
violates at most one of them, and the violation is of either property 2
or property 4, but not both. If the tree violates property 2, it is
because z is the root and is red. If the tree violates property 4, it is
because both z and z.p are red.

Part (c), which deals with violations of red-black properties, is more
central to showing that RB-INSERT-FIXUP restores the red-black
properties than parts (a) and (b), which we’ll use along the way to
understand situations in the code. Because we’ll be focusing on node z
and nodes near it in the tree, it helps to know from part (a) that z is
red. Part (b) will help show that z’s grandparent z.p.p exists when it’s
referenced in lines 2, 3, 7, 8, 14, and 15 (recall that we’re focusing
only on lines 3–15).

[art]

Figure 13.4 The operation of RB-INSERT-FIXUP. (a) A node z after
insertion. Because both z and its parent z.p are red, a violation of
property 4 occurs. Since z’s uncle y is red, case 1 in the code applies.
Node z’s grandparent z.p.p must be black, and its blackness transfers
down one level to z’s parent and uncle. Once the pointer z moves up two
levels in the tree, the tree shown in (b) results. Once again, z and its
parent are both red, but this time z’s uncle y is black. Since z is the
right child of z.p, case 2 applies. Performing a left rotation results
in the tree in (c). Now z is the left child of its parent, and case 3
applies. Recoloring and right rotation yield the tree in (d), which is a
legal red-black tree.

Recall that to use a loop invariant, we need to show that the invariant
is true upon entering the first iteration of the loop, that each
iteration maintains it, that the loop terminates, and that the loop
invariant gives us a useful property at loop termination. We’ll see that
each iteration of the loop has two possible outcomes: either the pointer
z moves up the tree, or some rotations occur and then the loop
terminates.

Initialization: Before RB-INSERT is called, the red-black tree has no
violations. RB-INSERT adds a red node z and calls RB-INSERT-FIXUP. We’ll
show that each part of the invariant holds at the time RB-INSERT-FIXUP
is called:

a. When RB-INSERT-FIXUP is called, z is the red node that was added.

b. If z.p is the root, then z.p started out black and did not change
before the call of RB-INSERT-FIXUP.

c. We have already seen that properties 1, 3, and 5 hold when
RB-INSERTFIXUP is called.

If the tree violates property 2 (the root must be black), then the red
root must be the newly added node z, which is the only internal node in
the tree. Because the parent and both children of z are the sentinel,
which is black, the tree does not also violate property 4 (both children
of a red node are black). Thus this violation of property 2 is the only
violation of red-black properties in the entire tree.

If the tree violates property 4, then, because the children of node z
are black sentinels and the tree had no other violations prior to z
being added, the violation must be because both z and z.p are red.
Moreover, the tree violates no other red-black properties.

Maintenance: There are six cases within the while loop, but we’ll
examine only the three cases in lines 3–15, when node z’s parent z.p is
a left child of z’s grandparent z.p.p. The proof for lines 17–29 is
symmetric. The node z.p.p exists, since by part (b) of the loop
invariant, if z.p is the root, then z.p is black. Since RB-INSERT-FIXUP
enters a loop iteration only if z.p is red, we know that z.p cannot be
the root. Hence, z.p.p exists.

Case 1 differs from cases 2 and 3 by the color of z’s uncle y. Line 3
makes y point to z’s uncle z.p.p.right, and line 4 tests y’s color. If y
is red, then case 1 executes. Otherwise, control passes to cases 2 and
3. In all three cases, z’s grandparent z.p.p is black, since its parent
z.p is red, and property 4 is violated only between z and z.p.

[art]

Figure 13.5 Case 1 of the procedure RB-INSERT-FIXUP. Both z and its
parent z.p are red, violating property 4. In case 1, z’s uncle y is red.
The same action occurs regardless of whether (a) z is a right child or
(b) z is a left child. Each of the subtrees α, β, γ, δ, and ϵ has a
black root—possibly the sentinel—and each has the same black-height. The
code for case 1 moves the blackness of z’s grandparent down to z’s
parent and uncle, preserving property 5: all downward simple paths from
a node to a leaf have the same number of blacks. The while loop
continues with node z’s grandparent z.p.p as the new z. If the action of
case 1 causes a new violation of property 4 to occur, it must be only
between the new z, which is red, and its parent, if it is red as well.

[art]

Figure 13.6 Cases 2 and 3 of the procedure RB-INSERT-FIXUP. As in case
1, property 4 is violated in either case 2 or case 3 because z and its
parent z.p are both red. Each of the subtrees α, β, γ, and δ has a black
root (α, β, and γ from property 4, and δ because otherwise case 1 would
apply), and each has the same black-height. Case 2 transforms into case
3 by a left rotation, which preserves property 5: all downward simple
paths from a node to a leaf have the same number of blacks. Case 3
causes some color changes and a right rotation, which also preserve
property 5. The while loop then terminates, because property 4 is
satisfied: there are no longer two red nodes in a row.

Case 1. z’s uncle y is red

Figure 13.5 shows the situation for case 1 (lines 5–8), which occurs
when both z.p and y are red. Because z’s grandparent z.p.p is black, its
blackness can transfer down one level to both z.p and y, thereby fixing
the problem of z and z.p both being red. Having had its blackness
transferred down one level, z’s grandparent becomes red, thereby
maintaining property 5. The while loop repeats with z.p.p as the new
node z, so that the pointer z moves up two levels in the tree.

Now, we show that case 1 maintains the loop invariant at the start of
the next iteration. We use z to denote node z in the current iteration,
and z′ = z.p.p to denote the node that will be called node z at the test
in line 1 upon the next iteration.

a. Because this iteration colors z.p.p red, node z′ is red at the start
of the next iteration.

b. The node z′.p is z.p.p.p in this iteration, and the color of this
node does not change. If this node is the root, it was black prior to
this iteration, and it remains black at the start of the next iteration.

c. We have already argued that case 1 maintains property 5, and it does
not introduce a violation of properties 1 or 3.

If node z′ is the root at the start of the next iteration, then case 1
corrected the lone violation of property 4 in this iteration. Since z′
is red and it is the root, property 2 becomes the only one that is
violated, and this violation is due to z′.

If node z′ is not the root at the start of the next iteration, then case
1 has not created a violation of property 2. Case 1 corrected the lone
violation of property 4 that existed at the start of this iteration. It
then made z′ red and left z′.p alone. If z′.p was black, there is no
violation of property 4. If z′.p was red, coloring z′ red created one
violation of property 4, between z′ and z′.p.

Case 2. z’s uncle y is black and z is a right child

Case 3. z’s uncle y is black and z is a left child

In cases 2 and 3, the color of z’s uncle y is black. We distinguish the
two cases, which assume that z’s parent z.p is red and a left child,
according to whether z is a right or left child of z.p. Lines 11–12
constitute case 2, which is shown in Figure 13.6 together with case 3.
In case 2, node z is a right child of its parent. A left rotation
immediately transforms the situation into case 3 (lines 13–15), in which
node z is a left child. Because both z and z.p are red, the rotation
affects neither the black-heights of nodes nor property 5. Whether case
3 executes directly or through case 2, z’s uncle y is black, since
otherwise case 1 would have run. Additionally, the node z.p.p exists,
since we have argued that this node existed at the time that lines 2 and
3 were executed, and after moving z up one level in line 11 and then
down one level in line 12, the identity of z.p.p remains unchanged. Case
3 performs some color changes and a right rotation, which preserve
property 5. At this point, there are no longer two red nodes in a row.
The while loop terminates upon the next test in line 1, since z.p is now
black.

We now show that cases 2 and 3 maintain the loop invariant. (As we have
just argued, z.p will be black upon the next test in line 1, and the
loop body will not execute again.)

a. Case 2 makes z point to z.p, which is red. No further change to z or
its color occurs in cases 2 and 3.

b. Case 3 makes z.p black, so that if z.p is the root at the start of
the next iteration, it is black.

c. As in case 1, properties 1, 3, and 5 are maintained in cases 2 and 3.

Since node z is not the root in cases 2 and 3, we know that there is no
violation of property 2. Cases 2 and 3 do not introduce a violation of
property 2, since the only node that is made red becomes a child of a
black node by the rotation in case 3.

Cases 2 and 3 correct the lone violation of property 4, and they do not
introduce another violation.

Termination: To see that the loop terminates, observe that if only case
1 occurs, then the node pointer z moves toward the root in each
iteration, so that eventually z.p is black. (If z is the root, then z.p
is the sentinel T.nil, which is black.) If either case 2 or case 3
occurs, then we’ve seen that the loop terminates. Since the loop
terminates because z.p is black, the tree does not violate property 4 at
loop termination. By the loop invariant, the only property that might
fail to hold is property 2. Line 30 restores this property by coloring
the root black, so that when RB-INSERT-FIXUP terminates, all the
red-black properties hold.

Thus, we have shown that RB-INSERT-FIXUP correctly restores the
red-black properties.

Analysis

What is the running time of RB-INSERT? Since the height of a red-black
tree on n nodes is O(lg n), lines 1–16 of RB-INSERT take O(lg n) time.
In RB-INSERTFIXUP, the while loop repeats only if case 1 occurs, and
then the pointer z moves two levels up the tree. The total number of
times the while loop can be executed is therefore O(lg n). Thus,
RB-INSERT takes a total of O(lg n) time. Moreover, it never performs
more than two rotations, since the while loop terminates if case 2 or
case 3 is executed.

Exercises

13.3-1

Line 16 of RB-INSERT sets the color of the newly inserted node z to red.
If instead z’s color were set to black, then property 4 of a red-black
tree would not be violated. Why not set z’s color to black?

13.3-2

Show the red-black trees that result after successively inserting the
keys 41, 38, 31, 12, 19, 8 into an initially empty red-black tree.

13.3-3

Suppose that the black-height of each of the subtrees α, β, γ, δ, ϵ in
Figures 13.5 and 13.6 is k. Label each node in each figure with its
black-height to verify that the indicated transformation preserves
property 5.

13.3-4

Professor Teach is concerned that RB-INSERT-FIXUP might set T.nil.color
to RED, in which case the test in line 1 would not cause the loop to
terminate when z is the root. Show that the professor’s concern is
unfounded by arguing that RB-INSERT-FIXUP never sets T.nil.color to RED.

13.3-5

Consider a red-black tree formed by inserting n nodes with RB-INSERT.
Argue that if n > 1, the tree has at least one red node.

13.3-6

Suggest how to implement RB-INSERT efficiently if the representation for
red-black trees includes no storage for parent pointers.

13.4    Deletion

Like the other basic operations on an n-node red-black tree, deletion of
a node takes O(lg n) time. Deleting a node from a red-black tree is more
complicated than inserting a node.

The procedure for deleting a node from a red-black tree is based on the
TREE-DELETE procedure on page 325. First, we need to customize the
TRANSPLANT subroutine on page 324 that TREE-DELETE calls so that it
applies to a red-black tree. Like TRANSPLANT, the new procedure
RB-TRANSPLANT replaces the subtree rooted at node u by the subtree
rooted at node v. The RB-TRANSPLANT procedure differs from TRANSPLANT in
two ways. First, line 1 references the sentinel T.nil instead of NIL.
Second, the assignment to v.p in line 6 occurs unconditionally: the
procedure can assign to v.p even if v points to the sentinel. We’ll take
advantage of the ability to assign to v.p when v = T.nil.

RB-TRANSPLANT(T, u, v)

  --- ----------------------
  1   if u.p == T.nil
  2   T.root = v
  3   elseif u == u.p.left
  4   u.p.left = v
  5   else u.p.right = v
  6   v.p = u.p
  --- ----------------------

The procedure RB-DELETE on the next page is like the TREE-DELETE
procedure, but with additional lines of pseudocode. The additional lines
deal with nodes x and y that may be involved in violations of the
red-black properties. When the node z being deleted has at most one
child, then y will be z. When z has two children, then, as in
TREE-DELETE, y will be z’s successor, which has no left child and moves
into z’s position in the tree. Additionally, y takes on z’s color. In
either case, node y has at most one child: node x, which takes y’s place
in the tree. (Node x will be the sentinel T.nil if y has no children.)
Since node y will be either removed from the tree or moved within the
tree, the procedure needs to keep track of y’s original color. If the
red-black properties might be violated after deleting node z, RB-DELETE
calls the auxiliary procedure RB-DELETE-FIXUP, which changes colors and
performs rotations to restore the red-black properties.

Although RB-DELETE contains almost twice as many lines of pseudocode as
TREE-DELETE, the two procedures have the same basic structure. You can
find each line of TREE-DELETE within RB-DELETE (with the changes of
replacing NIL by T.nil and replacing calls to TRANSPLANT by calls to
RB-TRANSPLANT), executed under the same conditions.

In detail, here are the other differences between the two procedures:

- Lines 1 and 9 set node y as described above: line 1 when node z has at
  most one child and line 9 when z has two children.
- Because node y’s color might change, the variable y-original-color
  stores y’s color before any changes occur. Lines 2 and 10 set this
  variable immediately after assignments to y. When node z has two
  children, then nodes y and z are distinct. In this case, line 17 moves
  y into z’s original position in the tree (that is, z’s location in the
  tree at the time RB-DELETE was called), and line 20 gives y the same
  color as z. When node y was originally black, removing or moving it
  could cause violations of the red-black properties, which are
  corrected by the call of RB-DELETE-FIXUP in line 22.

RB-DELETE(T, z)

+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|   1 | y = z               |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   2 | y-original-color =  |                                         |
|     | y.color             |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   3 | if z.left == T.nil  |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   4 | x = z.right         |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|   5 | RB-TRANSPLANT(T, z, z.right)             | // replace z by    |
|     |                                          | its right child    |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|   6 | elseif z.right ==   |                                         |
|     | T.nil               |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   7 | x = z.left          |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|   8 | RB-TRANSPLANT(T, z, z.left)              | // replace z by    |
|     |                                          | its left child     |
+-----+------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|   9 | else y = TREE-MINIMUM(z.right)           | // y is z’s        |
|     |                                          | successor          |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 10  | y-original-color =  |                                         |
|     | y.color             |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 11  | x = y.right         |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 12  | if y ≠ z.right      |                    | // is y farther    |
|     |                     |                    | down the tree?     |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 13  | RB-TRANSPLANT(T, y, y.right)             | // replace y by    |
|     |                                          | its right child    |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 14  | y.right = z.right   |                    | // z’s right child |
|     |                     |                    | becomes            |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 15  | y.right.p = y       |                    | //   y’s right     |
|     |                     |                    | child              |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 16  | else x.p = y        |                    | // in case x is    |
|     |                     |                    | T.nil              |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 17  | RB-TRANSPLANT(T, z, |                    | // replace z by    |
|     | y)                  |                    | its successor y    |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 18  | y.left = z.left     |                    | // and give z’s    |
|     |                     |                    | left child to y,   |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 19  | y.left.p = y        |                    | //       which had |
|     |                     |                    | no left child      |
+-----+---------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| 20  | y.color = z.color   |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 21  | if y-original-color | // if any red-black violations          |
|     | == BLACK            | occurred,                               |
+-----+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 22  | RB-DELETE-FIXUP(T,  | //       correct them                   |
|     | x)                  |                                         |
+-----+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+

- As discussed, the procedure keeps track of the node x that moves into
  node y’s original position at the time of call. The assignments in
  lines 4, 7, and 11 set x to point to either y’s only child or, if y
  has no children, the sentinel T.nil.

- Since node x moves into node y’s original position, the attribute x.p
  must be set correctly. If node z has two children and y is z’s right
  child, then y just moves into z’s position, with x remaining a child
  of y. Line 12 checks for this case. Although you might think that
  setting x.p to y in line 16 is unnecessary since x is a child of y,
  the call of RB-DELETE-FIXUP relies on x.p being y even if x is T.nil.
  Thus, when z has two children and y is z’s right child, executing line
  16 is necessary if y’s right child is T.nil, and otherwise it does not
  change anything.

  Otherwise, node z is either the same as node y or it is a proper
  ancestor of y’s original parent. In these cases, the calls of
  RB-TRANSPLANT in lines 5, 8, and 13 set x.p correctly in line 6 of
  RB-TRANSPLANT. (In these calls of RB-TRANSPLANT, the third parameter
  passed is the same as x.)

- Finally, if node y was black, one or more violations of the red-black
  properties might arise. The call of RB-DELETE-FIXUP in line 22
  restores the red-black properties. If y was red, the red-black
  properties still hold when y is removed or moved, for the following
  reasons:
  1.  No black-heights in the tree have changed. (See Exercise 13.4-1.)
  2.  No red nodes have been made adjacent. If z has at most one child,
      then y and z are the same node. That node is removed, with a child
      taking its place. If the removed node was red, then neither its
      parent nor its children can also be red, so moving a child to take
      its place cannot cause two red nodes to become adjacent. If, on
      the other hand, z has two children, then y takes z’s place in the
      tree, along with z’s color, so there cannot be two adjacent red
      nodes at y’s new position in the tree. In addition, if y was not
      z’s right child, then y’s original right child x replaces y in the
      tree. Since y is red, x must be black, and so replacing y by x
      cannot cause two red nodes to become adjacent.
  3.  Because y could not have been the root if it was red, the root
      remains black.

If node y was black, three problems may arise, which the call of
RB-DELETE-FIXUP will remedy. First, if y was the root and a red child of
y became the new root, property 2 is violated. Second, if both x and its
new parent are red, then a violation of property 4 occurs. Third, moving
y within the tree causes any simple path that previously contained y to
have one less black node. Thus, property 5 is now violated by any
ancestor of y in the tree. We can correct the violation of property 5 by
saying that when the black node y is removed or moved, its blackness
transfers to the node x that moves into y’s original position, giving x
an “extra” black. That is, if we add 1 to the count of black nodes on
any simple path that contains x, then under this interpretation,
property 5 holds. But now another problem emerges: node x is neither red
nor black, thereby violating property 1. Instead, node x is either
“doubly black” or “red-and-black,” and it contributes either 2 or 1,
respectively, to the count of black nodes on simple paths containing x.
The color attribute of x will still be either RED (if x is
red-and-black) or BLACK (if x is doubly black). In other words, the
extra black on a node is reflected in x’s pointing to the node rather
than in the color attribute.

The procedure RB-DELETE-FIXUP on the next page restores properties 1, 2,
and 4. Exercises 13.4-2 and 13.4-3 ask you to show that the procedure
restores properties 2 and 4, and so in the remainder of this section, we
focus on property 1. The goal of the while loop in lines 1–43 is to move
the extra black up the tree until

1.  x points to a red-and-black node, in which case line 44 colors x
    (singly) black;
2.  x points to the root, in which case the extra black simply vanishes;
    or
3.  having performed suitable rotations and recolorings, the loop exits.

Like RB-INSERT-FIXUP, the RB-DELETE-FIXUP procedure handles two
symmetric situations: lines 3–22 for when node x is a left child, and
lines 24–43 for when x is a right child. Our proof focuses on the four
cases shown in lines 3–22.

Within the while loop, x always points to a nonroot doubly black node.
Line 2 determines whether x is a left child or a right child of its
parent x.p so that either lines 3–22 or 24–43 will execute in a given
iteration. The sibling of x is always denoted by a pointer w. Since node
x is doubly black, node w cannot be T.nil, because otherwise, the number
of blacks on the simple path from x.p to the (singly black) leaf w would
be smaller than the number on the simple path from x.p to x.

Recall that the RB-DELETE procedure always assigns to x.p before calling
RB-DELETE-FIXUP (either within the call of RB-TRANSPLANT in line 13 or
the assignment in line 16), even when node x is the sentinel T.nil. That
is because RB-DELETE-FIXUP references x’s parent x.p in several places,
and this attribute must point to the node that became x’s parent in
RB-DELETE—even if x is T.nil.

Figure 13.7 demonstrates the four cases in the code when node x is a
left child. (As in RB-INSERT-FIXUP, the cases in RB-DELETE-FIXUP are not
mutually exclusive.) Before examining each case in detail, let’s look
more generally at how we can verify that the transformation in each of
the cases preserves property 5. The key idea is that in each case, the
transformation applied preserves the number of black nodes (including
x’s extra black) from (and including) the root of the subtree shown to
the roots of each of the subtrees α, β, …, ζ. Thus, if property 5 holds
prior to the transformation, it continues to hold afterward. For
example, in Figure 13.7(a), which illustrates case 1, the number of
black nodes from the root to the root of either subtree α or β is 3,
both before and after the transformation. (Again, remember that node x
adds an extra black.) Similarly, the number of black nodes from the root
to the root of any of γ, δ, ϵ, and ζ is 2, both before and after the
transformation.² In Figure 13.7(b), the counting must involve the value
c of the color attribute of the root of the subtree shown, which can be
either RED or BLACK.

RB-DELETE-FIXUP(T, x)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | while x ≠ T.root and x.color == BLACK                         |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | if x == x.p.left              | // is x a left child?         |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | w = x.p.right                 | // w is x’s sibling           |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | if w.color == RED                                             |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | w.color = BLACK               | [art]                         |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
|   6 | x.p.color = RED               |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
|   7 | LEFT-ROTATE(T, x.p)           |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
|   8 | w = x.p.right                 |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | if w.left.color == BLACK and  |                               |
|     | w.right.color == BLACK        |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10  | w.color = RED                 | [art]                         |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
| 11  | x = x.p                       |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 12  | else                                                          |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13  | if w.right.color == BLACK                                     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 14  | w.left.color = BLACK          | [art]                         |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
| 15  | w.color = RED                 |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
| 16  | RIGHT-ROTATE(T, w)            |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
| 17  | w = x.p.right                 |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 18  | w.color = x.p.color           | [art]                         |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
| 19  | x.p.color = BLACK             |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
| 20  | w.right.color = BLACK         |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
| 21  | LEFT-ROTATE(T, x.p)           |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+                               |
| 22  | x = T.root                    |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 23  | else // same as lines 3–22, but with “right” and “left”       |
|     | exchanged                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 24  | w = x.p.left                                                  |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 25  | if w.color == RED                                             |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 26  | w.color = BLACK                                               |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 27  | x.p.color = RED                                               |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 28  | RIGHT-ROTATE(T, x.p)                                          |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 29  | w = x.p.left                                                  |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 30  | if w.right.color == BLACK and w.left.color == BLACK           |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 31  | w.color = RED                                                 |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 32  | x = x.p                                                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 33  | else                                                          |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 34  | if w.left.color == BLACK                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 35  | w.right.color = BLACK                                         |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 36  | w.color = RED                                                 |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 37  | LEFT-ROTATE(T, w)                                             |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 38  | w = x.p.left                                                  |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 39  | w.color = x.p.color                                           |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 40  | x.p.color = BLACK                                             |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 41  | w.left.color = BLACK                                          |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 42  | RIGHT-ROTATE(T, x.p)                                          |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 43  | x = T.root                                                    |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 44  | x.color = BLACK                                               |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

[art]

Figure 13.7 The cases in lines 3–22 of the procedure RB-DELETE-FIXUP.
Brown nodes have color attributes represented by c and c′, which may be
either RED or BLACK. The letters α, β, …, ζ represent arbitrary
subtrees. Each case transforms the configuration on the left into the
configuration on the right by changing some colors and/or performing a
rotation. Any node pointed to by x has an extra black and is either
doubly black or red-and-black. Only case 2 causes the loop to repeat.
(a) Case 1 is transformed into case 2, 3, or 4 by exchanging the colors
of nodes B and D and performing a left rotation. (b) In case 2, the
extra black represented by the pointer x moves up the tree by coloring
node D red and setting x to point to node B. If case 2 is entered
through case 1, the while loop terminates because the new node x is
red-and-black, and therefore the value c of its color attribute is RED.
(c) Case 3 is transformed to case 4 by exchanging the colors of nodes C
and D and performing a right rotation. (d) Case 4 removes the extra
black represented by x by changing some colors and performing a left
rotation (without violating the red-black properties), and then the loop
terminates.

If we define count(RED) = 0 and count(BLACK) = 1, then the number of
black nodes from the root to α is 2 + count(c), both before and after
the transformation. In this case, after the transformation, the new node
x has color attribute c, but this node is really either red-and-black
(if c = RED) or doubly black (if c = BLACK). You can verify the other
cases similarly (see Exercise 13.4-6).

Case 1. x’s sibling w is red

Case 1 (lines 5–8 and Figure 13.7(a)) occurs when node w, the sibling of
node x, is red. Because w is red, it must have black children. This case
switches the colors of w and x.p and then performs a left-rotation on
x.p without violating any of the red-black properties. The new sibling
of x, which is one of w’s children prior to the rotation, is now black,
and thus case 1 converts into one of cases 2, 3, or 4.

Cases 2, 3, and 4 occur when node w is black and are distinguished by
the colors of w’s children.

Case 2. x’s sibling w is black, and both of w’s children are black

In case 2 (lines 10–11 and Figure 13.7(b)), both of w’s children are
black. Since w is also black, this case removes one black from both x
and w, leaving x with only one black and leaving w red. To compensate
for x and w each losing one black, x’s parent x.p can take on an extra
black. Line 11 does so by moving x up one level, so that the while loop
repeats with x.p as the new node x. If case 2 enters through case 1, the
new node x is red-and-black, since the original x.p was red. Hence, the
value c of the color attribute of the new node x is RED, and the loop
terminates when it tests the loop condition. Line 44 then colors the new
node x (singly) black.

Case 3. x’s sibling w is black, w’s left child is red, and w’s right
child is black

Case 3 (lines 14–17 and Figure 13.7(c)) occurs when w is black, its left
child is red, and its right child is black. This case switches the
colors of w and its left child w.left and then performs a right rotation
on w without violating any of the red-black properties. The new sibling
w of x is now a black node with a red right child, and thus case 3 falls
through into case 4.

Case 4. x’s sibling w is black, and w’s right child is red

Case 4 (lines 18–22 and Figure 13.7(d)) occurs when node x’s sibling w
is black and w’s right child is red. Some color changes and a left
rotation on x.p allow the extra black on x to vanish, making it singly
black, without violating any of the red-black properties. Line 22 sets x
to be the root, and the while loop terminates when it next tests the
loop condition.

Analysis

What is the running time of RB-DELETE? Since the height of a red-black
tree of n nodes is O(lg n), the total cost of the procedure without the
call to RB-DELETE-FIXUP takes O(lg n) time. Within RB-DELETE-FIXUP, each
of cases 1, 3, and 4 lead to termination after performing a constant
number of color changes and at most three rotations. Case 2 is the only
case in which the while loop can be repeated, and then the pointer x
moves up the tree at most O(lg n) times, performing no rotations. Thus,
the procedure RB-DELETE-FIXUP takes O(lg n) time and performs at most
three rotations, and the overall time for RB-DELETE is therefore also
O(lg n).

Exercises

13.4-1

Show that if node y in RB-DELETE is red, then no black-heights change.

13.4-2

Argue that after RB-DELETE-FIXUP executes, the root of the tree must be
black.

13.4-3

Argue that if in RB-DELETE both x and x.p are red, then property 4 is
restored by the call to RB-DELETE-FIXUP(T, x).

13.4-4

In Exercise 13.3-2 on page 346, you found the red-black tree that
results from successively inserting the keys 41, 38, 31, 12, 19, 8 into
an initially empty tree. Now show the red-black trees that result from
the successive deletion of the keys in the order 8, 12, 19, 31, 38, 41.

13.4-5

Which lines of the code for RB-DELETE-FIXUP might examine or modify the
sentinel T.nil?

13.4-6

In each of the cases of Figure 13.7, give the count of black nodes from
the root of the subtree shown to the roots of each of the subtrees α, β,
…, ζ, and verify that each count remains the same after the
transformation. When a node has a color attribute c or c′, use the
notation count(c) or count(c′) symbolically in your count.

13.4-7

Professors Skelton and Baron worry that at the start of case 1 of
RB-DELETE-FIXUP, the node x.p might not be black. If x.p is not black,
then lines 5–6 are wrong. Show that x.p must be black at the start of
case 1, so that the professors need not be concerned.

13.4-8

A node x is inserted into a red-black tree with RB-INSERT and then is
immediately deleted with RB-DELETE. Is the resulting red-black tree
always the same as the initial red-black tree? Justify your answer.

★ 13.4-9

Consider the operation RB-ENUMERATE(T, r, a, b), which outputs all the
keys k such that a ≤ k ≤ b in a subtree rooted at node r in an n-node
red-black tree T. Describe how to implement RB-ENUMERATE in Θ(m + lg n)
time, where m is the number of keys that are output. Assume that the
keys in T are unique and that the values a and b appear as keys in T.
How does your solution change if a and b might not appear in T?

Problems

13-1     Persistent dynamic sets

During the course of an algorithm, you sometimes find that you need to
maintain past versions of a dynamic set as it is updated. We call such a
set persistent. One way to implement a persistent set is to copy the
entire set whenever it is modified, but this approach can slow down a
program and also consume a lot of space. Sometimes, you can do much
better.

Consider a persistent set S with the operations INSERT, DELETE, and
SEARCH, which you implement using binary search trees as shown in Figure
13.8(a). Maintain a separate root for every version of the set. In order
to insert the key 5 into the set, create a new node with key 5. This
node becomes the left child of a new node with key 7, since you cannot
modify the existing node with key 7. Similarly, the new node with key 7
becomes the left child of a new node with key 8 whose right child is the
existing node with key 10. The new node with key 8 becomes, in turn, the
right child of a new root r′ with key 4 whose left child is the existing
node with key 3. Thus, you copy only part of the tree and share some of
the nodes with the original tree, as shown in Figure 13.8(b).

Assume that each tree node has the attributes key, left, and right but
no parent. (See also Exercise 13.3-6 on page 346.)

a. For a persistent binary search tree (not a red-black tree, just a
binary search tree), identify the nodes that need to change to insert or
delete a node.

[art]

Figure 13.8 (a) A binary search tree with keys 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10. (b)
The persistent binary search tree that results from the insertion of key
5. The most recent version of the set consists of the nodes reachable
from the root r′, and the previous version consists of the nodes
reachable from r. Blue nodes are added when key 5 is inserted.

b. Write a procedure PERSISTENT-TREE-INSERT(T, z) that, given a
persistent binary search tree T and a node z to insert, returns a new
persistent tree T′ that is the result of inserting z into T. Assume that
you have a procedure COPY-NODE(x) that makes a copy of node x, including
all of its attributes.

c. If the height of the persistent binary search tree T is h, what are
the time and space requirements of your implementation of
PERSISTENT-TREE-INSERT? (The space requirement is proportional to the
number of nodes that are copied.)

d. Suppose that you include the parent attribute in each node. In this
case, the PERSISTENT-TREE-INSERT procedure needs to perform additional
copying. Prove that PERSISTENT-TREE-INSERT then requires Ω(n) time and
space, where n is the number of nodes in the tree.

e. Show how to use red-black trees to guarantee that the worst-case
running time and space are O(lg n) per insertion or deletion. You may
assume that all keys are distinct.

13-2     Join operation on red-black trees

The join operation takes two dynamic sets S₁ and S₂ and an element x
such that for any x₁ ∈ S₁ and x₂ ∈ S₂, we have x₁.key ≤ x.key ≤ x₂.key.
It returns a set S = S₁ ⋃ {x} ⋃ S₂. In this problem, we investigate how
to implement the join operation on red-black trees.

a. Suppose that you store the black-height of a red-black tree T as the
new attribute T.bh. Argue that RB-INSERT and RB-DELETE can maintain the
bh attribute without requiring extra storage in the nodes of the tree
and without increasing the asymptotic running times. Show how to
determine the black-height of each node visited while descending through
T, using O(1) time per node visited.

Let T₁ and T₂ be red-black trees and x be a key value such that for any
nodes x₁ in T₁ and x₂ in T₂, we have x₁.key ≤ x.key ≤ x₂.key. You will
show how to implement the operation RB-JOIN(T₁, x, T₂), which destroys
T₁ and T₂ and returns a red-black tree T = T₁ ⋃ {x} ⋃ T₂. Let n be the
total number of nodes in T₁ and T₂.

b. Assume that T₁.bh ≥ T₂.bh. Describe an O(lg n)-time algorithm that
finds a black node y in T₁ with the largest key from among those nodes
whose black-height is T₂.bh.

c. Let T_(y) be the subtree rooted at y. Describe how T_(y) ⋃ {x} ⋃ T₂
can replace T_(y) in O(1) time without destroying the binary-search-tree
property.

d. What color should you make x so that red-black properties 1, 3, and 5
are maintained? Describe how to enforce properties 2 and 4 in O(lg n)
time.

e. Argue that no generality is lost by making the assumption in part
(b). Describe the symmetric situation that arises when T₁.bh ≤ T₂.bh.

f. Argue that the running time of RB-JOIN is O(lg n).

13-3     AVL trees

An AVL tree is a binary search tree that is height balanced: for each
node x, the heights of the left and right subtrees of x differ by at
most 1. To implement an AVL tree, maintain an extra attribute h in each
node such that x.h is the height of node x. As for any other binary
search tree T, assume that T.root points to the root node.

a. Prove that an AVL tree with n nodes has height O(lg n). (Hint: Prove
that an AVL tree of height h has at least F_(h) nodes, where F_(h) is
the hth Fibonacci number.)

b. To insert into an AVL tree, first place a node into the appropriate
place in binary search tree order. Afterward, the tree might no longer
be height balanced. Specifically, the heights of the left and right
children of some node might differ by 2. Describe a procedure
BALANCE(x), which takes a subtree rooted at x whose left and right
children are height balanced and have heights that differ by at most 2,
so that |x.right.h − x.left.h| ≤ 2, and alters the subtree rooted at x
to be height balanced. The procedure should return a pointer to the node
that is the root of the subtree after alterations occur. (Hint: Use
rotations.)

c. Using part (b), describe a recursive procedure AVL-INSERT(T, z) that
takes an AVL tree T and a newly created node z (whose key has already
been filled in), and adds z into T, maintaining the property that T is
an AVL tree. As in TREE-INSERT from Section 12.3, assume that z.key has
already been filled in and that z.left = NIL and z.right = NIL. Assume
as well that z.h = 0.

d. Show that AVL-INSERT, run on an n-node AVL tree, takes O(lg n) time
and performs O(lg n) rotations.

Chapter notes

The idea of balancing a search tree is due to Adel’son-Vel’skiĭ and
Landis [2], who introduced a class of balanced search trees called “AVL
trees” in 1962, described in Problem 13-3. Another class of search
trees, called “2-3 trees,” was introduced by J. E. Hopcroft
(unpublished) in 1970. A 2-3 tree maintains balance by manipulating the
degrees of nodes in the tree, where each node has either two or three
children. Chapter 18 covers a generalization of 2-3 trees introduced by
Bayer and McCreight [39], called “B-trees.”

Red-black trees were invented by Bayer [38] under the name “symmetric
binary B-trees.” Guibas and Sedgewick [202] studied their properties at
length and introduced the red/black color convention. Andersson [16]
gives a simpler-to-code variant of red-black trees. Weiss [451] calls
this variant AA-trees. An AA-tree is similar to a red-black tree except
that left children can never be red.

Sedgewick and Wayne [402] present red-black trees as a modified version
of 2-3 trees in which a node with three children is split into two nodes
with two children each. One of these nodes becomes the left child of the
other, and only left children can be red. They call this structure a
“left-leaning red-black binary search tree.” Although the code for
left-leaning red-black binary search trees is more concise than the
red-black tree pseudocode in this chapter, operations on left-leaning
red-black binary search trees do not limit the number of rotations per
operation to a constant. This distinction will matter in Chapter 17.

Treaps, a hybrid of binary search trees and heaps, were proposed by
Seidel and Aragon [404]. They are the default implementation of a
dictionary in LEDA [324], which is a well-implemented collection of data
structures and algorithms.

There are many other variations on balanced binary trees, including
weight-balanced trees [344], k-neighbor trees [318], and scapegoat trees
[174]. Perhaps the most intriguing are the “splay trees” introduced by
Sleator and Tarjan [418], which are “self-adjusting.” (See Tarjan [429]
for a good description of splay trees.) Splay trees maintain balance
without any explicit balance condition such as color. Instead, “splay
operations” (which involve rotations) are performed within the tree
every time an access is made. The amortized cost (see Chapter 16) of
each operation on an n-node tree is O(lg n). Splay trees have been
conjectured to perform within a constant factor of the best offline
rotation-based tree. The best known competitive ratio (see Chapter 27)
for a rotation-based tree is the Tango Tree of Demaine et al. [109].

Skip lists [369] provide an alternative to balanced binary trees. A skip
list is a linked list that is augmented with a number of additional
pointers. Each dictionary operation runs in O(lg n) expected time on a
skip list of n items.

¹ Although we try to avoid gendered language in this book, the English
language lacks a gender-neutral word for a parent’s sibling.

² If property 5 holds, we can assume that paths from the roots of γ, δ,
ϵ, and ζ down to leaves contain one more black than do paths from the
roots of α and β down to leaves.

Part IV    Advanced Design and Analysis Techniques

 

 

Introduction

This part covers three important techniques used in designing and
analyzing efficient algorithms: dynamic programming (Chapter 14), greedy
algorithms (Chapter 15), and amortized analysis (Chapter 16). Earlier
parts have presented other widely applicable techniques, such as
divide-and-conquer, randomization, and how to solve recurrences. The
techniques in this part are somewhat more sophisticated, but you will be
able to use them solve many computational problems. The themes
introduced in this part will recur later in this book.

Dynamic programming typically applies to optimization problems in which
you make a set of choices in order to arrive at an optimal solution,
each choice generates subproblems of the same form as the original
problem, and the same subproblems arise repeatedly. The key strategy is
to store the solution to each such subproblem rather than recompute it.
Chapter 14 shows how this simple idea can sometimes transform
exponential-time algorithms into polynomial-time algorithms.

Like dynamic-programming algorithms, greedy algorithms typically apply
to optimization problems in which you make a set of choices in order to
arrive at an optimal solution. The idea of a greedy algorithm is to make
each choice in a locally optimal manner, resulting in a faster algorithm
than you get with dynamic programming. Chapter 15 will help you
determine when the greedy approach works.

The technique of amortized analysis applies to certain algorithms that
perform a sequence of similar operations. Instead of bounding the cost
of the sequence of operations by bounding the actual cost of each
operation separately, an amortized analysis provides a worst-case bound
on the actual cost of the entire sequence. One advantage of this
approach is that although some operations might be expensive, many
others might be cheap. You can use amortized analysis when designing
algorithms, since the design of an algorithm and the analysis of its
running time are often closely intertwined. Chapter 16 introduces three
ways to perform an amortized analysis of an algorithm.

14        Dynamic Programming

Dynamic programming, like the divide-and-conquer method, solves problems
by combining the solutions to subproblems. (“Programming” in this
context refers to a tabular method, not to writing computer code.) As we
saw in Chapters 2 and 4, divide-and-conquer algorithms partition the
problem into disjoint subproblems, solve the subproblems recursively,
and then combine their solutions to solve the original problem. In
contrast, dynamic programming applies when the subproblems overlap—that
is, when subproblems share subsubproblems. In this context, a
divide-and-conquer algorithm does more work than necessary, repeatedly
solving the common subsubproblems. A dynamic-programming algorithm
solves each subsubproblem just once and then saves its answer in a
table, thereby avoiding the work of recomputing the answer every time it
solves each subsubproblem.

Dynamic programming typically applies to optimization problems. Such
problems can have many possible solutions. Each solution has a value,
and you want to find a solution with the optimal (minimum or maximum)
value. We call such a solution an optimal solution to the problem, as
opposed to the optimal solution, since there may be several solutions
that achieve the optimal value.

To develop a dynamic-programming algorithm, follow a sequence of four
steps:

1.  Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.
2.  Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.
3.  Compute the value of an optimal solution, typically in a bottom-up
    fashion.
4.  Construct an optimal solution from computed information.

Steps 1–3 form the basis of a dynamic-programming solution to a problem.
If you need only the value of an optimal solution, and not the solution
itself, then you can omit step 4. When you do perform step 4, it often
pays to maintain additional information during step 3 so that you can
easily construct an optimal solution.

The sections that follow use the dynamic-programming method to solve
some optimization problems. Section 14.1 examines the problem of cutting
a rod into rods of smaller length in a way that maximizes their total
value. Section 14.2 shows how to multiply a chain of matrices while
performing the fewest total scalar multiplications. Given these examples
of dynamic programming, Section 14.3 discusses two key characteristics
that a problem must have for dynamic programming to be a viable solution
technique. Section 14.4 then shows how to find the longest common
subsequence of two sequences via dynamic programming. Finally, Section
14.5 uses dynamic programming to construct binary search trees that are
optimal, given a known distribution of keys to be looked up.

14.1    Rod cutting

Our first example uses dynamic programming to solve a simple problem in
deciding where to cut steel rods. Serling Enterprises buys long steel
rods and cuts them into shorter rods, which it then sells. Each cut is
free. The management of Serling Enterprises wants to know the best way
to cut up the rods.

Serling Enterprises has a table giving, for i = 1, 2, …, the price p_(i)
in dollars that they charge for a rod of length i inches. The length of
each rod in inches is always an integer. Figure 14.1 gives a sample
price table.

The rod-cutting problem is the following. Given a rod of length n inches
and a table of prices p_(i) for i = 1, 2, …, n, determine the maximum
revenue r_(n) obtainable by cutting up the rod and selling the pieces.
If the price p_(n) for a rod of length n is large enough, an optimal
solution might require no cutting at all.

Consider the case when n = 4. Figure 14.2 shows all the ways to cut up a
rod of 4 inches in length, including the way with no cuts at all.
Cutting a 4-inch rod into two 2-inch pieces produces revenue p₂ + p₂ =
5 + 5 = 10, which is optimal.

Serling Enterprises can cut up a rod of length n in 2^(n−1) different
ways, since they have an independent option of cutting, or not cutting,
at distance i inches from the left end, for i = 1, 2, …, n − 1.¹ We
denote a decomposition into pieces using ordinary additive notation, so
that 7 = 2 + 2 + 3 indicates that a rod of length 7 is cut into three
pieces—two of length 2 and one of length 3. If an optimal solution cuts
the rod into k pieces, for some 1 ≤ k ≤ n, then an optimal decomposition

n = i₁ + i₂ + ⋯ + i_(k)

[art]

Figure 14.1 A sample price table for rods. Each rod of length i inches
earns the company p_(i) dollars of revenue.

[art]

Figure 14.2 The 8 possible ways of cutting up a rod of length 4. Above
each piece is the value of that piece, according to the sample price
chart of Figure 14.1. The optimal strategy is part (c)—cutting the rod
into two pieces of length 2—which has total value 10.

of the rod into pieces of lengths i₁, i₂, …, i_(k) provides maximum
corresponding revenue

[art]

For the sample problem in Figure 14.1, you can determine the optimal
revenue figures r_(i), for i = 1, 2, …, 10, by inspection, with the
corresponding optimal decompositions

+----------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| r₁ = 1   | from solution 1 = 1   | (no cuts),            |
+----------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| r₂ = 5   | from solution 2 = 2   | (no cuts),            |
+----------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| r₃ = 8   | from solution 3 = 3   | (no cuts),            |
+----------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| r₄ = 10  | from solution 4 = 2 + 2,                      |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+
| r₅ = 13  | from solution 5 = 2 + 3,                      |
+----------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| r₆ = 17  | from solution 6 = 6   | (no cuts),            |
+----------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| r₇ = 18  | from solution 7 = 1 + 6 or 7 = 2 + 2 + 3,     |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+
| r₈ = 22  | from solution 8 = 2 + 6,                      |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+
| r₉ = 25  | from solution 9 = 3 + 6,                      |
+----------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| r₁₀ = 30 | from solution 10 = 10 | (no cuts).            |
+----------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

More generally, we can express the values r_(n) for n ≥ 1 in terms of
optimal revenues from shorter rods:

[art]

The first argument, p_(n), corresponds to making no cuts at all and
selling the rod of length n as is. The other n − 1 arguments to max
correspond to the maximum revenue obtained by making an initial cut of
the rod into two pieces of size i and n − i, for each i = 1, 2, …, n −
1, and then optimally cutting up those pieces further, obtaining
revenues r_(i) and r_(n−i) from those two pieces. Since you don’t know
ahead of time which value of i optimizes revenue, you have to consider
all possible values for i and pick the one that maximizes revenue. You
also have the option of picking no i at all if the greatest revenue
comes from selling the rod uncut.

To solve the original problem of size n, you solve smaller problems of
the same type. Once you make the first cut, the two resulting pieces
form independent instances of the rod-cutting problem. The overall
optimal solution incorporates optimal solutions to the two resulting
subproblems, maximizing revenue from each of those two pieces. We say
that the rod-cutting problem exhibits optimal substructure: optimal
solutions to a problem incorporate optimal solutions to related
subproblems, which you may solve independently.

In a related, but slightly simpler, way to arrange a recursive structure
for the rod-cutting problem, let’s view a decomposition as consisting of
a first piece of length i cut off the left-hand end, and then a
right-hand remainder of length n − i. Only the remainder, and not the
first piece, may be further divided. Think of every decomposition of a
length-n rod in this way: as a first piece followed by some
decomposition of the remainder. Then we can express the solution with no
cuts at all by saying that the first piece has size i = n and revenue
p_(n) and that the remainder has size 0 with corresponding revenue r₀ =
0. We thus obtain the following simpler version of equation (14.1):

[art]

In this formulation, an optimal solution embodies the solution to only
one related subproblem—the remainder—rather than two.

Recursive top-down implementation

The CUT-ROD procedure on the following page implements the computation
implicit in equation (14.2) in a straightforward, top-down, recursive
manner. It takes as input an array p[1 : n] of prices and an integer n,
and it returns the maximum revenue possible for a rod of length n. For
length n = 0, no revenue is possible, and so CUT-ROD returns 0 in line
2. Line 3 initializes the maximum revenue q to −∞, so that the for loop
in lines 4–5 correctly computes q = max {p_(i) + CUT-ROD(p, n − i) : 1 ≤
i ≤ n}. Line 6 then returns this value. A simple induction on n proves
that this answer is equal to the desired answer r_(n), using equation
(14.2).

CUT-ROD(p, n)

  --- ---------------------------------------
  1   if n == 0
  2   return 0
  3   q = −∞
  4   for i = 1 to n
  5   q = max {q, p[i] + CUT-ROD(p, n − i)}
  6   return q
  --- ---------------------------------------

If you code up CUT-ROD in your favorite programming language and run it
on your computer, you’ll find that once the input size becomes
moderately large, your program takes a long time to run. For n = 40,
your program may take several minutes and possibly more than an hour.
For large values of n, you’ll also discover that each time you increase
n by 1, your program’s running time approximately doubles.

Why is CUT-ROD so inefficient? The problem is that CUT-ROD calls itself
recursively over and over again with the same parameter values, which
means that it solves the same subproblems repeatedly. Figure 14.3 shows
a recursion tree demonstrating what happens for n = 4: CUT-ROD(p, n)
calls CUT-ROD(p, n − i) for i = 1, 2, …, n. Equivalently, CUT-ROD(p, n)
calls CUT-ROD(p, j) for each j = 0, 1, …, n − 1. When this process
unfolds recursively, the amount of work done, as a function of n, grows
explosively.

To analyze the running time of CUT-ROD, let T(n) denote the total number
of calls made to CUT-ROD(p, n) for a particular value of n. This
expression equals the number of nodes in a subtree whose root is labeled
n in the recursion tree. The count includes the initial call at its
root. Thus, T(0) = 1 and

[art]

The initial 1 is for the call at the root, and the term T(j) counts the
number of calls (including recursive calls) due to the call CUT-ROD(p, n
− i), where j = n − i. As Exercise 14.1-1 asks you to show,

[art]

and so the running time of CUT-ROD is exponential in n.

In retrospect, this exponential running time is not so surprising.
CUT-ROD explicitly considers all possible ways of cutting up a rod of
length n. How many ways are there? A rod of length n has n − 1 potential
locations to cut. Each possible way to cut up the rod makes a cut at
some subset of these n − 1 locations, including the empty set, which
makes for no cuts. Viewing each cut location as a distinct member of a
set of n − 1 elements, you can see that there are 2^(n−1) subsets. Each
leaf in the recursion tree of Figure 14.3 corresponds to one possible
way to cut up the rod. Hence, the recursion tree has 2^(n−1) leaves. The
labels on the simple path from the root to a leaf give the sizes of each
remaining right-hand piece before making each cut. That is, the labels
give the corresponding cut points, measured from the right-hand end of
the rod.

[art]

Figure 14.3 The recursion tree showing recursive calls resulting from a
call CUT-ROD(p, n) for n = 4. Each node label gives the size n of the
corresponding subproblem, so that an edge from a parent with label s to
a child with label t corresponds to cutting off an initial piece of size
s − t and leaving a remaining subproblem of size t. A path from the root
to a leaf corresponds to one of the 2^(n−1) ways of cutting up a rod of
length n. In general, this recursion tree has 2^(n) nodes and 2^(n−1)
leaves.

Using dynamic programming for optimal rod cutting

Now, let’s see how to use dynamic programming to convert CUT-ROD into an
efficient algorithm.

The dynamic-programming method works as follows. Instead of solving the
same subproblems repeatedly, as in the naive recursion solution, arrange
for each subproblem to be solved only once. There’s actually an obvious
way to do so: the first time you solve a subproblem, save its solution.
If you need to refer to this subproblem’s solution again later, just
look it up, rather than recomputing it.

Saving subproblem solutions comes with a cost: the additional memory
needed to store solutions. Dynamic programming thus serves as an example
of a time-memory trade-off. The savings may be dramatic. For example,
we’re about to use dynamic programming to go from the exponential-time
algorithm for rod cutting down to a Θ(n²)-time algorithm. A
dynamic-programming approach runs in polynomial time when the number of
distinct subproblems involved is polynomial in the input size and you
can solve each such subproblem in polynomial time.

There are usually two equivalent ways to implement a dynamic-programming
approach. Solutions to the rod-cutting problem illustrate both of them.

The first approach is top-down with memoization.² In this approach, you
write the procedure recursively in a natural manner, but modified to
save the result of each subproblem (usually in an array or hash table).
The procedure now first checks to see whether it has previously solved
this subproblem. If so, it returns the saved value, saving further
computation at this level. If not, the procedure computes the value in
the usual manner but also saves it. We say that the recursive procedure
has been memoized: it “remembers” what results it has computed
previously.

The second approach is the bottom-up method. This approach typically
depends on some natural notion of the “size” of a subproblem, such that
solving any particular subproblem depends only on solving “smaller”
subproblems. Solve the subproblems in size order, smallest first,
storing the solution to each subproblem when it is first solved. In this
way, when solving a particular subproblem, there are already saved
solutions for all of the smaller subproblems its solution depends upon.
You need to solve each subproblem only once, and when you first see it,
you have already solved all of its prerequisite subproblems.

These two approaches yield algorithms with the same asymptotic running
time, except in unusual circumstances where the top-down approach does
not actually recurse to examine all possible subproblems. The bottom-up
approach often has much better constant factors, since it has lower
overhead for procedure calls.

The procedures MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD and MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX on the facing
page demonstrate how to memoize the top-down CUT-ROD procedure. The main
procedure MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD initializes a new auxiliary array r[0 : n]
with the value −∞ which, since known revenue values are always
nonnegative, is a convenient choice for denoting “unknown.”
MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD then calls its helper procedure, MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX,
which is just the memoized version of the exponential-time procedure,
CUT-ROD. It first checks in line 1 to see whether the desired value is
already known and, if it is, then line 2 returns it. Otherwise, lines
3–7 compute the desired value q in the usual manner, line 8 saves it in
r[n], and line 9 returns it.

The bottom-up version, BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD on the next page, is even
simpler. Using the bottom-up dynamic-programming approach,
BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD takes advantage of the natural ordering of the
subproblems: a subproblem of size i is “smaller” than a subproblem of
size j if i < j. Thus, the procedure solves subproblems of sizes j = 0,
1, …, n, in that order.

MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD(p, n)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | let r[0 : n] be a new array    | // will remember solution      |
|   |                                | values in r                    |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | for i = 0 to n                 |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | r[i] = −∞                      |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4 | return MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX(p, n, r)                            |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX(p, n, r)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | if r[n] ≥ 0                    | // already have a solution for |
|   |                                | length n?                      |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | return r[n]                    |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | if n == 0                      |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4 | q = 0                          |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 5 | else q = −∞                    |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 6 | for i = 1 to n                 | // i is the position of the    |
|   |                                | first cut                      |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 7 | q = max {q, p[i] + MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX(p, n − i, r)}           |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 8 | r[n] = q                       | // remember the solution value |
|   |                                | for length n                   |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 9 | return q                       |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+

BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD(p, n)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | let r[0 : n] be a new array    | // will remember solution      |
|   |                                | values in r                    |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | r[0] = 0                       |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | for j = 1 to n                 | // for increasing rod length j |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4 | q = −∞                         |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 5 | for i = 1 to j                 | // i is the position of the    |
|   |                                | first cut                      |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 6 | q = max {q, p[i] + r[j − i]}                                    |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 7 | r[j] = q                       | // remember the solution value |
|   |                                | for length j                   |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 8 | return r[n]                    |                                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+

Line 1 of BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD creates a new array r[0 : n] in which to
save the results of the subproblems, and line 2 initializes r[0] to 0,
since a rod of length 0 earns no revenue. Lines 3–6 solve each
subproblem of size j, for j = 1, 2, …, n, in order of increasing size.
The approach used to solve a problem of a particular size j is the same
as that used by CUT-ROD, except that line 6 now directly references
array entry r[j − i] instead of making a recursive call to solve the
subproblem of size j − i. Line 7 saves in r[j] the solution to the
subproblem of size j. Finally, line 8 returns r[n], which equals the
optimal value r_(n).

The bottom-up and top-down versions have the same asymptotic running
time. The running time of BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD is Θ(n²), due to its doubly
nested loop structure. The number of iterations of its inner for loop,
in lines 5–6, forms an arithmetic series. The running time of its
top-down counterpart, MEMOIZEDCUT-ROD, is also Θ(n²), although this
running time may be a little harder to see. Because a recursive call to
solve a previously solved subproblem returns immediately,
MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD solves each subproblem just once. It solves subproblems
for sizes 0, 1, …, n. To solve a subproblem of size n, the for loop of
lines 6–7 iterates n times. Thus, the total number of iterations of this
for loop, over all recursive calls of MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD, forms an
arithmetic series, giving a total of Θ(n²) iterations, just like the
inner for loop of BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD. (We actually are using a form of
aggregate analysis here. We’ll see aggregate analysis in detail in
Section 16.1.)

[art]

Figure 14.4 The subproblem graph for the rod-cutting problem with n = 4.
The vertex labels give the sizes of the corresponding subproblems. A
directed edge (x, y) indicates that solving subproblem x requires a
solution to subproblem y. This graph is a reduced version of the
recursion tree of Figure 14.3, in which all nodes with the same label
are collapsed into a single vertex and all edges go from parent to
child.

Subproblem graphs

When you think about a dynamic-programming problem, you need to
understand the set of subproblems involved and how subproblems depend on
one another.

The subproblem graph for the problem embodies exactly this information.
Figure 14.4 shows the subproblem graph for the rod-cutting problem with
n = 4. It is a directed graph, containing one vertex for each distinct
subproblem. The subproblem graph has a directed edge from the vertex for
subproblem x to the vertex for subproblem y if determining an optimal
solution for subproblem x involves directly considering an optimal
solution for subproblem y. For example, the subproblem graph contains an
edge from x to y if a top-down recursive procedure for solving x
directly calls itself to solve y. You can think of the subproblem graph
as a “reduced” or “collapsed” version of the recursion tree for the
top-down recursive method, with all nodes for the same subproblem
coalesced into a single vertex and all edges directed from parent to
child.

The bottom-up method for dynamic programming considers the vertices of
the subproblem graph in such an order that you solve the subproblems y
adjacent to a given subproblem x before you solve subproblem x. (As
Section B.4 notes, the adjacency relation in a directed graph is not
necessarily symmetric.) Using terminology that we’ll see in Section
20.4, in a bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm, you consider the
vertices of the subproblem graph in an order that is a “reverse
topological sort,” or a “topological sort of the transpose” of the
subproblem graph. In other words, no subproblem is considered until all
of the subproblems it depends upon have been solved. Similarly, using
notions that we’ll visit in Section 20.3, you can view the top-down
method (with memoization) for dynamic programming as a “depth-first
search” of the subproblem graph.

The size of the subproblem graph G = (V, E) can help you determine the
running time of the dynamic-programming algorithm. Since you solve each
subproblem just once, the running time is the sum of the times needed to
solve each subproblem. Typically, the time to compute the solution to a
subproblem is proportional to the degree (number of outgoing edges) of
the corresponding vertex in the subproblem graph, and the number of
subproblems is equal to the number of vertices in the subproblem graph.
In this common case, the running time of dynamic programming is linear
in the number of vertices and edges.

Reconstructing a solution

The procedures MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD and BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD return the value
of an optimal solution to the rod-cutting problem, but they do not
return the solution itself: a list of piece sizes.

Let’s see how to extend the dynamic-programming approach to record not
only the optimal value computed for each subproblem, but also a choice
that led to the optimal value. With this information, you can readily
print an optimal solution. The procedure EXTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD on
the next page computes, for each rod size j, not only the maximum
revenue r_(j), but also s_(j), the optimal size of the first piece to
cut off. It’s similar to BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD, except that it creates the
array s in line 1, and it updates s[j] in line 8 to hold the optimal
size i of the first piece to cut off when solving a subproblem of size
j.

The procedure PRINT-CUT-ROD-SOLUTION on the following page takes as
input an array p[1 : n] of prices and a rod size n. It calls
EXTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD to compute the array s[1 : n] of optimal
first-piece sizes. Then it prints out the complete list of piece sizes
in an optimal decomposition of a rod of length n. For the sample price
chart appearing in Figure 14.1, the call EXTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD(p,
10) returns the following arrays:

  ------ --- --- --- --- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  i      0   1   2   3   4    5    6    7    8    9    10
  r[i]   0   1   5   8   10   13   17   18   22   25   30
  s[i]       1   2   3   2    2    6    1    2    3    10
  ------ --- --- --- --- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----

A call to PRINT-CUT-ROD-SOLUTION(p, 10) prints just 10, but a call with
n = 7 prints the cuts 1 and 6, which correspond to the first optimal
decomposition for r₇ given earlier.

EXTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD(p, n)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | let r[0 : n] and s[1 : n] be new arrays                       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | r[0] = 0                      |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | for j = 1 to n                | // for increasing rod length  |
|     |                               | j                             |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | q = −∞                        |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | for i = 1 to j                | // i is the position of the   |
|     |                               | first cut                     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   6 | if q < p[i] + r[j − i]        |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   7 | q = p[i] + r[j − i]                                           |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   8 | s[j] = i                      | // best cut location so far   |
|     |                               | for length j                  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | r[j] = q                      | // remember the solution      |
|     |                               | value for length j            |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10  | return r and s                |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+

PRINT-CUT-ROD-SOLUTION(p, n)

+---+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 1 | (r, s) = EXTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD(p, n)                     |
+---+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 2 | while n > 0           |                                       |
+---+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 3 | print s[n]            | // cut location for length n          |
+---+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 4 | n = n − s[n]          | // length of the remainder of the rod |
+---+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+

Exercises

14.1-1

Show that equation (14.4) follows from equation (14.3) and the initial
condition T(0) = 1.

14.1-2

Show, by means of a counterexample, that the following “greedy” strategy
does not always determine an optimal way to cut rods. Define the density
of a rod of length i to be p_(i)/i, that is, its value per inch. The
greedy strategy for a rod of length n cuts off a first piece of length
i, where 1 ≤ i ≤ n, having maximum density. It then continues by
applying the greedy strategy to the remaining piece of length n − i.

14.1-3

Consider a modification of the rod-cutting problem in which, in addition
to a price p_(i) for each rod, each cut incurs a fixed cost of c. The
revenue associated with a solution is now the sum of the prices of the
pieces minus the costs of making the cuts. Give a dynamic-programming
algorithm to solve this modified problem.

14.1-4

Modify CUT-ROD and MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX so that their for loops go up to
only ⌊n/2⌋, rather than up to n. What other changes to the procedures do
you need to make? How are their running times affected?

14.1-5

Modify MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD to return not only the value but the actual
solution.

14.1-6

The Fibonacci numbers are defined by recurrence (3.31) on page 69. Give
an O(n)-time dynamic-programming algorithm to compute the nth Fibonacci
number. Draw the subproblem graph. How many vertices and edges does the
graph contain?

14.2    Matrix-chain multiplication

Our next example of dynamic programming is an algorithm that solves the
problem of matrix-chain multiplication. Given a sequence (chain) 〈A₁,
A₂, …, A_(n)〉 of n matrices to be multiplied, where the matrices aren’t
necessarily square, the goal is to compute the product

[art]

using the standard algorithm³ for multiplying rectangular matrices,
which we’ll see in a moment, while minimizing the number of scalar
multiplications.

You can evaluate the expression (14.5) using the algorithm for
multiplying pairs of rectangular matrices as a subroutine once you have
parenthesized it to resolve all ambiguities in how the matrices are
multiplied together. Matrix multiplication is associative, and so all
parenthesizations yield the same product. A product of matrices is fully
parenthesized if it is either a single matrix or the product of two
fully parenthesized matrix products, surrounded by parentheses. For
example, if the chain of matrices is 〈A₁, A₂, A₃, A₄〉, then you can
fully parenthesize the product A₁A₂A₃A₄ in five distinct ways:

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| (A₁(A₂(A₃A₄))),                                                       |
|                                                                       |
| (A₁((A₂A₃)A₄)),                                                       |
|                                                                       |
| ((A₁A₂)(A₃A₄)),                                                       |
|                                                                       |
| ((A₁(A₂A₃))A₄),                                                       |
|                                                                       |
| (((A₁A₂)A₃)A₄).                                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

How you parenthesize a chain of matrices can have a dramatic impact on
the cost of evaluating the product. Consider first the cost of
multiplying two rectangular matrices. The standard algorithm is given by
the procedure RECTANGULAR-MATRIX-MULTIPLY, which generalizes the
square-matrix multiplication procedure MATRIX-MULTIPLY on page 81. The
RECTANGULAR-MATRIX-MULTIPLY procedure computes C = C + A ·B for three
matrices A = (a_(ij)), B = (b_(ij)), and C = (c_(ij)), where A is p × q,
B is q × r, and C is p × r.

RECTANGULAR-MATRIX-MULTIPLY(A, B, C, p, q, r)

  --- -----------------------------------
  1   for i = 1 to p
  2   for j = 1 to r
  3   for k = 1 to q
  4   c_(ij) = c_(ij) + a_(ik) · b_(kj)
  --- -----------------------------------

The running time of RECTANGULAR-MATRIX-MULTIPLY is dominated by the
number of scalar multiplications in line 4, which is pqr. Therefore,
we’ll consider the cost of multiplying matrices to be the number of
scalar multiplications. (The number of scalar multiplications dominates
even if we consider initializing C = 0 to perform just C = A ·B.)

To illustrate the different costs incurred by different
parenthesizations of a matrix product, consider the problem of a chain
〈A₁, A₂, A₃〉 of three matrices. Suppose that the dimensions of the
matrices are 10 × 100, 100 × 5, and 5 × 50, respectively. Multiplying
according to the parenthesization ((A₁A₂)A₃) performs 10 · 100 · 5 =
5000 scalar multiplications to compute the 10 × 5 matrix product A₁A₂,
plus another 10 · 5 · 50 = 2500 scalar multiplications to multiply this
matrix by A₃, for a total of 7500 scalar multiplications. Multiplying
according to the alternative parenthesization (A₁(A₂A₃)) performs 100 ·
5 · 50 = 25,000 scalar multiplications to compute the 100 × 50 matrix
product A₂A₃, plus another 10 · 100 · 50 = 50,000 scalar multiplications
to multiply A₁ by this matrix, for a total of 75,000 scalar
multiplications. Thus, computing the product according to the first
parenthesization is 10 times faster.

We state the matrix-chain multiplication problem as follows: given a
chain 〈A₁, A₂, …, A_(n)〉 of n matrices, where for i = 1, 2, …, n,
matrix A_(i) has dimension p_(i−1) × p_(i), fully parenthesize the
product A₁A₂ ⋯ A_(n) in a way that minimizes the number of scalar
multiplications. The input is the sequence of dimensions 〈p₀, p₁, p₂,
…, p_(n)〉.

The matrix-chain multiplication problem does not entail actually
multiplying matrices. The goal is only to determine an order for
multiplying matrices that has the lowest cost. Typically, the time
invested in determining this optimal order is more than paid for by the
time saved later on when actually performing the matrix multiplications
(such as performing only 7500 scalar multiplications instead of 75,000).

Counting the number of parenthesizations

Before solving the matrix-chain multiplication problem by dynamic
programming, let us convince ourselves that exhaustively checking all
possible parenthesizations is not an efficient algorithm. Denote the
number of alternative parenthesizations of a sequence of n matrices by
P(n). When n = 1, the sequence consists of just one matrix, and
therefore there is only one way to fully parenthesize the matrix
product. When n ≥ 2, a fully parenthesized matrix product is the product
of two fully parenthesized matrix subproducts, and the split between the
two subproducts may occur between the kth and (k + 1)st matrices for any
k = 1, 2, …, n − 1. Thus, we obtain the recurrence

[art]

Problem 12-4 on page 329 asked you to show that the solution to a
similar recurrence is the sequence of Catalan numbers, which grows as
Ω(4^(n)/n^(3/2)). A simpler exercise (see Exercise 14.2-3) is to show
that the solution to the recurrence (14.6) is Ω(2^(n)). The number of
solutions is thus exponential in n, and the brute-force method of
exhaustive search makes for a poor strategy when determining how to
optimally parenthesize a matrix chain.

Applying dynamic programming

Let’s use the dynamic-programming method to determine how to optimally
parenthesize a matrix chain, by following the four-step sequence that we
stated at the beginning of this chapter:

1.  Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.
2.  Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.
3.  Compute the value of an optimal solution.
4.  Construct an optimal solution from computed information.

We’ll go through these steps in order, demonstrating how to apply each
step to the problem.

Step 1: The structure of an optimal parenthesization

In the first step of the dynamic-programming method, you find the
optimal substructure and then use it to construct an optimal solution to
the problem from optimal solutions to subproblems. To perform this step
for the matrix-chain multiplication problem, it’s convenient to first
introduce some notation. Let A_(i:j), where i ≤ j, denote the matrix
that results from evaluating the product A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j). If the
problem is nontrivial, that is, i < j, then to parenthesize the product
A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j), the product must split between A_(k) and A_(k+1)
for some integer k in the range i ≤ k < j. That is, for some value of k,
first compute the matrices A_(i:k) and A_(k+1:j), and then multiply them
together to produce the final product A_(i:j). The cost of
parenthesizing this way is the cost of computing the matrix A_(i:k),
plus the cost of computing A_(k+1:j), plus the cost of multiplying them
together.

The optimal substructure of this problem is as follows. Suppose that to
optimally parenthesize A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j), you split the product
between A_(k) and A_(k+1). Then the way you parenthesize the “prefix”
subchain A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(k) within this optimal parenthesization of
A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j) must be an optimal parenthesization of A_(i)A_(i+1)
⋯ A_(k). Why? If there were a less costly way to parenthesize
A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(k), then you could substitute that parenthesization in
the optimal parenthesization of A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j) to produce another
way to parenthesize A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j) whose cost is lower than the
optimum: a contradiction. A similar observation holds for how to
parenthesize the subchain A_(k+1)A_(k+2) ⋯ A_(j) in the optimal
parenthesization of A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j): it must be an optimal
parenthesization of A_(k+1)A_(k+2) ⋯ A_(j).

Now let’s use the optimal substructure to show how to construct an
optimal solution to the problem from optimal solutions to subproblems.
Any solution to a nontrivial instance of the matrix-chain multiplication
problem requires splitting the product, and any optimal solution
contains within it optimal solutions to subproblem instances. Thus, to
build an optimal solution to an instance of the matrix-chain
multiplication problem, split the problem into two subproblems
(optimally parenthesizing A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(k) and A_(k+1)A_(k+2) ⋯
A_(j)), find optimal solutions to the two subproblem instances, and then
combine these optimal subproblem solutions. To ensure that you’ve
examined the optimal split, you must consider all possible splits.

Step 2: A recursive solution

The next step is to define the cost of an optimal solution recursively
in terms of the optimal solutions to subproblems. For the matrix-chain
multiplication problem, a subproblem is to determine the minimum cost of
parenthesizing A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j) for 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n. Given the input
dimensions 〈p₀, p₁, p₂, …, p_(n)〉, an index pair i, j specifies a
subproblem. Let m[i, j] be the minimum number of scalar multiplications
needed to compute the matrix A_(i:j). For the full problem, the
lowest-cost way to compute A_(1:n) is thus m[1, n].

We can define m[i, j] recursively as follows. If i = j, the problem is
trivial: the chain consists of just one matrix A_(i:i) = A_(i), so that
no scalar multiplications are necessary to compute the product. Thus,
m[i, i] = 0 for i = 1, 2, …, n. To compute m[i, j] when i < j, we take
advantage of the structure of an optimal solution from step 1. Suppose
that an optimal parenthesization splits the product A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j)
between A_(k) and A_(k+1), where i ≤ k < j. Then, m[i, j] equals the
minimum cost m[i, k] for computing the subproduct A_(i:k), plus the
minimum cost m[k+1, j] for computing the subproduct, A_(k+1:j), plus the
cost of multiplying these two matrices together. Because each matrix
A_(i) is p_(i−1) × p_(i), computing the matrix product A_(i:k)A_(k+1:j)
takes p_(i−1) p_(k) p_(j) scalar multiplications. Thus, we obtain

m[i, j] = m[i, k] + m[k + 1, j] + p_(i−1) p_(k) p_(j).

This recursive equation assumes that you know the value of k. But you
don’t, at least not yet. You have to try all possible values of k. How
many are there? Just j − i, namely k = i, i + 1, …, j − 1. Since the
optimal parenthesization must use one of these values for k, you need
only check them all to find the best. Thus, the recursive definition for
the minimum cost of parenthesizing the product A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j)
becomes

[art]

The m[i, j] values give the costs of optimal solutions to subproblems,
but they do not provide all the information you need to construct an
optimal solution. To help you do so, let’s define s[i, j] to be a value
of k at which you split the product A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j) in an optimal
parenthesization. That is, s[i, j] equals a value k such that m[i, j] =
m[i, k] + m[k + 1, j] + p_(i−1) p_(k) p_(j).

Step 3: Computing the optimal costs

At this point, you could write a recursive algorithm based on recurrence
(14.7) to compute the minimum cost m[1, n] for multiplying A₁A₂ ⋯ A_(n).
But as we saw for the rod-cutting problem, and as we shall see in
Section 14.3, this recursive algorithm takes exponential time. That’s no
better than the brute-force method of checking each way of
parenthesizing the product.

Fortunately, there aren’t all that many distinct subproblems: just one
subproblem for each choice of i and j satisfying 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n, or [art]
in all.⁴ A recursive algorithm may encounter each subproblem many times
in different branches of its recursion tree. This property of
overlapping subproblems is the second hallmark of when dynamic
programming applies (the first hallmark being optimal substructure).

Instead of computing the solution to recurrence (14.7) recursively,
let’s compute the optimal cost by using a tabular, bottom-up approach,
as in the procedure MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER. (The corresponding top-down
approach using memoization appears in Section 14.3.) The input is a
sequence p = 〈p₀, p₁, …, p_(n)〉 of matrix dimensions, along with n, so
that for i = 1, 2, …, n, matrix A_(i) has dimensions p_(i−1) × p_(i).
The procedure uses an auxiliary table m[1 : n, 1 : n] to store the m[i,
j] costs and another auxiliary table s[1 : n − 1, 2 : n] that records
which index k achieved the optimal cost in computing m[i, j]. The table
s will help in constructing an optimal solution.

MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER(p, n)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | let m[1 : n, 1 : n] and s[1 : n − 1, 2 : n] be new tables     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | for i = 1 to n                | // chain length 1             |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | m[i, i] = 0                                                   |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | for l = 2 to n                | // l is the chain length      |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | for i = 1 to n − l + 1        | // chain begins at A_(i)      |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   6 | j = i + l − 1                 | // chain ends at A_(j)        |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   7 | m[i, j] = ∞                                                   |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   8 | for k = i to j − 1            | // try A_(i:k)A_(k+1:j)       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | q = m[i, k] + m[k + 1, j] + p_(i−1)p_(k) p_(j)                |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10  | if q < m[i, j]                                                |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 11  | m[i, j] = q                   | // remember this cost         |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 12  | s[i, j] = k                   | // remember this index        |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 13  | return m and s                                                |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

In what order should the algorithm fill in the table entries? To answer
this question, let’s see which entries of the table need to be accessed
when computing the cost m[i, j]. Equation (14.7) tells us that to
compute the cost of matrix product A_(i:j), first the costs of the
products A_(i:k) and A_(k+1:j) need to have been computed for all k = i,
i + 1, …, j − 1. The chain A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j) consists of j − i + 1
matrices, and the chains A_(i)A_(i+1) … A_(k) and A_(k+1) A_(k+2) …
A_(j) consist of k − i + 1 and j − k matrices, respectively. Since k <
j, a chain of k − i + 1 matrices consists of fewer than j − i + 1
matrices. Likewise, since k ≥ i, a chain of j − k matrices consists of
fewer than j − i + 1 matrices. Thus, the algorithm should fill in the
table m from shorter matrix chains to longer matrix chains. That is, for
the subproblem of optimally parenthesizing the chain A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯
A_(j), it makes sense to consider the subproblem size as the length j −
i + 1 of the chain.

Now, let’s see how the MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER procedure fills in the m[i, j]
entries in order of increasing chain length. Lines 2–3 initialize m[i,
i] = 0 for i = 1, 2, …, n, since any matrix chain with just one matrix
requires no scalar multiplications. In the for loop of lines 4–12, the
loop variable l denotes the length of matrix chains whose minimum costs
are being computed. Each iteration of this loop uses recurrence (14.7)
to compute m[i, i + l − 1] for i = 1, 2, …, n − l + 1. In the first
iteration, l = 2, and so the loop computes m[i, i + 1] for i = 1, 2, …,
n − 1: the minimum costs for chains of length l = 2. The second time
through the loop, it computes m[i, i + 2] for i = 1, 2, …, n − 2: the
minimum costs for chains of length l = 3. And so on, ending with a
single matrix chain of length l = n and computing m[1, n]. When lines
7–12 compute an m[i, j] cost, this cost depends only on table entries
m[i, k] and m[k + 1, j], which have already been computed.

Figure 14.5 illustrates the m and s tables, as filled in by the
MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER procedure on a chain of n = 6 matrices. Since m[i, j]
is defined only for i ≤ j, only the portion of the table m on or above
the main diagonal is used. The figure shows the table rotated to make
the main diagonal run horizontally. The matrix chain is listed along the
bottom. Using this layout, the minimum cost m[i, j] for multiplying a
subchain A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j) of matrices appears at the intersection of
lines running northeast from A_(i) and northwest from A_(j). Reading
across, each diagonal in the table contains the entries for matrix
chains of the same length. MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER computes the rows from
bottom to top and from left to right within each row. It computes each
entry m[i, j] using the products p_(i−1) p_(k) p_(j) for k = i, i + 1,
…, j − 1 and all entries southwest and southeast from m[i, j].

A simple inspection of the nested loop structure of MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER
yields a running time of O(n³) for the algorithm. The loops are nested
three deep, and each loop index (l, i, and k) takes on at most n − 1
values. Exercise 14.2-5 asks you to show that the running time of this
algorithm is in fact also Ω(n³). The algorithm requires Θ(n²) space to
store the m and s tables. Thus, MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER is much more
efficient than the exponential-time method of enumerating all possible
parenthesizations and checking each one.

[art]

Figure 14.5 The m and s tables computed by MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER for n = 6
and the following matrix dimensions:

  ----------- --------- --------- -------- -------- --------- ---------
  matrix      A₁        A₂        A₃       A₄       A₅        A₆
  dimension   30 × 35   35 × 15   15 × 5   5 × 10   10 × 20   20 × 25
  ----------- --------- --------- -------- -------- --------- ---------

The tables are rotated so that the main diagonal runs horizontally. The
m table uses only the main diagonal and upper triangle, and the s table
uses only the upper triangle. The minimum number of scalar
multiplications to multiply the 6 matrices is m[1, 6] = 15,125. Of the
entries that are not tan, the pairs that have the same color are taken
together in line 9 when computing

[art]

Step 4: Constructing an optimal solution

Although MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER determines the optimal number of scalar
multiplications needed to compute a matrix-chain product, it does not
directly show how to multiply the matrices. The table s[1 : n − 1, 2 :
n] provides the information needed to do so. Each entry s[i, j] records
a value of k such that an optimal parenthesization of A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯
A_(j) splits the product between A_(k) and A_(k+1). The final matrix
multiplication in computing A_(1:n) optimally is
A_(1:s[1,n])A_(s[1,n]+1:n). The s table contains the information needed
to determine the earlier matrix multiplications as well, using
recursion: s[1, s[1, n]] determines the last matrix multiplication when
computing A_(1:s[1,n]) and s[s[1,n] + 1, n] determines the last matrix
multiplication when computing A_(s[1,n]+1:n). The recursive procedure
PRINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS on the facing page prints an optimal
parenthesization of the matrix chain product A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j), given
the s table computed by MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER and the indices i and j. The
initial call PRINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS(s, 1, n) prints an optimal
parenthesization of the full matrix chain product A₁A₂ ⋯ A_(n). In the
example of Figure 14.5, the call PRINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS(s, 1, 6) prints
the optimal parenthesization ((A₁(A₂A₃))((A₄A₅)A₆)).

PRINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS(s, i, j)

  --- -----------------------------------------
  1   if i == j
  2   print “A”_(i)
  3   else print “(”
  4   PRINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS(s, i, s[i, j])
  5   PRINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS(s, s[i, j] + 1, j)
  6   print “)”
  --- -----------------------------------------

Exercises

14.2-1

Find an optimal parenthesization of a matrix-chain product whose
sequence of dimensions is 〈5, 10, 3, 12, 5, 50, 6〉.

14.2-2

Give a recursive algorithm MATRIX-CHAIN-MULTIPLY(A, s, i, j) that
actually performs the optimal matrix-chain multiplication, given the
sequence of matrices 〈A₁, A₂, …, A_(n)〉, the s table computed by
MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER, and the indices i and j. (The initial call is
MATRIX-CHAIN-MULTIPLY(A, s, 1, n).) Assume that the call
RECTANGULAR-MATRIX-MULTIPLY(A, B) returns the product of matrices A and
B.

14.2-3

Use the substitution method to show that the solution to the recurrence
(14.6) is Ω(2^(n)).

14.2-4

Describe the subproblem graph for matrix-chain multiplication with an
input chain of length n. How many vertices does it have? How many edges
does it have, and which edges are they?

14.2-5

Let R(i, j) be the number of times that table entry m[i, j] is
referenced while computing other table entries in a call of
MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER. Show that the total number of references for the
entire table is

[art]

(Hint: You may find equation (A.4) on page 1141 useful.)

14.2-6

Show that a full parenthesization of an n-element expression has exactly
n − 1 pairs of parentheses.

14.3    Elements of dynamic programming

Although you have just seen two complete examples of the
dynamic-programming method, you might still be wondering just when the
method applies. From an engineering perspective, when should you look
for a dynamic-programming solution to a problem? In this section, we’ll
examine the two key ingredients that an optimization problem must have
in order for dynamic programming to apply: optimal substructure and
overlapping subproblems. We’ll also revisit and discuss more fully how
memoization might help you take advantage of the overlapping-subproblems
property in a top-down recursive approach.

Optimal substructure

The first step in solving an optimization problem by dynamic programming
is to characterize the structure of an optimal solution. Recall that a
problem exhibits optimal substructure if an optimal solution to the
problem contains within it optimal solutions to subproblems. When a
problem exhibits optimal substructure, that gives you a good clue that
dynamic programming might apply. (As Chapter 15 discusses, it also might
mean that a greedy strategy applies, however.) Dynamic programming
builds an optimal solution to the problem from optimal solutions to
subproblems. Consequently, you must take care to ensure that the range
of subproblems you consider includes those used in an optimal solution.

Optimal substructure was key to solving both of the previous problems in
this chapter. In Section 14.1, we observed that the optimal way of
cutting up a rod of length n (if Serling Enterprises makes any cuts at
all) involves optimally cutting up the two pieces resulting from the
first cut. In Section 14.2, we noted that an optimal parenthesization of
the matrix chain product A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j) that splits the product
between A_(k) and A_(k+1) contains within it optimal solutions to the
problems of parenthesizing A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(k) and A_(k+1)A_(k+2) ⋯
A_(j).

You will find yourself following a common pattern in discovering optimal
substructure:

1.  You show that a solution to the problem consists of making a choice,
    such as choosing an initial cut in a rod or choosing an index at
    which to split the matrix chain. Making this choice leaves one or
    more subproblems to be solved.
2.  You suppose that for a given problem, you are given the choice that
    leads to an optimal solution. You do not concern yourself yet with
    how to determine this choice. You just assume that it has been given
    to you.
3.  Given this choice, you determine which subproblems ensue and how to
    best characterize the resulting space of subproblems.
4.  You show that the solutions to the subproblems used within an
    optimal solution to the problem must themselves be optimal by using
    a “cut-and-paste” technique. You do so by supposing that each of the
    subproblem solutions is not optimal and then deriving a
    contradiction. In particular, by “cutting out” the nonoptimal
    solution to each subproblem and “pasting in” the optimal one, you
    show that you can get a better solution to the original problem,
    thus contradicting your supposition that you already had an optimal
    solution. If an optimal solution gives rise to more than one
    subproblem, they are typically so similar that you can modify the
    cut-and-paste argument for one to apply to the others with little
    effort.

To characterize the space of subproblems, a good rule of thumb says to
try to keep the space as simple as possible and then expand it as
necessary. For example, the space of subproblems for the rod-cutting
problem contained the problems of optimally cutting up a rod of length i
for each size i. This subproblem space worked well, and it was not
necessary to try a more general space of subproblems.

Conversely, suppose that you tried to constrain the subproblem space for
matrix-chain multiplication to matrix products of the form A₁A₂ ⋯ A_(j).
As before, an optimal parenthesization must split this product between
A_(k) and A_(k+1) for some 1 ≤ k < j. Unless you can guarantee that k
always equals j − 1, you will find that you have subproblems of the form
A₁A₂ ⋯ A_(k) and A_(k+1)A_(k+2) ⋯ A_(j). Moreover, the latter subproblem
does not have the form A₁A₂ ⋯ A_(j). To solve this problem by dynamic
programming, you need to allow the subproblems to vary at “both ends.”
That is, both i and j need to vary in the subproblem of parenthesizing
the product A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j).

Optimal substructure varies across problem domains in two ways:

1.  how many subproblems an optimal solution to the original problem
    uses, and
2.  how many choices you have in determining which subproblem(s) to use
    in an optimal solution.

In the rod-cutting problem, an optimal solution for cutting up a rod of
size n uses just one subproblem (of size n − i), but we have to consider
n choices for i in order to determine which one yields an optimal
solution. Matrix-chain multiplication for the subchain A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯
A_(j) serves an example with two subproblems and j − i choices. For a
given matrix A_(k) where the product splits, two subproblems
arise—parenthesizing A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(k) and parenthesizing
A_(k+1)A_(k+2) ⋯ A_(j)—and we have to solve both of them optimally. Once
we determine the optimal solutions to subproblems, we choose from among
j − i candidates for the index k.

Informally, the running time of a dynamic-programming algorithm depends
on the product of two factors: the number of subproblems overall and how
many choices you look at for each subproblem. In rod cutting, we had
Θ(n) subproblems overall, and at most n choices to examine for each,
yielding an O(n²) running time. Matrix-chain multiplication had Θ(n²)
subproblems overall, and each had at most n − 1 choices, giving an O(n³)
running time (actually, a Θ(n³) running time, by Exercise 14.2-5).

Usually, the subproblem graph gives an alternative way to perform the
same analysis. Each vertex corresponds to a subproblem, and the choices
for a subproblem are the edges incident from that subproblem. Recall
that in rod cutting, the subproblem graph has n vertices and at most n
edges per vertex, yielding an O(n²) running time. For matrix-chain
multiplication, if you were to draw the subproblem graph, it would have
Θ(n²) vertices and each vertex would have degree at most n − 1, giving a
total of O(n³) vertices and edges.

Dynamic programming often uses optimal substructure in a bottom-up
fashion. That is, you first find optimal solutions to subproblems and,
having solved the subproblems, you find an optimal solution to the
problem. Finding an optimal solution to the problem entails making a
choice among subproblems as to which you will use in solving the
problem. The cost of the problem solution is usually the subproblem
costs plus a cost that is directly attributable to the choice itself. In
rod cutting, for example, first we solved the subproblems of determining
optimal ways to cut up rods of length i for i = 0, 1, …, n − 1, and then
we determined which of these subproblems yielded an optimal solution for
a rod of length n, using equation (14.2). The cost attributable to the
choice itself is the term p_(i) in equation (14.2). In matrix-chain
multiplication, we determined optimal parenthesizations of subchains of
A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j), and then we chose the matrix A_(k) at which to
split the product. The cost attributable to the choice itself is the
term p_(i−1) p_(k) p_(j).

Chapter 15 explores “greedy algorithms,” which have many similarities to
dynamic programming. In particular, problems to which greedy algorithms
apply have optimal substructure. One major difference between greedy
algorithms and dynamic programming is that instead of first finding
optimal solutions to subproblems and then making an informed choice,
greedy algorithms first make a “greedy” choice—the choice that looks
best at the time—and then solve a resulting subproblem, without
bothering to solve all possible related smaller subproblems.
Surprisingly, in some cases this strategy works!

Subtleties

You should be careful not to assume that optimal substructure applies
when it does not. Consider the following two problems whose input
consists of a directed graph G = (V, E) and vertices u, v ∈ V.

Unweighted shortest path:⁵ Find a path from u to v consisting of the
fewest edges. Such a path must be simple, since removing a cycle from a
path produces a path with fewer edges.

Unweighted longest simple path: Find a simple path from u to v
consisting of the most edges. (Without the requirement that the path
must be simple, the problem is undefined, since repeatedly traversing a
cycle creates paths with an arbitrarily large number of edges.)

The unweighted shortest-path problem exhibits optimal substructure.
Here’s how. Suppose that u ≠ v, so that the problem is nontrivial. Then,
any path p from u to v must contain an intermediate vertex, say w. (Note
that w may be u or v.) Then, we can decompose the path [art] into
subpaths [art]. The number of edges in p equals the number of edges in
p₁ plus the number of edges in p₂. We claim that if p is an optimal
(i.e., shortest) path from u to v, then p₁ must be a shortest path from
u to w. Why? As suggested earlier, use a “cut-and-paste” argument: if
there were another path, say [art], from u to w with fewer edges than
p₁, then we could cut out p₁ and paste in [art] to produce a path [art]
with fewer edges than p, thus contradicting p’s optimality. Likewise, p₂
must be a shortest path from w to v. Thus, to find a shortest path from
u to v, consider all intermediate vertices w, find a shortest path from
u to w and a shortest path from w to v, and choose an intermediate
vertex w that yields the overall shortest path. Section 23.2 uses a
variant of this observation of optimal substructure to find a shortest
path between every pair of vertices on a weighted, directed graph.

You might be tempted to assume that the problem of finding an unweighted
longest simple path exhibits optimal substructure as well. After all, if
we decompose a longest simple path [art] into subpaths [art], then
mustn’t p₁ be a longest simple path from u to w, and mustn’t p₂ be a
longest simple path from w to v? The answer is no! Figure 14.6 supplies
an example. Consider the path q → r → t, which is a longest simple path
from q to t. Is q → r a longest simple path from q to r? No, for the
path q → s → t → r is a simple path that is longer. Is r → t a longest
simple path from r to t? No again, for the path r → q → s → t is a
simple path that is longer.

[art]

Figure 14.6 A directed graph showing that the problem of finding a
longest simple path in an unweighted directed graph does not have
optimal substructure. The path q → r → t is a longest simple path from q
to t, but the subpath q → r is not a longest simple path from q to r,
nor is the subpath r → t a longest simple path from r to t.

This example shows that for longest simple paths, not only does the
problem lack optimal substructure, but you cannot necessarily assemble a
“legal” solution to the problem from solutions to subproblems. If you
combine the longest simple paths q → s → t → r and r → q → s → t, you
get the path q → s → t → r → q → s → t, which is not simple. Indeed, the
problem of finding an unweighted longest simple path does not appear to
have any sort of optimal substructure. No efficient dynamic-programming
algorithm for this problem has ever been found. In fact, this problem is
NP-complete, which—as we shall see in Chapter 34—means that we are
unlikely to find a way to solve it in polynomial time.

Why is the substructure of a longest simple path so different from that
of a shortest path? Although a solution to a problem for both longest
and shortest paths uses two subproblems, the subproblems in finding the
longest simple path are not independent, whereas for shortest paths they
are. What do we mean by subproblems being independent? We mean that the
solution to one subproblem does not affect the solution to another
subproblem of the same problem. For the example of Figure 14.6, we have
the problem of finding a longest simple path from q to t with two
subproblems: finding longest simple paths from q to r and from r to t.
For the first of these subproblems, we chose the path q → s → t → r,
which used the vertices s and t. These vertices cannot appear in a
solution to the second subproblem, since the combination of the two
solutions to subproblems yields a path that is not simple. If vertex t
cannot be in the solution to the second problem, then there is no way to
solve it, since t is required to be on the path that forms the solution,
and it is not the vertex where the subproblem solutions are “spliced”
together (that vertex being r). Because vertices s and t appear in one
subproblem solution, they cannot appear in the other subproblem
solution. One of them must be in the solution to the other subproblem,
however, and an optimal solution requires both. Thus, we say that these
subproblems are not independent. Looked at another way, using resources
in solving one subproblem (those resources being vertices) renders them
unavailable for the other subproblem.

Why, then, are the subproblems independent for finding a shortest path?
The answer is that by nature, the subproblems do not share resources. We
claim that if a vertex w is on a shortest path p from u to v, then we
can splice together any shortest path [art] and any shortest path [art]
to produce a shortest path from u to v. We are assured that, other than
w, no vertex can appear in both paths p₁ and p₂. Why? Suppose that some
vertex x ≠ w appears in both p₁ and p₂, so that we can decompose p₁ as
[art] and p₂ as [art]. By the optimal substructure of this problem, path
p has as many edges as p₁ and p₂ together. Let’s say that p has e edges.
Now let us construct a path [art] from u to v. Because we have excised
the paths from x to w and from w to x, each of which contains at least
one edge, path p′ contains at most e − 2 edges, which contradicts the
assumption that p is a shortest path. Thus, we are assured that the
subproblems for the shortest-path problem are independent.

The two problems examined in Sections 14.1 and 14.2 have independent
subproblems. In matrix-chain multiplication, the subproblems are
multiplying subchains A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(k) and A_(k+1)A_(k+2) ⋯ A_(j).
These subchains are disjoint, so that no matrix could possibly be
included in both of them. In rod cutting, to determine the best way to
cut up a rod of length n, we looked at the best ways of cutting up rods
of length i for i = 0, 1, …, n − 1. Because an optimal solution to the
length-n problem includes just one of these subproblem solutions (after
cutting off the first piece), independence of subproblems is not an
issue.

Overlapping subproblems

The second ingredient that an optimization problem must have for dynamic
programming to apply is that the space of subproblems must be “small” in
the sense that a recursive algorithm for the problem solves the same
subproblems over and over, rather than always generating new
subproblems. Typically, the total number of distinct subproblems is a
polynomial in the input size. When a recursive algorithm revisits the
same problem repeatedly, we say that the optimization problem has
overlapping subproblems.⁶ In contrast, a problem for which a
divide-and-conquer approach is suitable usually generates brand-new
problems at each step of the recursion. Dynamic-programming algorithms
typically take advantage of overlapping subproblems by solving each
subproblem once and then storing the solution in a table where it can be
looked up when needed, using constant time per lookup.

[art]

Figure 14.7 The recursion tree for the computation of
RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, 1, 4). Each node contains the parameters i and
j. The computations performed in a subtree shaded blue are replaced by a
single table lookup in MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN.

In Section 14.1, we briefly examined how a recursive solution to rod
cutting makes exponentially many calls to find solutions of smaller
subproblems. The dynamic-programming solution reduces the running time
from the exponential time of the recursive algorithm down to quadratic
time.

To illustrate the overlapping-subproblems property in greater detail,
let’s revisit the matrix-chain multiplication problem. Referring back to
Figure 14.5, observe that MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER repeatedly looks up the
solution to subproblems in lower rows when solving subproblems in higher
rows. For example, it references entry m[3, 4] four times: during the
computations of m[2, 4], m[1, 4], m[3, 5], and m[3, 6]. If the algorithm
were to recompute m[3, 4] each time, rather than just looking it up, the
running time would increase dramatically. To see how, consider the
inefficient recursive procedure RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN on the facing
page, which determines m[i, j], the minimum number of scalar
multiplications needed to compute the matrix-chain product A_(i:j) =
A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j). The procedure is based directly on the recurrence
(14.7). Figure 14.7 shows the recursion tree produced by the call
RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, 1, 4). Each node is labeled by the values of
the parameters i and j. Observe that some pairs of values occur many
times.

In fact, the time to compute m[1, n] by this recursive procedure is at
least exponential in n. To see why, let T(n) denote the time taken by
RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN to compute an optimal parenthesization of a chain
of n matrices. Because the execution of lines 1–2 and of lines 6–7 each
take at least unit time, as does the multiplication in line 5,
inspection of the procedure yields the recurrence

RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, i, j)

+---+---------------------------------------+
| 1 | if i == j                             |
+---+---------------------------------------+
| 2 | return 0                              |
+---+---------------------------------------+
| 3 | m[i, j] = ∞                           |
+---+---------------------------------------+
| 4 | for k = i to j − 1                    |
+---+---------------------------------------+
| 5 | q = RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, i, k)   |
|   +---------------------------------------+
|   | + RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, k + 1, j) |
|   +---------------------------------------+
|   | + p_(i−1) p_(k) p_(j)                 |
+---+---------------------------------------+
| 6 | if q < m[i, j]                        |
+---+---------------------------------------+
| 7 | m[i, j] = q                           |
+---+---------------------------------------+
| 8 | return m[i, j]                        |
+---+---------------------------------------+

[art]

Noting that for i = 1, 2, …, n − 1, each term T(i) appears once as T(k)
and once as T(n − k), and collecting the n − 1 1s in the summation
together with the 1 out front, we can rewrite the recurrence as

[art]

Let’s prove that T(n) = Ω(2^(n)) using the substitution method.
Specifically, we’ll show that T(n) ≥ 2^(n−1) for all n ≥ 1. For the base
case n = 1, the summation is empty, and we get T(1) ≥ 1 = 2⁰.
Inductively, for n ≥ 2 we have

[art]

which completes the proof. Thus, the total amount of work performed by
the call RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, 1, n) is at least exponential in n.

Compare this top-down, recursive algorithm (without memoization) with
the bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm. The latter is more
efficient because it takes advantage of the overlapping-subproblems
property. Matrix-chain multiplication has only Θ(n²) distinct
subproblems, and the dynamic-programming algorithm solves each exactly
once. The recursive algorithm, on the other hand, must solve each
subproblem every time it reappears in the recursion tree. Whenever a
recursion tree for the natural recursive solution to a problem contains
the same subproblem repeatedly, and the total number of distinct
subproblems is small, dynamic programming can improve efficiency,
sometimes dramatically.

Reconstructing an optimal solution

As a practical matter, you’ll often want to store in a separate table
which choice you made in each subproblem so that you do not have to
reconstruct this information from the table of costs.

For matrix-chain multiplication, the table s[i, j] saves a significant
amount of work when we need to reconstruct an optimal solution. Suppose
that the MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER procedure on page 378 did not maintain the
s[i, j] table, so that it filled in only the table m[i, j] containing
optimal subproblem costs. The procedure chooses from among j − i
possibilities when determining which subproblems to use in an optimal
solution to parenthesizing A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j), and j − i is not a
constant. Therefore, it would take Θ(j −i) = ω(1) time to reconstruct
which subproblems it chose for a solution to a given problem. Because
MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER stores in s[i, j] the index of the matrix at which it
split the product A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j), the PRINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS
procedure on page 381 can look up each choice in O(1) time.

Memoization

As we saw for the rod-cutting problem, there is an alternative approach
to dynamic programming that often offers the efficiency of the bottom-up
dynamic-programming approach while maintaining a top-down strategy. The
idea is to memoize the natural, but inefficient, recursive algorithm. As
in the bottom-up approach, you maintain a table with subproblem
solutions, but the control structure for filling in the table is more
like the recursive algorithm.

A memoized recursive algorithm maintains an entry in a table for the
solution to each subproblem. Each table entry initially contains a
special value to indicate that the entry has yet to be filled in. When
the subproblem is first encountered as the recursive algorithm unfolds,
its solution is computed and then stored in the table. Each subsequent
encounter of this subproblem simply looks up the value stored in the
table and returns it.⁷

The procedure MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN is a memoized version of the
procedure RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN on page 389. Note where it resembles
the memoized top-down method on page 369 for the rod-cutting problem.

MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, n)

  --- ------------------------------------
  1   let m[1 : n, 1 : n] be a new table
  2   for i = 1 to n
  3   for j = i to n
  4   m[i, j] = ∞
  5   return LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, 1, n)
  --- ------------------------------------

LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, i, j)

+---+------------------------------------------------------+
| 1 | if m[i, j] < ∞                                       |
+---+------------------------------------------------------+
| 2 | return m[i, j]                                       |
+---+------------------------------------------------------+
| 3 | if i == j                                            |
+---+------------------------------------------------------+
| 4 | m[i, j] = 0                                          |
+---+------------------------------------------------------+
| 5 | else for k = i to j − 1                              |
+---+------------------------------------------------------+
| 6 | q = LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, i, k)                         |
|   +------------------------------------------------------+
|   | + LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, k + 1, j) + p_(i−1) p_(k) p_(j) |
+---+------------------------------------------------------+
| 7 | if q < m[i, j]                                       |
+---+------------------------------------------------------+
| 8 | m[i, j] = q                                          |
+---+------------------------------------------------------+
| 9 | return m[i, j]                                       |
+---+------------------------------------------------------+

The MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN procedure, like the bottom-up
MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER procedure on page 378, maintains a table m[1 : n, 1 :
n] of computed values of m[i, j], the minimum number of scalar
multiplications needed to compute the matrix A_(i:j). Each table entry
initially contains the value ∞ to indicate that the entry has yet to be
filled in. Upon calling LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, i, j), if line 1 finds that
m[i, j] < ∞, then the procedure simply returns the previously computed
cost m[i, j] in line 2. Otherwise, the cost is computed as in
RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN, stored in m[i, j], and returned. Thus,
LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, i, j) always returns the value of m[i, j], but it
computes it only upon the first call of LOOKUP-CHAIN with these specific
values of i and j. Figure 14.7 illustrates how MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN
saves time compared with RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN. Subtrees shaded blue
represent values that are looked up rather than recomputed.

Like the bottom-up procedure MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER, the memoized procedure
MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN runs in O(n³) time. To begin with, line 4 of
MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN executes Θ(n²) times, which dominates the running
time outside of the call to LOOKUP-CHAIN in line 5. We can categorize
the calls of LOOKUP-CHAIN into two types:

1.  calls in which m[i, j] = ∞, so that lines 3–9 execute, and
2.  calls in which m[i, j] < ∞, so that LOOKUP-CHAIN simply returns in
    line 2.

There are Θ(n²) calls of the first type, one per table entry. All calls
of the second type are made as recursive calls by calls of the first
type. Whenever a given call of LOOKUP-CHAIN makes recursive calls, it
makes O(n) of them. Therefore, there are O(n³) calls of the second type
in all. Each call of the second type takes O(1) time, and each call of
the first type takes O(n) time plus the time spent in its recursive
calls. The total time, therefore, is O(n³). Memoization thus turns an
Ω(2^(n))-time algorithm into an O(n³)-time algorithm.

We have seen how to solve the matrix-chain multiplication problem by
either a top-down, memoized dynamic-programming algorithm or a bottom-up
dynamic-programming algorithm in O(n³) time. Both the bottom-up and
memoized methods take advantage of the overlapping-subproblems property.
There are only Θ(n²) distinct subproblems in total, and either of these
methods computes the solution to each subproblem only once. Without
memoization, the natural recursive algorithm runs in exponential time,
since solved subproblems are repeatedly solved.

In general practice, if all subproblems must be solved at least once, a
bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm usually outperforms the
corresponding top-down memoized algorithm by a constant factor, because
the bottom-up algorithm has no overhead for recursion and less overhead
for maintaining the table. Moreover, for some problems you can exploit
the regular pattern of table accesses in the dynamic-programming
algorithm to reduce time or space requirements even further. On the
other hand, in certain situations, some of the subproblems in the
subproblem space might not need to be solved at all. In that case, the
memoized solution has the advantage of solving only those subproblems
that are definitely required.

Exercises

14.3-1

Which is a more efficient way to determine the optimal number of
multiplications in a matrix-chain multiplication problem: enumerating
all the ways of parenthesizing the product and computing the number of
multiplications for each, or running RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN? Justify
your answer.

14.3-2

Draw the recursion tree for the MERGE-SORT procedure from Section 2.3.1
on an array of 16 elements. Explain why memoization fails to speed up a
good divide-and-conquer algorithm such as MERGE-SORT.

14.3-3

Consider the antithetical variant of the matrix-chain multiplication
problem where the goal is to parenthesize the sequence of matrices so as
to maximize, rather than minimize, the number of scalar multiplications.
Does this problem exhibit optimal substructure?

14.3-4

As stated, in dynamic programming, you first solve the subproblems and
then choose which of them to use in an optimal solution to the problem.
Professor Capulet claims that she does not always need to solve all the
subproblems in order to find an optimal solution. She suggests that she
can find an optimal solution to the matrix-chain multiplication problem
by always choosing the matrix A_(k) at which to split the subproduct
A_(i)A_(i+1) ⋯ A_(j) (by selecting k to minimize the quantity
p_(i−1) p_(k) p_(j)) before solving the subproblems. Find an instance of
the matrix-chain multiplication problem for which this greedy approach
yields a suboptimal solution.

14.3-5

Suppose that the rod-cutting problem of Section 14.1 also had a limit
l_(i) on the number of pieces of length i allowed to be produced, for i
= 1, 2, …, n. Show that the optimal-substructure property described in
Section 14.1 no longer holds.

14.4    Longest common subsequence

Biological applications often need to compare the DNA of two (or more)
different organisms. A strand of DNA consists of a string of molecules
called bases, where the possible bases are adenine, cytosine, guanine,
and thymine. Representing each of these bases by its initial letter, we
can express a strand of DNA as a string over the 4-element set {A, C, G,
T}. (See Section C.1 for the definition of a string.) For example, the
DNA of one organism may be S₁ = ACCGGTCGAGTGCGCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA, and the
DNA of another organism may be S₂ = GTCGTTCGGAATGCCGTTGCTCTGTAAA. One
reason to compare two strands of DNA is to determine how “similar” the
two strands are, as some measure of how closely related the two
organisms are. We can, and do, define similarity in many different ways.
For example, we can say that two DNA strands are similar if one is a
substring of the other. (Chapter 32 explores algorithms to solve this
problem.) In our example, neither S₁ nor S₂ is a substring of the other.
Alternatively, we could say that two strands are similar if the number
of changes needed to turn one into the other is small. (Problem 14-5
looks at this notion.) Yet another way to measure the similarity of
strands S₁ and S₂ is by finding a third strand S₃ in which the bases in
S₃ appear in each of S₁ and S₂. These bases must appear in the same
order, but not necessarily consecutively. The longer the strand S₃ we
can find, the more similar S₁ and S₂ are. In our example, the longest
strand S₃ is GTCGTCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA.

We formalize this last notion of similarity as the
longest-common-subsequence problem. A subsequence of a given sequence is
just the given sequence with 0 or more elements left out. Formally,
given a sequence X = 〈x₁, x₂, …, x_(m)〉, another sequence Z = 〈z₁,
z₂, …, z_(k)〉 is a subsequence of X if there exists a strictly
increasing sequence 〈i₁, i₂, …, i_(k)〉 of indices of X such that for
all j = 1, 2, …, k, we have [art]. For example, Z = 〈B, C, D, B〉 is a
subsequence of X = 〈A, B, C, B, D, A, B〉 with corresponding index
sequence 〈2, 3, 5, 7〉.

Given two sequences X and Y, we say that a sequence Z is a common
subsequence of X and Y if Z is a subsequence of both X and Y. For
example, if X = 〈A, B, C, B, D, A, B〉 and Y = 〈B, D, C, A, B, A〉,
the sequence 〈B, C, A〉 is a common subsequence of both X and Y. The
sequence 〈B, C, A〉 is not a longest common subsequence (LCS) of X and
Y, however, since it has length 3 and the sequence 〈B, C, B, A〉, which
is also common to both sequences X and Y, has length 4. The sequence
〈B, C, B, A〉 is an LCS of X and Y, as is the sequence 〈B, D, A, B〉,
since X and Y have no common subsequence of length 5 or greater.

In the longest-common-subsequence problem, the input is two sequences X
= 〈x₁, x₂, …, x_(m)〉 and Y = 〈y₁, y₂, …, y_(n)〉, and the goal is to
find a maximum-length common subsequence of X and Y. This section shows
how to efficiently solve the LCS problem using dynamic programming.

Step 1: Characterizing a longest common subsequence

You can solve the LCS problem with a brute-force approach: enumerate all
subsequences of X and check each subsequence to see whether it is also a
subsequence of Y, keeping track of the longest subsequence you find.
Each subsequence of X corresponds to a subset of the indices {1, 2, …,
m} of X. Because X has 2^(m) subsequences, this approach requires
exponential time, making it impractical for long sequences.

The LCS problem has an optimal-substructure property, however, as the
following theorem shows. As we’ll see, the natural classes of
subproblems correspond to pairs of “prefixes” of the two input
sequences. To be precise, given a sequence X = 〈x₁, x₂, …, x_(m)〉, we
define the ith prefix of X, for i = 0, 1, …, m, as X_(i) = 〈x₁, x₂, …,
x_(i)〉. For example, if X = 〈A, B, C, B, D, A, B〉, then X₄ = 〈A, B,
C, B〉 and X₀ is the empty sequence.

Theorem 14.1 (Optimal substructure of an LCS)

Let X = 〈x₁, x₂, …, x_(m)〉 and Y = 〈y₁, y₂, …, y_(n)〉 be sequences,
and let Z = 〈z₁, z₂, …, z_(k)〉 be any LCS of X and Y.

1.  If x_(m) = y_(n), then z_(k) = x_(m) = y_(n) and Z_(k−1) is an LCS
    of X_(m−1) and Y_(n−1).
2.  If x_(m) ≠ y_(n) and z_(k) ≠ x_(m), then Z is an LCS of X_(m−1) and
    Y.
3.  If x_(m) ≠ y_(n) and z_(k) ≠ y_(n), then Z is an LCS of X and
    Y_(n−1).

Proof   (1) If z_(k) ≠ x_(m), then we could append x_(m) = y_(n) to Z to
obtain a common subsequence of X and Y of length k + 1, contradicting
the supposition that Z is a longest common subsequence of X and Y. Thus,
we must have z_(k) = x_(m) = y_(n). Now, the prefix Z_(k−1) is a
length-(k − 1) common subsequence of X_(m−1) and Y_(n−1). We wish to
show that it is an LCS. Suppose for the purpose of contradiction that
there exists a common subsequence W of X_(m−1) and Y_(n−1) with length
greater than k − 1. Then, appending x_(m) = y_(n) to W produces a common
subsequence of X and Y whose length is greater than k, which is a
contradiction.

(2) If z_(k) ≠ x_(m), then Z is a common subsequence of X_(m−1) and Y.
If there were a common subsequence W of X_(m−1) and Y with length
greater than k, then W would also be a common subsequence of X_(m) and
Y, contradicting the assumption that Z is an LCS of X and Y.

(3) The proof is symmetric to (2).

▪

The way that Theorem 14.1 characterizes longest common subsequences says
that an LCS of two sequences contains within it an LCS of prefixes of
the two sequences. Thus, the LCS problem has an optimal-substructure
property. A recursive solution also has the overlapping-subproblems
property, as we’ll see in a moment.

Step 2: A recursive solution

Theorem 14.1 implies that you should examine either one or two
subproblems when finding an LCS of X = 〈x₁, x₂, …, x_(m)〉 and Y =
〈y₁, y₂, …, y_(n)〉. If x_(m) = y_(n), you need to find an LCS of
X_(m−1) and Y_(n−1). Appending x_(m) = y_(n) to this LCS yields an LCS
of X and Y. If x_(m) ≠ y_(n), then you have to solve two subproblems:
finding an LCS of X_(m−1) and Y and finding an LCS of X and Y_(n−1).
Whichever of these two LCSs is longer is an LCS of X and Y. Because
these cases exhaust all possibilities, one of the optimal subproblem
solutions must appear within an LCS of X and Y.

The LCS problem has the overlapping-subproblems property. Here’s how. To
find an LCS of X and Y, you might need to find the LCSs of X and Y_(n−1)
and of X_(m−1) and Y. But each of these subproblems has the
subsubproblem of finding an LCS of X_(m−1) and Y_(n−1). Many other
subproblems share subsubproblems.

As in the matrix-chain multiplication problem, solving the LCS problem
recursively involves establishing a recurrence for the value of an
optimal solution. Let’s define c[i, j] to be the length of an LCS of the
sequences X_(i) and Y_(j). If either i = 0 or j = 0, one of the
sequences has length 0, and so the LCS has length 0. The optimal
substructure of the LCS problem gives the recursive formula

[art]

In this recursive formulation, a condition in the problem restricts
which subproblems to consider. When x_(i) = y_(j), you can and should
consider the subproblem of finding an LCS of X_(i−1) and Y_(j−1).
Otherwise, you instead consider the two subproblems of finding an LCS of
X_(i) and Y_(j−1) and of X_(i−1) and Y_(j). In the previous
dynamic-programming algorithms we have examined—for rod cutting and
matrix-chain multiplication—we didn’t rule out any subproblems due to
conditions in the problem. Finding an LCS is not the only
dynamic-programming algorithm that rules out subproblems based on
conditions in the problem. For example, the edit-distance problem (see
Problem 14-5) has this characteristic.

Step 3: Computing the length of an LCS

Based on equation (14.9), you could write an exponential-time recursive
algorithm to compute the length of an LCS of two sequences. Since the
LCS problem has only Θ(mn) distinct subproblems (computing c[i, j] for 0
≤ i ≤ m and 0 ≤ j ≤ n), dynamic programming can compute the solutions
bottom up.

The procedure LCS-LENGTH on the next page takes two sequences X = 〈x₁,
x₂, …, x_(m)〉 and Y = 〈y₁, y₂, …, y_(n)〉 as inputs, along with their
lengths. It stores the c[i, j] values in a table c[0 : m, 0 : n], and it
computes the entries in row-major order. That is, the procedure fills in
the first row of c from left to right, then the second row, and so on.
The procedure also maintains the table b[1 : m, 1 : n] to help in
constructing an optimal solution. Intuitively, b[i, j] points to the
table entry corresponding to the optimal subproblem solution chosen when
computing c[i, j]. The procedure returns the b and c tables, where c[m,
n] contains the length of an LCS of X and Y. Figure 14.8 shows the
tables produced by LCS-LENGTH on the sequences X = 〈A, B, C, B, D, A,
B〉 and Y = 〈B, D, C, A, B, A〉. The running time of the procedure is
Θ(mn), since each table entry takes Θ(1) time to compute.

LCS-LENGTH(X, Y, m, n)

+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   1         | let b[1 : m, 1 : n] and c[0 : m, 0 : n] be new tables |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   2         | for i = 1 to m            |                           |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   3         | c[i, 0] = 0               |                           |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   4         | for j = 0 to n            |                           |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   5         | c[0, j] = 0               |                           |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   6         | for i = 1 to m            | // compute table entries  |
|             |                           | in row-major order        |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   7         | for j = 1 to n                                        |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|   8         | if x_(i) == y_(j)                                     |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|   9         | c[i, j] = c[i − 1, j − 1] + 1                         |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 10          | b[i, j] = “↖”                                         |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 11          | elseif c[i − 1, j] ≥ c[i, j − 1]                      |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 12          | c[i, j] = c[i − 1, j]                                 |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 13          | b[i, j] = “↑”                                         |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 14          | else c[i, j] = c[i, j − 1]                            |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 15          | b[i, j] = “←”                                         |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 16          | return c and b                                        |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
| PRINT-LCS(b, X, i, j)                   |                           |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   1         | if i == 0 or j == 0                                   |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   2         | return                    | // the LCS has length 0   |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   3         | if b[i, j] == “↖”                                     |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|   4         | PRINT-LCS(b, X, i − 1, j − 1)                         |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   5         | print x_(i)               | // same as y_(j)          |
+-------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   6         | elseif b[i, j] == “↑”                                 |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|   7         | PRINT-LCS(b, X, i − 1, j)                             |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|   8         | else PRINT-LCS(b, X, i, j − 1)                        |
+-------------+-------------------------------------------------------+

Step 4: Constructing an LCS

With the b table returned by LCS-LENGTH, you can quickly construct an
LCS of X = 〈x₁, x₂, …, x_(m)〉 and Y = 〈y₁, y₂, …, y_(n)〉. Begin at
b[m, n] and trace through the table by following the arrows. Each “↖”
encountered in an entry b[i, j] implies that x_(i) = y_(j) is an element
of the LCS that LCS-LENGTH found. This method gives you the elements of
this LCS in reverse order. The recursive procedure PRINT-LCS prints out
an LCS of X and Y in the proper, forward order.

[art]

Figure 14.8 The c and b tables computed by LCS-LENGTH on the sequences X
= 〈A, B, C, B, D, A, B〉 and Y = 〈B, D, C, A, B, A〉. The square in
row i and column j contains the value of c[i, j] and the appropriate
arrow for the value of b[i, j]. The entry 4 in c[7, 6]—the lower
right-hand corner of the table—is the length of an LCS 〈B, C, B, A〉 of
X and Y. For i, j > 0, entry c[i, j] depends only on whether x_(i) =
y_(j) and the values in entries c[i − 1, j], c[i, j − 1], and c[i − 1, j
− 1], which are computed before c[i, j]. To reconstruct the elements of
an LCS, follow the b[i, j] arrows from the lower right-hand corner, as
shown by the sequence shaded blue. Each “↖” on the shaded-blue sequence
corresponds to an entry (highlighted) for which x_(i) = y_(j) is a
member of an LCS.

The initial call is PRINT-LCS(b, X, m, n). For the b table in Figure
14.8, this procedure prints BCBA. The procedure takes O(m + n) time,
since it decrements at least one of i and j in each recursive call.

Improving the code

Once you have developed an algorithm, you will often find that you can
improve on the time or space it uses. Some changes can simplify the code
and improve constant factors but otherwise yield no asymptotic
improvement in performance. Others can yield substantial asymptotic
savings in time and space.

In the LCS algorithm, for example, you can eliminate the b table
altogether. Each c[i, j] entry depends on only three other c table
entries: c[i − 1, j − 1], c[i − 1, j], and c[i, j − 1]. Given the value
of c[i, j], you can determine in O(1) time which of these three values
was used to compute c[i, j], without inspecting table b. Thus, you can
reconstruct an LCS in O(m+n) time using a procedure similar to
PRINT-LCS. (Exercise 14.4-2 asks you to give the pseudocode.) Although
this method saves Θ(mn) space, the auxiliary space requirement for
computing an LCS does not asymptotically decrease, since the c table
takes Θ(mn) space anyway.

You can, however, reduce the asymptotic space requirements for
LCS-LENGTH, since it needs only two rows of table c at a time: the row
being computed and the previous row. (In fact, as Exercise 14.4-4 asks
you to show, you can use only slightly more than the space for one row
of c to compute the length of an LCS.) This improvement works if you
need only the length of an LCS. If you need to reconstruct the elements
of an LCS, the smaller table does not keep enough information to retrace
the algorithm’s steps in O(m + n) time.

Exercises

14.4-1

Determine an LCS of 〈1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1〉 and 〈0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0,
1, 1, 0〉.

14.4-2

Give pseudocode to reconstruct an LCS from the completed c table and the
original sequences X = 〈x₁, x₂, …, x_(m)〉 and Y = 〈y₁, y₂, …, y_(n)〉
in O(m + n) time, without using the b table.

14.4-3

Give a memoized version of LCS-LENGTH that runs in O(mn) time.

14.4-4

Show how to compute the length of an LCS using only 2 · min {m, n}
entries in the c table plus O(1) additional space. Then show how to do
the same thing, but using min {m, n} entries plus O(1) additional space.

14.4-5

Give an O(n²)-time algorithm to find the longest monotonically
increasing subsequence of a sequence of n numbers.

★ 14.4-6

Give an O(n lg n)-time algorithm to find the longest monotonically
increasing subsequence of a sequence of n numbers. (Hint: The last
element of a candidate subsequence of length i is at least as large as
the last element of a candidate subsequence of length i −1. Maintain
candidate subsequences by linking them through the input sequence.)

14.5    Optimal binary search trees

Suppose that you are designing a program to translate text from English
to Latvian. For each occurrence of each English word in the text, you
need to look up its Latvian equivalent. You can perform these lookup
operations by building a binary search tree with n English words as keys
and their Latvian equivalents as satellite data. Because you will search
the tree for each individual word in the text, you want the total time
spent searching to be as low as possible. You can ensure an O(lg n)
search time per occurrence by using a red-black tree or any other
balanced binary search tree. Words appear with different frequencies,
however, and a frequently used word such as the can end up appearing far
from the root while a rarely used word such as naumachia appears near
the root. Such an organization would slow down the translation, since
the number of nodes visited when searching for a key in a binary search
tree equals 1 plus the depth of the node containing the key. You want
words that occur frequently in the text to be placed nearer the root.⁸
Moreover, some words in the text might have no Latvian translation,⁹ and
such words would not appear in the binary search tree at all. How can
you organize a binary search tree so as to minimize the number of nodes
visited in all searches, given that you know how often each word occurs?

What you need is an optimal binary search tree. Formally, given a
sequence K = 〈k₁, k₂, …, k_(n)〉 of n distinct keys such that k₁ < k₂ <
… < k_(n), build a binary search tree containing them. For each key
k_(i), you are given the probability p_(i) that any given search is for
key k_(i). Since some searches may be for values not in K, you also have
n + 1 “dummy” keys d₀, d₁, d₂, …, d_(n) representing those values. In
particular, d₀ represents all values less than k₁, d_(n) represents all
values greater than k_(n), and for i = 1, 2, …, n − 1, the dummy key
d_(i) represents all values between k_(i) and k_(i+1). For each dummy
key d_(i), you have the probability q_(i) that a search corresponds to
d_(i). Figure 14.9 shows two binary search trees for a set of n = 5
keys. Each key k_(i) is an internal node, and each dummy key d_(i) is a
leaf. Since every search is either successful (finding some key k_(i))
or unsuccessful (finding some dummy key d_(i)), we have

[art]

[art]

Figure 14.9 Two binary search trees for a set of n = 5 keys with the
following probabilities:

  ------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  i       0      1      2      3      4      5
  p_(i)          0.15   0.10   0.05   0.10   0.20
  q_(i)   0.05   0.10   0.05   0.05   0.05   0.10
  ------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

(a) A binary search tree with expected search cost 2.80. (b) A binary
search tree with expected search cost 2.75. This tree is optimal.

Knowing the probabilities of searches for each key and each dummy key
allows us to determine the expected cost of a search in a given binary
search tree T. Let us assume that the actual cost of a search equals the
number of nodes examined, which is the depth of the node found by the
search in T, plus 1. Then the expected cost of a search in T is

[art]

where depth_(T) denotes a node’s depth in the tree T. The last equation
follows from equation (14.10). Figure 14.9 shows how to calculate the
expected search cost node by node.

For a given set of probabilities, your goal is to construct a binary
search tree whose expected search cost is smallest. We call such a tree
an optimal binary search tree. Figure 14.9(a) shows one binary search
tree, with expected cost 2.80, for the probabilities given in the figure
caption. Part (b) of the figure displays an optimal binary search tree,
with expected cost 2.75. This example demonstrates that an optimal
binary search tree is not necessarily a tree whose overall height is
smallest. Nor does an optimal binary search tree always have the key
with the greatest probability at the root. Here, key k₅ has the greatest
search probability of any key, yet the root of the optimal binary search
tree shown is k₂. (The lowest expected cost of any binary search tree
with k₅ at the root is 2.85.)

As with matrix-chain multiplication, exhaustive checking of all
possibilities fails to yield an efficient algorithm. You can label the
nodes of any n-node binary tree with the keys k₁, k₂, …, k_(n) to
construct a binary search tree, and then add in the dummy keys as
leaves. In Problem 12-4 on page 329, we saw that the number of binary
trees with n nodes is Ω(4^(n)/n^(3/2)). Thus you would need to examine
an exponential number of binary search trees to perform an exhaustive
search. We’ll see how to solve this problem more efficiently with
dynamic programming.

Step 1: The structure of an optimal binary search tree

To characterize the optimal substructure of optimal binary search trees,
we start with an observation about subtrees. Consider any subtree of a
binary search tree. It must contain keys in a contiguous range k_(i), …,
k_(j), for some 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n. In addition, a subtree that contains keys
k_(i), …, k_(j) must also have as its leaves the dummy keys d_(i−1), …,
d_(j).

Now we can state the optimal substructure: if an optimal binary search
tree T has a subtree T′ containing keys k_(i), …, k_(j), then this
subtree T′ must be optimal as well for the subproblem with keys k_(i),
…, k_(j) and dummy keys d_(i−1), …, d_(j). The usual cut-and-paste
argument applies. If there were a subtree T″ whose expected cost is
lower than that of T′, then cutting T′ out of T and pasting in T″ would
result in a binary search tree of lower expected cost than T, thus
contradicting the optimality of T.

With the optimal substructure in hand, here is how to construct an
optimal solution to the problem from optimal solutions to subproblems.
Given keys k_(i), …, k_(j), one of these keys, say k_(r) (i ≤ r ≤ j), is
the root of an optimal subtree containing these keys. The left subtree
of the root k_(r) contains the keys k_(i), …, k_(r−1) (and dummy keys
d_(i−1), …, d_(r−1)), and the right subtree contains the keys k_(r+1),
…, k_(j) (and dummy keys d_(r), …, d_(j)). As long as you examine all
candidate roots k_(r), where i ≤ r ≤ j, and you determine all optimal
binary search trees containing k_(i), …, k_(r−1) and those containing
k_(r+1), …, k_(j), you are guaranteed to find an optimal binary search
tree.

There is one technical detail worth understanding about “empty”
subtrees. Suppose that in a subtree with keys k_(i), …, k_(j), you
select k_(i) as the root. By the above argument, k_(i)’s left subtree
contains the keys k_(i), …, k_(i−1): no keys at all. Bear in mind,
however, that subtrees also contain dummy keys. We adopt the convention
that a subtree containing keys k_(i), …, k_(i−1) has no actual keys but
does contain the single dummy key d_(i−1). Symmetrically, if you select
k_(j) as the root, then k_(j)’s right subtree contains the keys k_(j+1),
…, k_(j). This right subtree contains no actual keys, but it does
contain the dummy key d_(j).

Step 2: A recursive solution

To define the value of an optimal solution recursively, the subproblem
domain is finding an optimal binary search tree containing the keys
k_(i), …, k_(j), where i ≥ 1, j ≤ n, and j ≥ i − 1. (When j = i − 1,
there is just the dummy key d_(i−1), but no actual keys.) Let e[i, j]
denote the expected cost of searching an optimal binary search tree
containing the keys k_(i), …, k_(j). Your goal is to compute e[1, n],
the expected cost of searching an optimal binary search tree for all the
actual and dummy keys.

The easy case occurs when j = i − 1. Then the subproblem consists of
just the dummy key d_(i−1). The expected search cost is e[i, i − 1] =
q_(i−1).

When j ≥ i, you need to select a root k_(r) from among k_(i), …, k_(j)
and then make an optimal binary search tree with keys k_(i), …, k_(r−1)
as its left subtree and an optimal binary search tree with keys k_(r+1),
…, k_(j) as its right subtree. What happens to the expected search cost
of a subtree when it becomes a subtree of a node? The depth of each node
in the subtree increases by 1. By equation (14.11), the expected search
cost of this subtree increases by the sum of all the probabilities in
the subtree. For a subtree with keys k_(i), …, k_(j), denote this sum of
probabilities as

[art]

Thus, if k_(r) is the root of an optimal subtree containing keys k_(i),
…, k_(j), we have

e[i, j] = p_(r) + (e[i, r − 1] + w(i, r − 1)) + (e[r + 1, j] + w(r + 1,
j)).

Noting that

w(i, j) = w(i, r − 1) + p_(r) + w(r + 1, j),

we rewrite e[i, j] as

[art]

The recursive equation (14.13) assumes that you know which node k_(r) to
use as the root. Of course, you choose the root that gives the lowest
expected search cost, giving the final recursive formulation:

[art]

The e[i, j] values give the expected search costs in optimal binary
search trees. To help keep track of the structure of optimal binary
search trees, define root[i, j], for 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n, to be the index r
for which k_(r) is the root of an optimal binary search tree containing
keys k_(i), …, k_(j). Although we’ll see how to compute the values of
root[i, j], the construction of an optimal binary search tree from these
values is left as Exercise 14.5-1.

Step 3: Computing the expected search cost of an optimal binary search
tree

At this point, you may have noticed some similarities between our
characterizations of optimal binary search trees and matrix-chain
multiplication. For both problem domains, the subproblems consist of
contiguous index subranges. A direct, recursive implementation of
equation (14.14) would be just as inefficient as a direct, recursive
matrix-chain multiplication algorithm. Instead, you can store the e[i,
j] values in a table e[1 : n + 1, 0 : n]. The first index needs to run
to n + 1 rather than n because in order to have a subtree containing
only the dummy key d_(n), you need to compute and store e[n + 1, n]. The
second index needs to start from 0 because in order to have a subtree
containing only the dummy key d₀, you need to compute and store e[1, 0].
Only the entries e[i, j] for which j ≥ i − 1 are filled in. The table
root[i, j] records the root of the subtree containing keys k_(i), …,
k_(j) and uses only the entries for which 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n.

One other table makes the dynamic-programming algorithm a little faster.
Instead of computing the value of w(i, j) from scratch every time you
compute e[i, j], which would take Θ(j − i) additions, store these values
in a table w[1 : n + 1, 0 : n]. For the base case, compute w[i, i − 1] =
q_(i−1) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n + 1. For j ≥ i, compute

[art]

Thus, you can compute the Θ(n²) values of w[i, j] in Θ(1) time each.

The OPTIMAL-BST procedure on the next page takes as inputs the
probabilities p₁, …, p_(n) and q₀, …, q_(n) and the size n, and it
returns the tables e and root. From the description above and the
similarity to the MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER procedure in Section 14.2, you
should find the operation of this procedure to be fairly
straightforward. The for loop of lines 2–4 initializes the values of
e[i, i − 1]and w[i, i − 1]. Then the for loop of lines 5–14 uses the
recurrences (14.14) and (14.15) to compute e[i, j] and w[i, j] for all 1
≤ i ≤ j ≤ n. In the first iteration, when l = 1, the loop computes e[i,
i] and w[i, i] for i = 1, 2, …, n. The second iteration, with l = 2,
computes e[i, i + 1] and w[i, i + 1] for i = 1, 2, …, n − 1, and so on.
The innermost for loop, in lines 10–14, tries each candidate index r to
determine which key k_(r) to use as the root of an optimal binary search
tree containing keys k_(i), …, k_(j). This for loop saves the current
value of the index r in root[i, j] whenever it finds a better key to use
as the root.

OPTIMAL-BST(p, q, n)

+-----+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|   1 | let e[1 : n + 1, 0 : n], w[1 : n + 1, 0 : n],                |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|     | and root[1 : n, 1 : n] be new tables                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   2 | for i = 1 to n + 1 | // base cases                           |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   3 | e[i, i − 1] =      | // equation (14.14)                     |
|     | q_(i−1)            |                                         |
+-----+--------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   4 | w[i, i − 1] = q_(i−1)                                        |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|   5 | for l = 1 to n                                               |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|   6 | for i = 1 to n − l + 1                                       |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|   7 | j = i + l − 1                                                |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|   8 | e[i, j] = ∞                                                  |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------------------+
|   9 | w[i, j] = w[i, j − 1] + p_(j) + q_(j)   | // equation        |
|     |                                         | (14.15)            |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 10  | for r = i to j                          | // try all         |
|     |                                         | possible roots r   |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 11  | t = e[i, r − 1] + e[r + 1, j] + w[i, j] // equation (14.14)  |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 12  | if t < e[i, j]                          | // new minimum?    |
+-----+-----------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 13  | e[i, j] = t                                                  |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14  | root[i, j] = r                                               |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15  | return e and root                                            |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------+

Figure 14.10 shows the tables e[i, j], w[i, j], and root[i, j] computed
by the procedure OPTIMAL-BST on the key distribution shown in Figure
14.9. As in the matrix-chain multiplication example of Figure 14.5, the
tables are rotated to make the diagonals run horizontally. OPTIMAL-BST
computes the rows from bottom to top and from left to right within each
row.

The OPTIMAL-BST procedure takes Θ(n³) time, just like
MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER. Its running time is O(n³), since its for loops are
nested three deep and each loop index takes on at most n values. The
loop indices in OPTIMAL-BST do not have exactly the same bounds as those
in MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER, but they are within at most 1 in all directions.
Thus, like MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER, the OPTIMAL-BST procedure takes Ω(n³)
time.

[art]

Figure 14.10 The tables e[i, j], w[i, j], and root[i, j] computed by
OPTIMAL-BST on the key distribution shown in Figure 14.9. The tables are
rotated so that the diagonals run horizontally.

Exercises

14.5-1

Write pseudocode for the procedure CONSTRUCT-OPTIMAL-BST(root, n) which,
given the table root[1 : n, 1 : n], outputs the structure of an optimal
binary search tree. For the example in Figure 14.10, your procedure
should print out the structure

k₂ is the root

k₁ is the left child of k₂

d₀ is the left child of k₁

d₁ is the right child of k₁

k₅ is the right child of k₂

k₄ is the left child of k₅

k₃ is the left child of k₄

d₂ is the left child of k₃

d₃ is the right child of k₃

d₄ is the right child of k₄

d₅ is the right child of k₅

corresponding to the optimal binary search tree shown in Figure 14.9(b).

14.5-2

Determine the cost and structure of an optimal binary search tree for a
set of n = 7 keys with the following probabilities:

  ------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  i       0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7
  p_(i)          0.04   0.06   0.08   0.02   0.10   0.12   0.14
  q_(i)   0.06   0.06   0.06   0.06   0.05   0.05   0.05   0.05
  ------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

14.5-3

Suppose that instead of maintaining the table w[i, j], you computed the
value of w(i, j) directly from equation (14.12) in line 9 of OPTIMAL-BST
and used this computed value in line 11. How would this change affect
the asymptotic running time of OPTIMAL-BST?

★ 14.5-4

Knuth [264] has shown that there are always roots of optimal subtrees
such that root[i, j − 1] ≤ root[i, j] ≤ root[i + 1, j] for all 1 ≤ i < j
≤ n. Use this fact to modify the OPTIMAL-BST procedure to run in Θ(n²)
time.

Problems

14-1     Longest simple path in a directed acyclic graph

You are given a directed acyclic graph G = (V, E) with real-valued edge
weights and two distinguished vertices s and t. The weight of a path is
the sum of the weights of the edges in the path. Describe a
dynamic-programming approach for finding a longest weighted simple path
from s to t. What is the running time of your algorithm?

14-2     Longest palindrome subsequence

A palindrome is a nonempty string over some alphabet that reads the same
forward and backward. Examples of palindromes are all strings of length
1, civic, racecar, and aibohphobia (fear of palindromes).

Give an efficient algorithm to find the longest palindrome that is a
subsequence of a given input string. For example, given the input
character, your algorithm should return carac. What is the running time
of your algorithm?

14-3     Bitonic euclidean traveling-salesperson problem

In the euclidean traveling-salesperson problem, you are given a set of n
points in the plane, and your goal is to find the shortest closed tour
that connects all n points.

[art]

Figure 14.11 Seven points in the plane, shown on a unit grid. (a) The
shortest closed tour, with length approximately 24.89. This tour is not
bitonic. (b) The shortest bitonic tour for the same set of points. Its
length is approximately 25.58.

Figure 14.11(a) shows the solution to a 7-point problem. The general
problem is NP-hard, and its solution is therefore believed to require
more than polynomial time (see Chapter 34).

J. L. Bentley has suggested simplifying the problem by considering only
bitonic tours, that is, tours that start at the leftmost point, go
strictly rightward to the rightmost point, and then go strictly leftward
back to the starting point. Figure 14.11(b) shows the shortest bitonic
tour of the same 7 points. In this case, a polynomial-time algorithm is
possible.

Describe an O(n²)-time algorithm for determining an optimal bitonic
tour. You may assume that no two points have the same x-coordinate and
that all operations on real numbers take unit time. (Hint: Scan left to
right, maintaining optimal possibilities for the two parts of the tour.)

14-4     Printing neatly

Consider the problem of neatly printing a paragraph with a monospaced
font (all characters having the same width). The input text is a
sequence of n words of lengths l₁, l₂, …, l_(n), measured in characters,
which are to be printed neatly on a number of lines that hold a maximum
of M characters each. No word exceeds the line length, so that l_(i) ≤ M
for i = 1, 2, …, n. The criterion of “neatness” is as follows. If a
given line contains words i through j, where i ≤ j, and exactly one
space appears between words, then the number of extra space characters
at the end of the line is [art], which must be nonnegative so that the
words fit on the line. The goal is to minimize the sum, over all lines
except the last, of the cubes of the numbers of extra space characters
at the ends of lines. Give a dynamic-programming algorithm to print a
paragraph of n words neatly. Analyze the running time and space
requirements of your algorithm.

14-5     Edit distance

In order to transform a source string of text x[1 : m] to a target
string y[1 : n], you can perform various transformation operations. The
goal is, given x and y, to produce a series of transformations that
changes x to y. An array z—assumed to be large enough to hold all the
characters it needs—holds the intermediate results. Initially, z is
empty, and at termination, you should have z[j] = y[j] for j = 1, 2, …,
n. The procedure for solving this problem maintains current indices i
into x and j into z, and the operations are allowed to alter z and these
indices. Initially, i = j = 1. Every character in x must be examined
during the transformation, which means that at the end of the sequence
of transformation operations, i = m + 1.

You may choose from among six transformation operations, each of which
has a constant cost that depends on the operation:

Copy a character from x to z by setting z[j] = x[i] and then
incrementing both i and j. This operation examines x[i] and has cost
Q_(C).

Replace a character from x by another character c, by setting z[j] = c,
and then incrementing both i and j. This operation examines x[i] and has
cost Q_(R).

Delete a character from x by incrementing i but leaving j alone. This
operation examines x[i] and has cost Q_(D).

Insert the character c into z by setting z[j] = c and then incrementing
j, but leaving i alone. This operation examines no characters of x and
has cost Q_(I).

Twiddle (i.e., exchange) the next two characters by copying them from x
to z but in the opposite order: setting z[j] = x[i + 1] and z[j + 1] =
x[i], and then setting i = i + 2 and j = j + 2. This operation examines
x[i] and x[i + 1] and has cost Q_(T).

Kill the remainder of x by setting i = m + 1. This operation examines
all characters in x that have not yet been examined. This operation, if
performed, must be the final operation. It has cost Q_(K).

Figure 14.12 gives one way to transform the source string algorithm to
the target string altruistic. Several other sequences of transformation
operations can transform algorithm to altruistic.

Assume that Q_(C) < Q_(D) + Q_(I) and Q_(R) < Q_(D) + Q_(I), since
otherwise, the copy and replace operations would not be used. The cost
of a given sequence of transformation operations is the sum of the costs
of the individual operations in the sequence. For the sequence above,
the cost of transforming algorithm to altruistic is 3Q_(C) + Q_(R) +
Q_(D) + 4Q_(I) + Q_(T) + Q_(K).

a. Given two sequences x[1 : m] and y[1 : n] and the costs of the
transformation operations, the edit distance from x to y is the cost of
the least expensive operation sequence that transforms x to y. Describe
a dynamic-programming algorithm that finds the edit distance from x[1 :
m] to y[1 : n] and prints an optimal operation sequence. Analyze the
running time and space requirements of your algorithm.

[art]

Figure 14.12 A sequence of operations that transforms the source
algorithm to the target string altruistic. The underlined characters are
x[i] and z[j] after the operation.

The edit-distance problem generalizes the problem of aligning two DNA
sequences (see, for example, Setubal and Meidanis [405, Section 3.2]).
There are several methods for measuring the similarity of two DNA
sequences by aligning them. One such method to align two sequences x and
y consists of inserting spaces at arbitrary locations in the two
sequences (including at either end) so that the resulting sequences x′
and y′ have the same length but do not have a space in the same position
(i.e., for no position j are both x′[j] and y′[j] a space). Then we
assign a “score” to each position. Position j receives a score as
follows:

- +1 if x′[j] = y′[j] and neither is a space,
- −1 if x′[j] ≠ y′[j] and neither is a space,
- −2 if either x′[j] or y′[j] is a space.

The score for the alignment is the sum of the scores of the individual
positions. For example, given the sequences x = GATCGGCAT and y =
CAATGTGAATC, one alignment is

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| G ATCG GCAT                                                           |
|                                                                       |
| CAAT GTGAATC                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| -*++*+*+-++*                                                          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

A + under a position indicates a score of +1 for that position, a -
indicates a score of −1, and a * indicates a score of −2, so that this
alignment has a total score of 6 · 1 − 2 · 1 − 4 · 2 = −4.

b. Explain how to cast the problem of finding an optimal alignment as an
edit-distance problem using a subset of the transformation operations
copy, replace, delete, insert, twiddle, and kill.

14-6     Planning a company party

Professor Blutarsky is consulting for the president of a corporation
that is planning a company party. The company has a hierarchical
structure, that is, the supervisor relation forms a tree rooted at the
president. The human resources department has ranked each employee with
a conviviality rating, which is a real number. In order to make the
party fun for all attendees, the president does not want both an
employee and his or her immediate supervisor to attend.

Professor Blutarsky is given the tree that describes the structure of
the corporation, using the left-child, right-sibling representation
described in Section 10.3. Each node of the tree holds, in addition to
the pointers, the name of an employee and that employee’s conviviality
ranking. Describe an algorithm to make up a guest list that maximizes
the sum of the conviviality ratings of the guests. Analyze the running
time of your algorithm.

14-7     Viterbi algorithm

Dynamic programming on a directed graph can play a part in speech
recognition. A directed graph G = (V, E) with labeled edges forms a
formal model of a person speaking a restricted language. Each edge (u,
v) ∈ E is labeled with a sound σ(u, v) from a finite set Σ of sounds.
Each directed path in the graph starting from a distinguished vertex v₀
∈ V corresponds to a possible sequence of sounds produced by the model,
with the label of a path being the concatenation of the labels of the
edges on that path.

a. Describe an efficient algorithm that, given an edge-labeled directed
graph G with distinguished vertex v₀ and a sequence s = 〈σ₁, σ₂, …,
σ_(k)〉 of sounds from Σ, returns a path in G that begins at v₀ and has
s as its label, if any such path exists. Otherwise, the algorithm should
return NO-SUCH-PATH. Analyze the running time of your algorithm. (Hint:
You may find concepts from Chapter 20 useful.)

Now suppose that every edge (u, v) ∈ E has an associated nonnegative
probability p(u, v) of being traversed, so that the corresponding sound
is produced. The sum of the probabilities of the edges leaving any
vertex equals 1. The probability of a path is defined to be the product
of the probabilities of its edges. Think of the probability of a path
beginning at vertex v₀ as the probability that a “random walk” beginning
at v₀ follows the specified path, where the edge leaving a vertex u is
taken randomly, according to the probabilities of the available edges
leaving u.

b. Extend your answer to part (a) so that if a path is returned, it is a
most probable path starting at vertex v₀ and having label s. Analyze the
running time of your algorithm.

14-8     Image compression by seam carving

Suppose that you are given a color picture consisting of an m×n array
A[1 : m, 1 : n] of pixels, where each pixel specifies a triple of red,
green, and blue (RGB) intensities. You want to compress this picture
slightly, by removing one pixel from each of the m rows, so that the
whole picture becomes one pixel narrower. To avoid incongruous visual
effects, however, the pixels removed in two adjacent rows must lie in
either the same column or adjacent columns. In this way, the pixels
removed form a “seam” from the top row to the bottom row, where
successive pixels in the seam are adjacent vertically or diagonally.

a. Show that the number of such possible seams grows at least
exponentially in m, assuming that n > 1.

b. Suppose now that along with each pixel A[i, j], you are given a
real-valued disruption measure d[i, j], indicating how disruptive it
would be to remove pixel A[i, j]. Intuitively, the lower a pixel’s
disruption measure, the more similar the pixel is to its neighbors.
Define the disruption measure of a seam as the sum of the disruption
measures of its pixels.

Give an algorithm to find a seam with the lowest disruption measure. How
efficient is your algorithm?

14-9     Breaking a string

A certain string-processing programming language allows you to break a
string into two pieces. Because this operation copies the string, it
costs n time units to break a string of n characters into two pieces.
Suppose that you want to break a string into many pieces. The order in
which the breaks occur can affect the total amount of time used. For
example, suppose that you want to break a 20-character string after
characters 2, 8, and 10 (numbering the characters in ascending order
from the left-hand end, starting from 1). If you program the breaks to
occur in left-to-right order, then the first break costs 20 time units,
the second break costs 18 time units (breaking the string from
characters 3 to 20 at character 8), and the third break costs 12 time
units, totaling 50 time units. If you program the breaks to occur in
right-to-left order, however, then the first break costs 20 time units,
the second break costs 10 time units, and the third break costs 8 time
units, totaling 38 time units. In yet another order, you could break
first at 8 (costing 20), then break the left piece at 2 (costing another
8), and finally the right piece at 10 (costing 12), for a total cost of
40.

Design an algorithm that, given the numbers of characters after which to
break, determines a least-cost way to sequence those breaks. More
formally, given an array L[1 : m] containing the break points for a
string of n characters, compute the lowest cost for a sequence of
breaks, along with a sequence of breaks that achieves this cost.

14-10     Planning an investment strategy

Your knowledge of algorithms helps you obtain an exciting job with a hot
startup, along with a $10,000 signing bonus. You decide to invest this
money with the goal of maximizing your return at the end of 10 years.
You decide to use your investment manager, G. I. Luvcache, to manage
your signing bonus. The company that Luvcache works with requires you to
observe the following rules. It offers n different investments, numbered
1 through n. In each year j, investment i provides a return rate of
r_(ij). In other words, if you invest d dollars in investment i in year
j, then at the end of year j, you have dr_(ij) dollars. The return rates
are guaranteed, that is, you are given all the return rates for the next
10 years for each investment. You make investment decisions only once
per year. At the end of each year, you can leave the money made in the
previous year in the same investments, or you can shift money to other
investments, by either shifting money between existing investments or
moving money to a new investment. If you do not move your money between
two consecutive years, you pay a fee of f₁ dollars, whereas if you
switch your money, you pay a fee of f₂ dollars, where f₂ > f₁. You pay
the fee once per year at the end of the year, and it is the same amount,
f₂, whether you move money in and out of only one investment, or in and
out of many investments.

a. The problem, as stated, allows you to invest your money in multiple
investments in each year. Prove that there exists an optimal investment
strategy that, in each year, puts all the money into a single
investment. (Recall that an optimal investment strategy maximizes the
amount of money after 10 years and is not concerned with any other
objectives, such as minimizing risk.)

b. Prove that the problem of planning your optimal investment strategy
exhibits optimal substructure.

c. Design an algorithm that plans your optimal investment strategy. What
is the running time of your algorithm?

d. Suppose that Luvcache’s company imposes the additional restriction
that, at any point, you can have no more than $15,000 in any one
investment. Show that the problem of maximizing your income at the end
of 10 years no longer exhibits optimal substructure.

14-11     Inventory planning

The Rinky Dink Company makes machines that resurface ice rinks. The
demand for such products varies from month to month, and so the company
needs to develop a strategy to plan its manufacturing given the
fluctuating, but predictable, demand. The company wishes to design a
plan for the next n months. For each month i, the company knows the
demand d_(i), that is, the number of machines that it will sell. Let
[art] be the total demand over the next n months. The company keeps a
full-time staff who provide labor to manufacture up to m machines per
month. If the company needs to make more than m machines in a given
month, it can hire additional, part-time labor, at a cost that works out
to c dollars per machine. Furthermore, if the company is holding any
unsold machines at the end of a month, it must pay inventory costs. The
company can hold up to D machines, with the cost for holding j machines
given as a function h(j) for j = 1, 2, …, D that monotonically increases
with j.

Give an algorithm that calculates a plan for the company that minimizes
its costs while fulfilling all the demand. The running time should be
polynomial in n and D.

14-12     Signing free-agent baseball players

Suppose that you are the general manager for a major-league baseball
team. During the off-season, you need to sign some free-agent players
for your team. The team owner has given you a budget of $X to spend on
free agents. You are allowed to spend less than $X, but the owner will
fire you if you spend any more than $X.

You are considering N different positions, and for each position, P
free-agent players who play that position are available.¹⁰ Because you
do not want to overload your roster with too many players at any
position, for each position you may sign at most one free agent who
plays that position. (If you do not sign any players at a particular
position, then you plan to stick with the players you already have at
that position.)

To determine how valuable a player is going to be, you decide to use a
sabermetric statistic¹¹ known as “WAR,” or “wins above replacement.” A
player with a higher WAR is more valuable than a player with a lower
WAR. It is not necessarily more expensive to sign a player with a higher
WAR than a player with a lower WAR, because factors other than a
player’s value determine how much it costs to sign them.

For each available free-agent player p, you have three pieces of
information:

- the player’s position,
- p.cost, the amount of money it costs to sign the player, and
- p.war, the player’s WAR.

Devise an algorithm that maximizes the total WAR of the players you sign
while spending no more than $X. You may assume that each player signs
for a multiple of $100,000. Your algorithm should output the total WAR
of the players you sign, the total amount of money you spend, and a list
of which players you sign. Analyze the running time and space
requirement of your algorithm.

Chapter notes

Bellman [44] began the systematic study of dynamic programming in 1955,
publishing a book about it in 1957. The word “programming,” both here
and in linear programming, refers to using a tabular solution method.
Although optimization techniques incorporating elements of dynamic
programming were known earlier, Bellman provided the area with a solid
mathematical basis.

Galil and Park [172] classify dynamic-programming algorithms according
to the size of the table and the number of other table entries each
entry depends on. They call a dynamic-programming algorithm tD/eD if its
table size is O(n^(t)) and each entry depends on O(n^(e)) other entries.
For example, the matrix-chain multiplication algorithm in Section 14.2
is 2D/1D, and the longest-common-subsequence algorithm in Section 14.4
is 2D/0D.

The MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER algorithm on page 378 is by Muraoka and Kuck
[339]. Hu and Shing [230, 231] give an O(n lg n)-time algorithm for the
matrix-chain multiplication problem.

The O(mn)-time algorithm for the longest-common-subsequence problem
appears to be a folk algorithm. Knuth [95] posed the question of whether
subquadratic algorithms for the LCS problem exist. Masek and Paterson
[316] answered this question in the affirmative by giving an algorithm
that runs in O(mn/lg n) time, where n ≤ m and the sequences are drawn
from a set of bounded size. For the special case in which no element
appears more than once in an input sequence, Szymanski [425] shows how
to solve the problem in O((n + m) lg(n + m)) time. Many of these results
extend to the problem of computing string edit distances (Problem 14-5).

An early paper on variable-length binary encodings by Gilbert and Moore
[181], which had applications to constructing optimal binary search
trees for the case in which all probabilities p_(i) are 0, contains an
O(n³)-time algorithm. Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5] present the
algorithm from Section 14.5. Splay trees [418], which modify the tree in
response to the search queries, come within a constant factor of the
optimal bounds without being initialized with the frequencies. Exercise
14.5-4 is due to Knuth [264]. Hu and Tucker [232] devised an algorithm
for the case in which all probabilities p_(i) are 0 that uses O(n²) time
and O(n) space. Subsequently, Knuth [261] reduced the time to O(n lg n).

Problem 14-8 is due to Avidan and Shamir [30], who have posted on the
web a wonderful video illustrating this image-compression technique.

¹ If pieces are required to be cut in order of monotonically increasing
size, there are fewer ways to consider. For n = 4, only 5 such ways are
possible: parts (a), (b), (c), (e), and (h) in Figure 14.2. The number
of ways is called the partition function, which is approximately equal
to [art]. This quantity is less than 2^(n−1), but still much greater
than any polynomial in n. We won’t pursue this line of inquiry further,
however.

² The technical term “memoization” is not a misspelling of
“memorization.” The word “memoization” comes from “memo,” since the
technique consists of recording a value to be looked up later.

³ None of the three methods from Sections 4.1 and Section 4.2 can be
used directly, because they apply only to square matrices.

⁴ The [art] term counts all pairs in which i < j. Because i and j may be
equal, we need to add in the n term.

⁵ We use the term “unweighted” to distinguish this problem from that of
finding shortest paths with weighted edges, which we shall see in
Chapters 22 and 23. You can use the breadth-first search technique of
Chapter 20 to solve the unweighted problem.

⁶ It may seem strange that dynamic programming relies on subproblems
being both independent and overlapping. Although these requirements may
sound contradictory, they describe two different notions, rather than
two points on the same axis. Two subproblems of the same problem are
independent if they do not share resources. Two subproblems are
overlapping if they are really the same subproblem that occurs as a
subproblem of different problems.

⁷ This approach presupposes that you know the set of all possible
subproblem parameters and that you have established the relationship
between table positions and subproblems. Another, more general, approach
is to memoize by using hashing with the subproblem parameters as keys.

⁸ If the subject of the text is ancient Rome, you might want naumachia
to appear near the root.

⁹ Yes, naumachia has a Latvian counterpart: nomačija.

¹⁰ Although there are nine positions on a baseball team, N is not
necessarily equal to 9 because some general managers have particular
ways of thinking about positions. For example, a general manager might
consider right-handed pitchers and left-handed pitchers to be separate
“positions,” as well as starting pitchers, long relief pitchers (relief
pitchers who can pitch several innings), and short relief pitchers
(relief pitchers who normally pitch at most only one inning).

¹¹ Sabermetrics is the application of statistical analysis to baseball
records. It provides several ways to compare the relative values of
individual players.

15        Greedy Algorithms

Algorithms for optimization problems typically go through a sequence of
steps, with a set of choices at each step. For many optimization
problems, using dynamic programming to determine the best choices is
overkill, and simpler, more efficient algorithms will do. A greedy
algorithm always makes the choice that looks best at the moment. That
is, it makes a locally optimal choice in the hope that this choice leads
to a globally optimal solution. This chapter explores optimization
problems for which greedy algorithms provide optimal solutions. Before
reading this chapter, you should read about dynamic programming in
Chapter 14, particularly Section 14.3.

Greedy algorithms do not always yield optimal solutions, but for many
problems they do. We first examine, in Section 15.1, a simple but
nontrivial problem, the activity-selection problem, for which a greedy
algorithm efficiently computes an optimal solution. We’ll arrive at the
greedy algorithm by first considering a dynamic-programming approach and
then showing that an optimal solution can result from always making
greedy choices. Section 15.2 reviews the basic elements of the greedy
approach, giving a direct approach for proving greedy algorithms
correct. Section 15.3 presents an important application of greedy
techniques: designing data-compression (Huffman) codes. Finally, Section
15.4 shows that in order to decide which blocks to replace when a miss
occurs in a cache, the “furthest-in-future” strategy is optimal if the
sequence of block accesses is known in advance.

The greedy method is quite powerful and works well for a wide range of
problems. Later chapters will present many algorithms that you can view
as applications of the greedy method, including minimum-spanning-tree
algorithms (Chapter 21), Dijkstra’s algorithm for shortest paths from a
single source (Section 22.3), and a greedy set-covering heuristic
(Section 35.3). Minimum-spanning-tree algorithms furnish a classic
example of the greedy method. Although you can read this chapter and
Chapter 21 independently of each other, you might find it useful to read
them together.

15.1    An activity-selection problem

Our first example is the problem of scheduling several competing
activities that require exclusive use of a common resource, with a goal
of selecting a maximum-size set of mutually compatible activities.
Imagine that you are in charge of scheduling a conference room. You are
presented with a set S = {a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)} of n proposed activities
that wish to reserve the conference room, and the room can serve only
one activity at a time. Each activity a_(i) has a start time s_(i) and a
finish time f_(i), where 0 ≤ s_(i) < f_(i) < ∞. If selected, activity
a_(i) takes place during the half-open time interval [s_(i), f_(i)).
Activities a_(i) and a_(j) are compatible if the intervals [s_(i),
f_(i)) and [s_(j), f_(j)) do not overlap. That is, a_(i) and a_(j) are
compatible if s_(i) ≥ f_(j) or s_(j) ≥ f_(i). (Assume that if your staff
needs time to change over the room from one activity to the next, the
changeover time is built into the intervals.) In the activity-selection
problem, your goal is to select a maximum-size subset of mutually
compatible activities. Assume that the activities are sorted in
monotonically increasing order of finish time:

[art]

(We’ll see later the advantage that this assumption provides.) For
example, consider the set of activities in Figure 15.1. The subset {a₃,
a₉, a₁₁} consists of mutually compatible activities. It is not a maximum
subset, however, since the subset {a₁, a₄, a₈, a₁₁} is larger. In fact,
{a₁, a₄, a₈, a₁₁} is a largest subset of mutually compatible activities,
and another largest subset is {a₂, a₄, a₉, a₁₁}.

We’ll see how to solve this problem, proceeding in several steps. First
we’ll explore a dynamic-programming solution, in which you consider
several choices when determining which subproblems to use in an optimal
solution. We’ll then observe that you need to consider only one
choice—the greedy choice—and that when you make the greedy choice, only
one subproblem remains. Based on these observations, we’ll develop a
recursive greedy algorithm to solve the activity-selection problem.
Finally, we’ll complete the process of developing a greedy solution by
converting the recursive algorithm to an iterative one. Although the
steps we go through in this section are slightly more involved than is
typical when developing a greedy algorithm, they illustrate the
relationship between greedy algorithms and dynamic programming.

[art]

Figure 15.1 A set {a₁, a₂, … , a₁₁} of activities. Activity a_(i) has
start time s_(i) and finish time f_(i).

The optimal substructure of the activity-selection problem

Let’s verify that the activity-selection problem exhibits optimal
substructure. Denote by S_(ij) the set of activities that start after
activity a_(i) finishes and that finish before activity a_(j) starts.
Suppose that you want to find a maximum set of mutually compatible
activities in S_(ij), and suppose further that such a maximum set is
A_(ij), which includes some activity a_(k). By including a_(k) in an
optimal solution, you are left with two subproblems: finding mutually
compatible activities in the set S_(ik) (activities that start after
activity a_(i) finishes and that finish before activity a_(k) starts)
and finding mutually compatible activities in the set S_(kj) (activities
that start after activity a_(k) finishes and that finish before activity
a_(j) starts). Let A_(ik) = A_(ij) ∩ S_(ik) and A_(kj) = A_(ij) ∩
S_(kj), so that A_(ik) contains the activities in A_(ij) that finish
before a_(k) starts and A_(kj) contains the activities in A_(ij) that
start after a_(k) finishes. Thus, we have A_(ij) = A_(ik) ∪ {a_(k)} ∪
A_(kj), and so the maximum-size set A_(ij) of mutually compatible
activities in S_(ij) consists of |A_(ij) | = |A_(ik)| + |A_(kj) | + 1
activities.

The usual cut-and-paste argument shows that an optimal solution A_(ij)
must also include optimal solutions to the two subproblems for S_(ik)
and S_(kj). If you could find a set [art] of mutually compatible
activities in S_(kj) where [art], then you could use [art], rather than
A_(kj), in a solution to the subproblem for S_(ij). You would have
constructed a set of [art] mutually compatible activities, which
contradicts the assumption that A_(ij) is an optimal solution. A
symmetric argument applies to the activities in S_(ik).

This way of characterizing optimal substructure suggests that you can
solve the activity-selection problem by dynamic programming. Let’s
denote the size of an optimal solution for the set S_(ij) by c[i, j].
Then, the dynamic-programming approach gives the recurrence

c[i, j] = c[i, k] + c[k, j] + 1.

Of course, if you do not know that an optimal solution for the set
S_(ij) includes activity a_(k), you must examine all activities in
S_(ij) to find which one to choose, so that

[art]

You can then develop a recursive algorithm and memoize it, or you can
work bottom-up and fill in table entries as you go along. But you would
be overlooking another important characteristic of the
activity-selection problem that you can use to great advantage.

Making the greedy choice

What if you could choose an activity to add to an optimal solution
without having to first solve all the subproblems? That could save you
from having to consider all the choices inherent in recurrence (15.2).
In fact, for the activity-selection problem, you need to consider only
one choice: the greedy choice.

What is the greedy choice for the activity-selection problem? Intuition
suggests that you should choose an activity that leaves the resource
available for as many other activities as possible. Of the activities
you end up choosing, one of them must be the first one to finish.
Intuition says, therefore, choose the activity in S with the earliest
finish time, since that leaves the resource available for as many of the
activities that follow it as possible. (If more than one activity in S
has the earliest finish time, then choose any such activity.) In other
words, since the activities are sorted in monotonically increasing order
by finish time, the greedy choice is activity a₁. Choosing the first
activity to finish is not the only way to think of making a greedy
choice for this problem. Exercise 15.1-3 asks you to explore other
possibilities.

Once you make the greedy choice, you have only one remaining subproblem
to solve: finding activities that start after a₁ finishes. Why don’t you
have to consider activities that finish before a₁ starts? Because s₁ <
f₁, and because f₁ is the earliest finish time of any activity, no
activity can have a finish time less than or equal to s₁. Thus, all
activities that are compatible with activity a₁ must start after a₁
finishes.

Furthermore, we have already established that the activity-selection
problem exhibits optimal substructure. Let S_(k) = {a_(i) ∈ S : s_(i) ≥
f_(k)} be the set of activities that start after activity a_(k)
finishes. If you make the greedy choice of activity a₁, then S₁ remains
as the only subproblem to solve.¹ Optimal substructure says that if a₁
belongs to an optimal solution, then an optimal solution to the original
problem consists of activity a₁ and all the activities in an optimal
solution to the subproblem S₁.

One big question remains: Is this intuition correct? Is the greedy
choice—in which you choose the first activity to finish—always part of
some optimal solution? The following theorem shows that it is.

Theorem 15.1

Consider any nonempty subproblem S_(k), and let a_(m) be an activity in
S_(k) with the earliest finish time. Then a_(m) is included in some
maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities of S_(k).

Proof   Let A_(k) be a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible
activities in S_(k), and let a_(j) be the activity in A_(k) with the
earliest finish time. If a_(j) = a_(m), we are done, since we have shown
that a_(m) belongs to some maximum-size subset of mutually compatible
activities of S_(k). If a_(j) ≠ a_(m), let the set [art] be A_(k) but
substituting a_(m) for a_(j). The activities in [art] are compatible,
which follows because the activities in A_(k) are compatible, a_(j) is
the first activity in A_(k) to finish, and f_(m) ≤ f_(j). Since [art],
we conclude that [art] is a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible
activities of S_(k), and it includes a_(m).

▪

Although you might be able to solve the activity-selection problem with
dynamic programming, Theorem 15.1 says that you don’t need to. Instead,
you can repeatedly choose the activity that finishes first, keep only
the activities compatible with this activity, and repeat until no
activities remain. Moreover, because you always choose the activity with
the earliest finish time, the finish times of the activities that you
choose must strictly increase. You can consider each activity just once
overall, in monotonically increasing order of finish times.

An algorithm to solve the activity-selection problem does not need to
work bottom-up, like a table-based dynamic-programming algorithm.
Instead, it can work top-down, choosing an activity to put into the
optimal solution that it constructs and then solving the subproblem of
choosing activities from those that are compatible with those already
chosen. Greedy algorithms typically have this top-down design: make a
choice and then solve a subproblem, rather than the bottom-up technique
of solving subproblems before making a choice.

A recursive greedy algorithm

Now that you know you can bypass the dynamic-programming approach and
instead use a top-down, greedy algorithm, let’s see a straightforward,
recursive procedure to solve the activity-selection problem. The
procedure RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR on the following page takes the
start and finish times of the activities, represented as arrays s and
f,² the index k that defines the subproblem S_(k) it is to solve, and
the size n of the original problem. It returns a maximum-size set of
mutually compatible activities in S_(k). The procedure assumes that the
n input activities are already ordered by monotonically increasing
finish time, according to equation (15.1). If not, you can first sort
them into this order in O(n lg n) time, breaking ties arbitrarily. In
order to start, add the fictitious activity a₀ with f₀ = 0, so that
subproblem S₀ is the entire set of activities S. The initial call, which
solves the entire problem, is RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, 0, n).

RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, k, n)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | m = k + 1                                                       |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | while m ≤ n and s[m] < f [k]   | // find the first activity in  |
|   |                                | S_(k) to finish                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | m = m + 1                                                       |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4 | if m ≤ n                                                        |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5 | return {a_(m)} ∪ RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, m, n)       |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6 | else return ∅                                                   |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

Figure 15.2 shows how the algorithm operates on the activities in Figure
15.1. In a given recursive call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, k,
n), the while loop of lines 2–3 looks for the first activity in S_(k) to
finish. The loop examines a_(k+1), a_(k+2), … , a_(n), until it finds
the first activity a_(m) that is compatible with a_(k), which means that
s_(m) ≥ f_(k). If the loop terminates because it finds such an activity,
line 5 returns the union of {a_(m)} and the maximum-size subset of S_(m)
returned by the recursive call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, m, n).
Alternatively, the loop may terminate because m > n, in which case the
procedure has examined all activities in S_(k) without finding one that
is compatible with a_(k). In this case, S_(k) = ∅, and so line 6 returns
∅.

Assuming that the activities have already been sorted by finish times,
the running time of the call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, 0, n) is
Θ(n). To see why, observe that over all recursive calls, each activity
is examined exactly once in the while loop test of line 2. In
particular, activity a_(i) is examined in the last call made in which k
< i.

An iterative greedy algorithm

The recursive procedure can be converted to an iterative one because the
procedure RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR is almost “tail recursive” (see
Problem 7-5): it ends with a recursive call to itself followed by a
union operation. It is usually a straightforward task to transform a
tail-recursive procedure to an iterative form. In fact, some compilers
for certain programming languages perform this task automatically.

[art]

Figure 15.2 The operation of RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR on the 11
activities from Figure 15.1. Activities considered in each recursive
call appear between horizontal lines. The fictitious activity a₀
finishes at time 0, and the initial call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s,
f, 0, 11), selects activity a₁. In each recursive call, the activities
that have already been selected are blue, and the activity shown in tan
is being considered. If the starting time of an activity occurs before
the finish time of the most recently added activity (the arrow between
them points left), it is rejected. Otherwise (the arrow points directly
up or to the right), it is selected. The last recursive call,
RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, 11, 11), returns ∅. The resulting set
of selected activities is {a₁, a₄, a₈, a₁₁}.

The procedure GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR is an iterative version of the
procedure RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR. It, too, assumes that the input
activities are ordered by monotonically increasing finish time. It
collects selected activities into a set A and returns this set when it
is done.

GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, n)

+---+-----------------+----------------------------+
| 1 | A = {a₁}                                     |
+---+----------------------------------------------+
| 2 | k = 1                                        |
+---+----------------------------------------------+
| 3 | for m = 2 to n                               |
+---+-----------------+----------------------------+
| 4 | if s[m] ≥ f [k] | // is a_(m) in S_(k)?      |
+---+-----------------+----------------------------+
| 5 | A = A ∪ {a_(m)} | // yes, so choose it       |
+---+-----------------+----------------------------+
| 6 | k = m           | // and continue from there |
+---+-----------------+----------------------------+
| 7 | return A                                     |
+---+----------------------------------------------+

The procedure works as follows. The variable k indexes the most recent
addition to A, corresponding to the activity a_(k) in the recursive
version. Since the procedure considers the activities in order of
monotonically increasing finish time, f_(k) is always the maximum finish
time of any activity in A. That is,

[art]

Lines 1–2 select activity a₁, initialize A to contain just this
activity, and initialize k to index this activity. The for loop of lines
3–6 finds the earliest activity in S_(k) to finish. The loop considers
each activity a_(m) in turn and adds a_(m) to A if it is compatible with
all previously selected activities. Such an activity is the earliest in
S_(k) to finish. To see whether activity a_(m) is compatible with every
activity currently in A, it suffices by equation (15.3) to check (in
line 4) that its start time s_(m) is not earlier than the finish time
f_(k) of the activity most recently added to A. If activity a_(m) is
compatible, then lines 5–6 add activity a_(m) to A and set k to m. The
set A returned by the call GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f) is precisely
the set returned by the initial call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f,
0, n).

Like the recursive version, GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR schedules a set of
n activities in Θ(n) time, assuming that the activities were already
sorted initially by their finish times.

Exercises

15.1-1

Give a dynamic-programming algorithm for the activity-selection problem,
based on recurrence (15.2). Have your algorithm compute the sizes c[i,
j] as defined above and also produce the maximum-size subset of mutually
compatible activities. Assume that the inputs have been sorted as in
equation (15.1). Compare the running time of your solution to the
running time of GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.

15.1-2

Suppose that instead of always selecting the first activity to finish,
you instead select the last activity to start that is compatible with
all previously selected activities. Describe how this approach is a
greedy algorithm, and prove that it yields an optimal solution.

15.1-3

Not just any greedy approach to the activity-selection problem produces
a maximum-size set of mutually compatible activities. Give an example to
show that the approach of selecting the activity of least duration from
among those that are compatible with previously selected activities does
not work. Do the same for the approaches of always selecting the
compatible activity that overlaps the fewest other remaining activities
and always selecting the compatible remaining activity with the earliest
start time.

15.1-4

You are given a set of activities to schedule among a large number of
lecture halls, where any activity can take place in any lecture hall.
You wish to schedule all the activities using as few lecture halls as
possible. Give an efficient greedy algorithm to determine which activity
should use which lecture hall.

(This problem is also known as the interval-graph coloring problem. It
is modeled by an interval graph whose vertices are the given activities
and whose edges connect incompatible activities. The smallest number of
colors required to color every vertex so that no two adjacent vertices
have the same color corresponds to finding the fewest lecture halls
needed to schedule all of the given activities.)

15.1-5

Consider a modification to the activity-selection problem in which each
activity a_(i) has, in addition to a start and finish time, a value
v_(i). The objective is no longer to maximize the number of activities
scheduled, but instead to maximize the total value of the activities
scheduled. That is, the goal is to choose a set A of compatible
activities such that [art] is maximized. Give a polynomial-time
algorithm for this problem.

15.2    Elements of the greedy strategy

A greedy algorithm obtains an optimal solution to a problem by making a
sequence of choices. At each decision point, the algorithm makes the
choice that seems best at the moment. This heuristic strategy does not
always produce an optimal solution, but as in the activity-selection
problem, sometimes it does. This section discusses some of the general
properties of greedy methods.

The process that we followed in Section 15.1 to develop a greedy
algorithm was a bit more involved than is typical. It consisted of the
following steps:

1.  Determine the optimal substructure of the problem.
2.  Develop a recursive solution. (For the activity-selection problem,
    we formulated recurrence (15.2), but bypassed developing a recursive
    algorithm based solely on this recurrence.)
3.  Show that if you make the greedy choice, then only one subproblem
    remains.
4.  Prove that it is always safe to make the greedy choice. (Steps 3 and
    4 can occur in either order.)
5.  Develop a recursive algorithm that implements the greedy strategy.
6.  Convert the recursive algorithm to an iterative algorithm.

These steps highlighted in great detail the dynamic-programming
underpinnings of a greedy algorithm. For example, the first cut at the
activity-selection problem defined the subproblems S_(ij), where both i
and j varied. We then found that if you always make the greedy choice,
you can restrict the subproblems to be of the form S_(k).

An alternative approach is to fashion optimal substructure with a greedy
choice in mind, so that the choice leaves just one subproblem to solve.
In the activity-selection problem, start by dropping the second
subscript and defining subproblems of the form S_(k). Then prove that a
greedy choice (the first activity a_(m) to finish in S_(k)), combined
with an optimal solution to the remaining set S_(m) of compatible
activities, yields an optimal solution to S_(k). More generally, you can
design greedy algorithms according to the following sequence of steps:

1.  Cast the optimization problem as one in which you make a choice and
    are left with one subproblem to solve.
2.  Prove that there is always an optimal solution to the original
    problem that makes the greedy choice, so that the greedy choice is
    always safe.
3.  Demonstrate optimal substructure by showing that, having made the
    greedy choice, what remains is a subproblem with the property that
    if you combine an optimal solution to the subproblem with the greedy
    choice you have made, you arrive at an optimal solution to the
    original problem.

Later sections of this chapter will use this more direct process.
Nevertheless, beneath every greedy algorithm, there is almost always a
more cumbersome dynamic-programming solution.

How can you tell whether a greedy algorithm will solve a particular
optimization problem? No way works all the time, but the greedy-choice
property and optimal substructure are the two key ingredients. If you
can demonstrate that the problem has these properties, then you are well
on the way to developing a greedy algorithm for it.

Greedy-choice property

The first key ingredient is the greedy-choice property: you can assemble
a globally optimal solution by making locally optimal (greedy) choices.
In other words, when you are considering which choice to make, you make
the choice that looks best in the current problem, without considering
results from subproblems.

Here is where greedy algorithms differ from dynamic programming. In
dynamic programming, you make a choice at each step, but the choice
usually depends on the solutions to subproblems. Consequently, you
typically solve dynamic-programming problems in a bottom-up manner,
progressing from smaller subproblems to larger subproblems.
(Alternatively, you can solve them top down, but memoizing. Of course,
even though the code works top down, you still must solve the
subproblems before making a choice.) In a greedy algorithm, you make
whatever choice seems best at the moment and then solve the subproblem
that remains. The choice made by a greedy algorithm may depend on
choices so far, but it cannot depend on any future choices or on the
solutions to subproblems. Thus, unlike dynamic programming, which solves
the subproblems before making the first choice, a greedy algorithm makes
its first choice before solving any subproblems. A dynamic-programming
algorithm proceeds bottom up, whereas a greedy strategy usually
progresses top down, making one greedy choice after another, reducing
each given problem instance to a smaller one.

Of course, you need to prove that a greedy choice at each step yields a
globally optimal solution. Typically, as in the case of Theorem 15.1,
the proof examines a globally optimal solution to some subproblem. It
then shows how to modify the solution to substitute the greedy choice
for some other choice, resulting in one similar, but smaller,
subproblem.

You can usually make the greedy choice more efficiently than when you
have to consider a wider set of choices. For example, in the
activity-selection problem, assuming that the activities were already
sorted in monotonically increasing order by finish times, each activity
needed to be examined just once. By preprocessing the input or by using
an appropriate data structure (often a priority queue), you often can
make greedy choices quickly, thus yielding an efficient algorithm.

Optimal substructure

As we saw in Chapter 14, a problem exhibits optimal substructure if an
optimal solution to the problem contains within it optimal solutions to
subproblems. This property is a key ingredient of assessing whether
dynamic programming applies, and it’s also essential for greedy
algorithms. As an example of optimal substructure, recall how Section
15.1 demonstrated that if an optimal solution to subproblem S_(ij)
includes an activity a_(k), then it must also contain optimal solutions
to the subproblems S_(ik) and S_(kj). Given this optimal substructure,
we argued that if you know which activity to use as a_(k), you can
construct an optimal solution to S_(ij) by selecting a_(k) along with
all activities in optimal solutions to the subproblems S_(ik) and
S_(kj). This observation of optimal substructure gave rise to the
recurrence (15.2) that describes the value of an optimal solution.

You will usually use a more direct approach regarding optimal
substructure when applying it to greedy algorithms. As mentioned above,
you have the luxury of assuming that you arrived at a subproblem by
having made the greedy choice in the original problem. All you really
need to do is argue that an optimal solution to the subproblem, combined
with the greedy choice already made, yields an optimal solution to the
original problem. This scheme implicitly uses induction on the
subproblems to prove that making the greedy choice at every step
produces an optimal solution.

Greedy versus dynamic programming

Because both the greedy and dynamic-programming strategies exploit
optimal substructure, you might be tempted to generate a
dynamic-programming solution to a problem when a greedy solution
suffices or, conversely, you might mistakenly think that a greedy
solution works when in fact a dynamic-programming solution is required.
To illustrate the subtle differences between the two techniques, let’s
investigate two variants of a classical optimization problem.

The 0-1 knapsack problem is the following. A thief robbing a store wants
to take the most valuable load that can be carried in a knapsack capable
of carrying at most W pounds of loot. The thief can choose to take any
subset of n items in the store. The ith item is worth v_(i) dollars and
weighs w_(i) pounds, where v_(i) and w_(i) are integers. Which items
should the thief take? (We call this the 0-1 knapsack problem because
for each item, the thief must either take it or leave it behind. The
thief cannot take a fractional amount of an item or take an item more
than once.)

In the fractional knapsack problem, the setup is the same, but the thief
can take fractions of items, rather than having to make a binary (0-1)
choice for each item. You can think of an item in the 0-1 knapsack
problem as being like a gold ingot and an item in the fractional
knapsack problem as more like gold dust.

Both knapsack problems exhibit the optimal-substructure property. For
the 0-1 problem, if the most valuable load weighing at most W pounds
includes item j, then the remaining load must be the most valuable load
weighing at most W − w_(j) pounds that the thief can take from the n − 1
original items excluding item j. For the comparable fractional problem,
if if the most valuable load weighing at most W pounds includes weight w
of item j, then the remaining load must be the most valuable load
weighing at most W − w pounds that the thief can take from the n − 1
original items plus w_(j) − w pounds of item j.

Although the problems are similar, a greedy strategy works to solve the
fractional knapsack problem, but not the 0-1 problem. To solve the
fractional problem, first compute the value per pound v_(i)/w_(i) for
each item. Obeying a greedy strategy, the thief begins by taking as much
as possible of the item with the greatest value per pound. If the supply
of that item is exhausted and the thief can still carry more, then the
thief takes as much as possible of the item with the next greatest value
per pound, and so forth, until reaching the weight limit W. Thus, by
sorting the items by value per pound, the greedy algorithm runs in O(n
lg n) time. You are asked to prove that the fractional knapsack problem
has the greedy-choice property in Exercise 15.2-1.

To see that this greedy strategy does not work for the 0-1 knapsack
problem, consider the problem instance illustrated in Figure 15.3(a).
This example has three items and a knapsack that can hold 50 pounds.
Item 1 weighs 10 pounds and is worth $60. Item 2 weighs 20 pounds and is
worth $100. Item 3 weighs 30 pounds and is worth $120. Thus, the value
per pound of item 1 is $6 per pound, which is greater than the value per
pound of either item 2 ($5 per pound) or item 3 ($4 per pound). The
greedy strategy, therefore, would take item 1 first. As you can see from
the case analysis in Figure 15.3(b), however, the optimal solution takes
items 2 and 3, leaving item 1 behind. The two possible solutions that
take item 1 are both suboptimal.

For the comparable fractional problem, however, the greedy strategy,
which takes item 1 first, does yield an optimal solution, as shown in
Figure 15.3(c). Taking item 1 doesn’t work in the 0-1 problem, because
the thief is unable to fill the knapsack to capacity, and the empty
space lowers the effective value per pound of the load. In the 0-1
problem, when you consider whether to include an item in the knapsack,
you must compare the solution to the subproblem that includes the item
with the solution to the subproblem that excludes the item before you
can make the choice. The problem formulated in this way gives rise to
many overlapping subproblems—a hallmark of dynamic programming, and
indeed, as Exercise 15.2-2 asks you to show, you can use dynamic
programming to solve the 0-1 problem.

[art]

Figure 15.3 An example showing that the greedy strategy does not work
for the 0-1 knapsack problem. (a) The thief must select a subset of the
three items shown whose weight must not exceed 50 pounds. (b) The
optimal subset includes items 2 and 3. Any solution with item 1 is
suboptimal, even though item 1 has the greatest value per pound. (c) For
the fractional knapsack problem, taking the items in order of greatest
value per pound yields an optimal solution.

Exercises

15.2-1

Prove that the fractional knapsack problem has the greedy-choice
property.

15.2-2

Give a dynamic-programming solution to the 0-1 knapsack problem that
runs in O(n W) time, where n is the number of items and W is the maximum
weight of items that the thief can put in the knapsack.

15.2-3

Suppose that in a 0-1 knapsack problem, the order of the items when
sorted by increasing weight is the same as their order when sorted by
decreasing value. Give an efficient algorithm to find an optimal
solution to this variant of the knapsack problem, and argue that your
algorithm is correct.

15.2-4

Professor Gekko has always dreamed of inline skating across North
Dakota. The professor plans to cross the state on highway U.S. 2, which
runs from Grand Forks, on the eastern border with Minnesota, to
Williston, near the western border with Montana. The professor can carry
two liters of water and can skate m miles before running out of water.
(Because North Dakota is relatively flat, the professor does not have to
worry about drinking water at a greater rate on uphill sections than on
flat or downhill sections.) The professor will start in Grand Forks with
two full liters of water. The professor has an official North Dakota
state map, which shows all the places along U.S. 2 to refill water and
the distances between these locations.

The professor’s goal is to minimize the number of water stops along the
route across the state. Give an efficient method by which the professor
can determine which water stops to make. Prove that your strategy yields
an optimal solution, and give its running time.

15.2-5

Describe an efficient algorithm that, given a set {x₁, x₂, … , x_(n)} of
points on the real line, determines the smallest set of unit-length
closed intervals that contains all of the given points. Argue that your
algorithm is correct.

★ 15.2-6

Show how to solve the fractional knapsack problem in O(n) time.

15.2-7

You are given two sets A and B, each containing n positive integers. You
can choose to reorder each set however you like. After reordering, let
a_(i) be the ith element of set A, and let b_(i) be the ith element of
set B. You then receive a payoff of [art]. Give an algorithm that
maximizes your payoff. Prove that your algorithm maximizes the payoff,
and state its running time, omitting the time for reordering the sets.

15.3    Huffman codes

Huffman codes compress data well: savings of 20% to 90% are typical,
depending on the characteristics of the data being compressed. The data
arrive as a sequence of characters. Huffman’s greedy algorithm uses a
table giving how often each character occurs (its frequency) to build up
an optimal way of representing each character as a binary string.

Suppose that you have a 100,000-character data file that you wish to
store compactly and you know that the 6 distinct characters in the file
occur with the frequencies given by Figure 15.4. The character a occurs
45,000 times, the character b occurs 13,000 times, and so on.

You have many options for how to represent such a file of information.
Here, we consider the problem of designing a binary character code (or
code for short) in which each character is represented by a unique
binary string, which we call a codeword. If you use a fixed-length code,
you need ⌈lg n⌉ bits to represent n ≥ 2 characters. For 6 characters,
therefore, you need 3 bits: a = 000, b = 001, c = 010, d = 011, e = 100,
and f = 101. This method requires 300,000 bits to encode the entire
file. Can you do better?

[art]

Figure 15.4 A character-coding problem. A data file of 100,000
characters contains only the characters a–f, with the frequencies
indicated. With each character represented by a 3-bit codeword, encoding
the file requires 300,000 bits. With the variable-length code shown, the
encoding requires only 224,000 bits.

A variable-length code can do considerably better than a fixed-length
code. The idea is simple: give frequent characters short codewords and
infrequent characters long codewords. Figure 15.4 shows such a code.
Here, the 1-bit string 0 represents a, and the 4-bit string 1100
represents f. This code requires

(45 · 1 + 13 · 3 + 12 · 3 + 16 · 3 + 9 · 4 + 5 · 4) · 1,000 = 224,000
bits

to represent the file, a savings of approximately 25%. In fact, this is
an optimal character code for this file, as we shall see.

Prefix-free codes

We consider here only codes in which no codeword is also a prefix of
some other codeword. Such codes are called prefix-free codes. Although
we won’t prove it here, a prefix-free code can always achieve the
optimal data compression among any character code, and so we suffer no
loss of generality by restricting our attention to prefix-free codes.

Encoding is always simple for any binary character code: just
concatenate the codewords representing each character of the file. For
example, with the variable-length prefix-free code of Figure 15.4, the
4-character file face has the encoding 1100 · 0 · 100 · 1101 =
110001001101, where “·” denotes concatenation.

Prefix-free codes are desirable because they simplify decoding. Since no
codeword is a prefix of any other, the codeword that begins an encoded
file is unambiguous. You can simply identify the initial codeword,
translate it back to the original character, and repeat the decoding
process on the remainder of the encoded file. In our example, the string
100011001101 parses uniquely as 100 · 0 · 1100 · 1101, which decodes to
cafe.

[art]

Figure 15.5 Trees corresponding to the coding schemes in Figure 15.4.
Each leaf is labeled with a character and its frequency of occurrence.
Each internal node is labeled with the sum of the frequencies of the
leaves in its subtree. All frequencies are in thousands. (a) The tree
corresponding to the fixed-length code a = 000, b = 001, c = 010, d =
011, e = 100, f = 101. (b) The tree corresponding to the optimal
prefix-free code a = 0, b = 101, c = 100, d = 111, e = 1101, f = 1100.

The decoding process needs a convenient representation for the
prefix-free code so that you can easily pick off the initial codeword. A
binary tree whose leaves are the given characters provides one such
representation. Interpret the binary codeword for a character as the
simple path from the root to that character, where 0 means “go to the
left child” and 1 means “go to the right child.” Figure 15.5 shows the
trees for the two codes of our example. Note that these are not binary
search trees, since the leaves need not appear in sorted order and
internal nodes do not contain character keys.

An optimal code for a file is always represented by a full binary tree,
in which every nonleaf node has two children (see Exercise 15.3-2). The
fixed-length code in our example is not optimal since its tree, shown in
Figure 15.5(a), is not a full binary tree: it contains codewords
beginning with 10, but none beginning with 11. Since we can now restrict
our attention to full binary trees, we can say that if C is the alphabet
from which the characters are drawn and all character frequencies are
positive, then the tree for an optimal prefix-free code has exactly |C |
leaves, one for each letter of the alphabet, and exactly |C | − 1
internal nodes (see Exercise B.5-3 on page 1175).

Given a tree T corresponding to a prefix-free code, we can compute the
number of bits required to encode a file. For each character c in the
alphabet C, let the attribute c.freq denote the frequency of c in the
file and let d_(T)(c) denote the depth of c’s leaf in the tree. Note
that d_(T) (c) is also the length of the codeword for character c. The
number of bits required to encode a file is thus

[art]

which we define as the cost of the tree T.

Constructing a Huffman code

Huffman invented a greedy algorithm that constructs an optimal
prefix-free code, called a Huffman code in his honor. In line with our
observations in Section 15.2, its proof of correctness relies on the
greedy-choice property and optimal substructure. Rather than
demonstrating that these properties hold and then developing pseudocode,
we present the pseudocode first. Doing so will help clarify how the
algorithm makes greedy choices.

The procedure HUFFMAN assumes that C is a set of n characters and that
each character c ∈ C is an object with an attribute c.freq giving its
frequency. The algorithm builds the tree T corresponding to an optimal
code in a bottom-up manner. It begins with a set of |C | leaves and
performs a sequence of |C | − 1 “merging” operations to create the final
tree. The algorithm uses a min-priority queue Q, keyed on the freq
attribute, to identify the two least-frequent objects to merge together.
The result of merging two objects is a new object whose frequency is the
sum of the frequencies of the two objects that were merged.

HUFFMAN(C)

  ----- -------------------------- -----------------------------------------------
    1   n = |C |                    
    2   Q = C                       
    3   for i = 1 to n − 1          
    4   allocate a new node z       
    5   x = EXTRACT-MIN(Q)          
    6   y = EXTRACT-MIN(Q)          
    7   z.left = x                  
    8   z.right = y                 
    9   z.freq = x.freq + y.freq    
  10    INSERT(Q, z)                
  11    return EXTRACT-MIN(Q)      // the root of the tree is the only node left
  ----- -------------------------- -----------------------------------------------

For our example, Huffman’s algorithm proceeds as shown in Figure 15.6.
Since the alphabet contains 6 letters, the initial queue size is n = 6,
and 5 merge steps build the tree. The final tree represents the optimal
prefix-free code. The codeword for a letter is the sequence of edge
labels on the simple path from the root to the letter.

[art]

Figure 15.6 The steps of Huffman’s algorithm for the frequencies given
in Figure 15.4. Each part shows the contents of the queue sorted into
increasing order by frequency. Each step merges the two trees with the
lowest frequencies. Leaves are shown as rectangles containing a
character and its frequency. Internal nodes are shown as circles
containing the sum of the frequencies of their children. An edge
connecting an internal node with its children is labeled 0 if it is an
edge to a left child and 1 if it is an edge to a right child. The
codeword for a letter is the sequence of labels on the edges connecting
the root to the leaf for that letter. (a) The initial set of n = 6
nodes, one for each letter. (b)–(e) Intermediate stages. (f) The final
tree.

The HUFFMAN procedure works as follows. Line 2 initializes the
min-priority queue Q with the characters in C. The for loop in lines
3–10 repeatedly extracts the two nodes x and y of lowest frequency from
the queue and replaces them in the queue with a new node z representing
their merger. The frequency of z is computed as the sum of the
frequencies of x and y in line 9. The node z has x as its left child and
y as its right child. (This order is arbitrary. Switching the left and
right child of any node yields a different code of the same cost.) After
n − 1 mergers, line 11 returns the one node left in the queue, which is
the root of the code tree.

The algorithm produces the same result without the variables x and y,
assigning the values returned by the EXTRACT-MIN calls directly to
z.left and z.right in lines 7 and 8, and changing line 9 to z.freq =
z.left.freq+z.right.freq. We’ll use the node names x and y in the proof
of correctness, however, so we leave them in.

The running time of Huffman’s algorithm depends on how the min-priority
queue Q is implemented. Let’s assume that it’s implemented as a binary
min-heap (see Chapter 6). For a set C of n characters, the
BUILD-MIN-HEAP procedure discussed in Section 6.3 can initialize Q in
line 2 in O(n) time. The for loop in lines 3–10 executes exactly n − 1
times, and since each heap operation runs in O(lg n) time, the loop
contributes O(n lg n) to the running time. Thus, the total running time
of HUFFMAN on a set of n characters is O(n lg n).

Correctness of Huffman’s algorithm

To prove that the greedy algorithm HUFFMAN is correct, we’ll show that
the problem of determining an optimal prefix-free code exhibits the
greedy-choice and optimal-substructure properties. The next lemma shows
that the greedy-choice property holds.

Lemma 15.2 (Optimal prefix-free codes have the greedy-choice property)

Let C be an alphabet in which each character c ∈ C has frequency c.freq.
Let x and y be two characters in C having the lowest frequencies. Then
there exists an optimal prefix-free code for C in which the codewords
for x and y have the same length and differ only in the last bit.

Proof   The idea of the proof is to take the tree T representing an
arbitrary optimal prefix-free code and modify it to make a tree
representing another optimal prefix-free code such that the characters x
and y appear as sibling leaves of maximum depth in the new tree. In such
a tree, the codewords for x and y have the same length and differ only
in the last bit.

Let a and b be any two characters that are sibling leaves of maximum
depth in T. Without loss of generality, assume that a.freq ≤ b.freq and
x.freq ≤ y.freq. Since x.freq and y.freq are the two lowest leaf
frequencies, in order, and a.freq and b.freq are two arbitrary
frequencies, in order, we have x.freq ≤ a.freq and y.freq ≤ b.freq.

In the remainder of the proof, it is possible that we could have x.freq
= a.freq or y.freq = b.freq, but x.freq = b.freq implies that a.freq =
b.freq = x.freq = y.freq (see Exercise 15.3-1), and the lemma would be
trivially true. Therefore, assume that x.freq ≠ b.freq, which means that
x ≠ b.

[art]

Figure 15.7 An illustration of the key step in the proof of Lemma 15.2.
In the optimal tree T, leaves a and b are two siblings of maximum depth.
Leaves x and y are the two characters with the lowest frequencies. They
appear in arbitrary positions in T. Assuming that x ≠ b, swapping leaves
a and x produces tree T′, and then swapping leaves b and y produces tree
T ″. Since each swap does not increase the cost, the resulting tree T ″
is also an optimal tree.

As Figure 15.7 shows, imagine exchanging the positions in T of a and x
to produce a tree T′, and then exchanging the positions in T′ of b and y
to produce a tree T″ in which x and y are sibling leaves of maximum
depth. (Note that if x = b but y ≠ a, then tree T ″ does not have x and
y as sibling leaves of maximum depth. Because we assume that x ≠ b, this
situation cannot occur.) By equation (15.4), the difference in cost
between T and T′ is

[art]

because both a.freq − x.freq and d_(T) (a) − d_(T) (x) are nonnegative.
More specifically, a.freq − x.freq is nonnegative because x is a
minimum-frequency leaf, and d_(T) (a) − d_(T) (x) is nonnegative because
a is a leaf of maximum depth in T. Similarly, exchanging y and b does
not increase the cost, and so B(T′) − B(T ″) is nonnegative. Therefore,
B(T ″) ≤ B(T′) ≤ B(T), and since T is optimal, we have B(T) ≤ B(T ″),
which implies B(T ″) = B(T). Thus, T ″ is an optimal tree in which x and
y appear as sibling leaves of maximum depth, from which the lemma
follows.

▪

Lemma 15.2 implies that the process of building up an optimal tree by
mergers can, without loss of generality, begin with the greedy choice of
merging together those two characters of lowest frequency. Why is this a
greedy choice? We can view the cost of a single merger as being the sum
of the frequencies of the two items being merged. Exercise 15.3-4 shows
that the total cost of the tree constructed equals the sum of the costs
of its mergers. Of all possible mergers at each step, HUFFMAN chooses
the one that incurs the least cost.

The next lemma shows that the problem of constructing optimal
prefix-free codes has the optimal-substructure property.

Lemma 15.3 (Optimal prefix-free codes have the optimal-substructure
property)

Let C be a given alphabet with frequency c.freq defined for each
character c ∈ C. Let x and y be two characters in C with minimum
frequency. Let C′ be the alphabet C with the characters x and y removed
and a new character z added, so that C′ = (C − {x, y}) ∪ {z}. Define
freq for all characters in C′ with the same values as in C, along with
z.freq = x.freq + y.freq. Let T′ be any tree representing an optimal
prefix-free code for alphabet C′. Then the tree T, obtained from T′ by
replacing the leaf node for z with an internal node having x and y as
children, represents an optimal prefix-free code for the alphabet C.

Proof   We first show how to express the cost B(T) of tree T in terms of
the cost B(T′) of tree T′, by considering the component costs in
equation (15.4). For each character c ∈ C − {x, y}, we have that d_(T)
(c) = d_(T′) (c), and hence c.freq · d_(T) (c) = c.freq · d_(T′) (c).
Since d_(T) (x) = d_(T) (y) = d_(T′) (z) + 1, we have

  ----------------------------------------- --- ----------------------------------------
  x.freq · d_(T) (x) + y.freq · d_(T) (y)   =   (x.freq + y.freq)(d_(T′) (z) + 1)
                                            =   z.freq · d_(T′)(z)+ (x.freq + y.freq),
  ----------------------------------------- --- ----------------------------------------

from which we conclude that

B(T) = B(T′) + x.freq + y.freq

or, equivalently,

B(T′) = B(T) − x.freq − y.freq.

We now prove the lemma by contradiction. Suppose that T does not
represent an optimal prefix-free code for C. Then there exists an
optimal tree T″ such that B(T″) < B(T). Without loss of generality (by
Lemma 15.2), T″ has x and y as siblings. Let T^(″′) be the tree T″ with
the common parent of x and y replaced by a leaf z with frequency z.freq
= x.freq + y.freq. Then

  ------- --- -------------------------
  B(T‴)   =   B(T″) − x.freq − y.freq
          <   B(T) − x.freq − y.freq
          =   B(T′),
  ------- --- -------------------------

yielding a contradiction to the assumption that T′ represents an optimal
prefix-free code for C′. Thus, T must represent an optimal prefix-free
code for the alphabet C.

▪

Theorem 15.4

Procedure HUFFMAN produces an optimal prefix-free code.

Proof   Immediate from Lemmas 15.2 and 15.3.

Exercises

15.3-1

Explain why, in the proof of Lemma 15.2, if x.freq = b.freq, then we
must have a.freq = b.freq = x.freq = y.freq.

15.3-2

Prove that a non-full binary tree cannot correspond to an optimal
prefix-free code.

15.3-3

What is an optimal Huffman code for the following set of frequencies,
based on the first 8 Fibonacci numbers?

a:1 b:1 c:2 d:3 e:5 f:8 g:13 h:21

Can you generalize your answer to find the optimal code when the
frequencies are the first n Fibonacci numbers?

15.3-4

Prove that the total cost B(T) of a full binary tree T for a code equals
the sum, over all internal nodes, of the combined frequencies of the two
children of the node.

15.3-5

Given an optimal prefix-free code on a set C of n characters, you wish
to transmit the code itself using as few bits as possible. Show how to
represent any optimal prefix-free code on C using only 2n − 1 + n ⌈lg n⌉
bits. (Hint: Use 2n − 1 bits to specify the structure of the tree, as
discovered by a walk of the tree.)

15.3-6

Generalize Huffman’s algorithm to ternary codewords (i.e., codewords
using the symbols 0, 1, and 2), and prove that it yields optimal ternary
codes.

15.3-7

A data file contains a sequence of 8-bit characters such that all 256
characters are about equally common: the maximum character frequency is
less than twice the minimum character frequency. Prove that Huffman
coding in this case is no more efficient than using an ordinary 8-bit
fixed-length code.

15.3-8

Show that no lossless (invertible) compression scheme can guarantee that
for every input file, the corresponding output file is shorter. (Hint:
Compare the number of possible files with the number of possible encoded
files.)

15.4    Offline caching

Computer systems can decrease the time to access data by storing a
subset of the main memory in the cache: a small but faster memory. A
cache organizes data into cache blocks typically comprising 32, 64, or
128 bytes. You can also think of main memory as a cache for
disk-resident data in a virtual-memory system. Here, the blocks are
called pages, and 4096 bytes is a typical size.

As a computer program executes, it makes a sequence of memory requests.
Say that there are n memory requests, to data in blocks b₁, b₂, … ,
b_(n), in that order. The blocks in the access sequence might not be
distinct, and indeed, any given block is usually accessed multiple
times. For example, a program that accesses four distinct blocks p, q,
r, s might make a sequence of requests to blocks s, q, s, q, q, s, p, p,
r, s, s, q, p, r, q. The cache can hold up to some fixed number k of
cache blocks. It starts out empty before the first request. Each request
causes at most one block to enter the cache and at most one block to be
evicted from the cache. Upon a request for block b_(i), any one of three
scenarios may occur:

1.  Block b_(i) is already in the cache, due to a previous request for
    the same block. The cache remains unchanged. This situation is known
    as a cache hit.
2.  Block b_(i) is not in the cache at that time, but the cache contains
    fewer than k blocks. In this case, block b_(i) is placed into the
    cache, so that the cache contains one more block than it did before
    the request.
3.  Block b_(i) is not in the cache at that time and the cache is full:
    it contains k blocks. Block b_(i) is placed into the cache, but
    before that happens, some other block in the cache must be evicted
    from the cache in order to make room.

The latter two situations, in which the requested block is not already
in the cache, are called cache misses. The goal is to minimize the
number of cache misses or, equivalently, to maximize the number of cache
hits, over the entire sequence of n requests. A cache miss that occurs
while the cache holds fewer than k blocks—that is, as the cache is first
being filled up—is known as a compulsory miss, since no prior decision
could have kept the requested block in the cache. When a cache miss
occurs and the cache is full, ideally the choice of which block to evict
should allow for the smallest possible number of cache misses over the
entire sequence of future requests.

Typically, caching is an online problem. That is, the computer has to
decide which blocks to keep in the cache without knowing the future
requests. Here, however, let’s consider the offline version of this
problem, in which the computer knows in advance the entire sequence of n
requests and the cache size k, with a goal of minimizing the total
number of cache misses.

To solve this offline problem, you can use a greedy strategy called
furthest-in-future, which chooses to evict the block in the cache whose
next access in the request sequence comes furthest in the future.
Intuitively, this strategy makes sense: if you’re not going to need
something for a while, why keep it around? We’ll show that the
furthest-in-future strategy is indeed optimal by showing that the
offline caching problem exhibits optimal substructure and that
furthest-in-future has the greedy-choice property.

Now, you might be thinking that since the computer usually doesn’t know
the sequence of requests in advance, there is no point in studying the
offline problem. Actually, there is. In some situations, you do know the
sequence of requests in advance. For example, if you view the main
memory as the cache and the full set of data as residing on disk (or a
solid-state drive), there are algorithms that plan out the entire set of
reads and writes in advance. Furthermore, we can use the number of cache
misses produced by an optimal algorithm as a baseline for comparing how
well online algorithms perform. We’ll do just that in Section 27.3.

Offline caching can even model real-world problems. For example,
consider a scenario where you know in advance a fixed schedule of n
events at known locations. Events may occur at a location multiple
times, not necessarily consecutively. You are managing a group of k
agents, you need to ensure that you have one agent at each location when
an event occurs, and you want to minimize the number of times that
agents have to move. Here, the agents are like the blocks, the events
are like the requests, and moving an agent is akin to a cache miss.

Optimal substructure of offline caching

To show that the offline problem exhibits optimal substructure, let’s
define the subproblem (C, i) as processing requests for blocks b_(i),
b_(i+1), … , b_(n) with cache configuration C at the time that the
request for block b_(i) occurs, that is, C is a subset of the set of
blocks such that |C | ≤ k. A solution to subproblem (C, i) is a sequence
of decisions that specifies which block to evict (if any) upon each
request for blocks b_(i), b_(i+1), … , b_(n). An optimal solution to
subproblem (C, i) minimizes the number of cache misses.

Consider an optimal solution S to subproblem (C, i), and let C′ be the
contents of the cache after processing the request for block b_(i) in
solution S. Let S′ be the subsolution of S for the resulting subproblem
(C′, i + 1). If the request for b_(i) results in a cache hit, then the
cache remains unchanged, so that C′ = C. If the request for block b_(i)
results in a cache miss, then the contents of the cache change, so that
C′ ≠ C. We claim that in either case, S′ is an optimal solution to
subproblem (C′, i + 1). Why? If S′ is not an optimal solution to
subproblem (C′, i + 1), then there exists another solution S″ to
subproblem (C′, i + 1) that makes fewer cache misses than S′. Combining
S″ with the decision of S at the request for block b_(i) yields another
solution that makes fewer cache misses than S, which contradicts the
assumption that S is an optimal solution to subproblem (C, i).

To quantify a recursive solution, we need a little more notation. Let
R_(C,i) be the set of all cache configurations that can immediately
follow configuration C after processing a request for block b_(i). If
the request results in a cache hit, then the cache remains unchanged, so
that R_(C,i) = {C }. If the request for b_(i) results in a cache miss,
then there are two possibilities. If the cache is not full (|C | < k),
then the cache is filling up and the only choice is to insert b_(i) into
the cache, so that R_(C,i)= {C ∪ {b_(i)}}. If the cache is full (|C | =
k) upon a cache miss, then R_(C,i) contains k potential configurations:
one for each candidate block in C that could be evicted and replaced by
block b_(i). In this case, R_(C,i) = {(C − {x}) ∪ {b_(i)} : x ∈ C }. For
example, if C = {p, q, r}, k = 3, and block s is requested, then R_(C,i)
= {{p, q, s},{p, r, s},{q, r, s}}.

Let miss(C, i) denote the minimum number of cache misses in a solution
for subproblem (C, i). Here is a recurrence for miss(C, i):

[art]

Greedy-choice property

To prove that the furthest-in-future strategy yields an optimal
solution, we need to show that optimal offline caching exhibits the
greedy-choice property. Combined with the optimal-substructure property,
the greedy-choice property will prove that furthest-in-future produces
the minimum possible number of cache misses.

Theorem 15.5 (Optimal offline caching has the greedy-choice property)

Consider a subproblem (C, i) when the cache C contains k blocks, so that
it is full, and a cache miss occurs. When block b_(i) is requested, let
z = b_(m) be the block in C whose next access is furthest in the future.
(If some block in the cache will never again be referenced, then
consider any such block to be block z, and add a dummy request for block
z = b_(m) = b_(n+1).) Then evicting block z upon a request for block
b_(i) is included in some optimal solution for the subproblem (C, i).

Proof   Let S be an optimal solution to subproblem (C, i). If S evicts
block z upon the request for block b_(i), then we are done, since we
have shown that some optimal solution includes evicting z.

So now suppose that optimal solution S evicts some other block x when
block b_(i) is requested. We’ll construct another solution S′ to
subproblem (C, i) which, upon the request for b_(i), evicts block z
instead of x and induces no more cache misses than S does, so that S′ is
also optimal. Because different solutions may yield different cache
configurations, denote by C_(S,j) the configuration of the cache under
solution S just before the request for some block b_(j), and likewise
for solution S′ and C_(S′,j). We’ll show how to construct S′ with the
following properties:

1.  For j = i + 1, … , m, let D_(j) = C_(S,j) ∩ C_(S′,j). Then, |D_(j) |
    ≥ k − 1, so that the cache configurations C_(S,j) and C_(S′,j)
    differ by at most one block. If they differ, then C_(S,j) = D_(j) ∪
    {z} and C_(S′,j) = D_(j) ∪ {y} for some block y ≠ z.
2.  For each request of blocks b_(i), … , b_(m−1), if solution S has a
    cache hit, then solution S′ also has a cache hit.
3.  For all j > m, the cache configurations C_(S,j) and C_(S′,j) are
    identical.
4.  Over the sequence of requests for blocks b_(i), … , b_(m), the
    number of cache misses produced by solution S′ is at most the number
    of cache misses produced by solution S.

We’ll prove inductively that these properties hold for each request.

1.  We proceed by induction on j, for j = i +1, … , m. For the base
    case, the initial caches C_(S,i) and C_(S′,i) are identical. Upon
    the request for block b_(i), solution S evicts x and solution S′
    evicts z. Thus, cache configurations C_(S,i+1) and C_(S′,i+1) differ
    by just one block, C_(S,i+1) = D_(i+1) ∪ {z}, C_(S′,i+1) = D_(i+1) ∪
    {x}, and x ≠ z.

    The inductive step defines how solution S′ behaves upon a request
    for block b_(j) for i + 1 ≤ j ≤ m − 1. The inductive hypothesis is
    that property 1 holds when b_(j) is requested. Because z = b_(m) is
    the block in C_(S,i) whose next reference is furthest in the future,
    we know that b_(j) ≠ z. We consider several scenarios:

    - If C_(S,j) = C_(S′,j) (so that |D_(j) | = k), then solution S′
      makes the same decision upon the request for b_(j) as S makes, so
      that C_(S,j+1) = C_(S′,j+1).
    - If |D_(j)| = k − 1 and b_(j) ∈ D_(j), then both caches already
      contain block b_(j), and both solutions S and S′ have cache hits.
      Therefore, C_(S,j+1) = C_(S,j) and C_(S′,j+1) = C_(S′,j).
    - If |D_(j) | = k − 1 and b_(j) ∉ D_(j), then because C_(S,j) =
      D_(j) ∪ {z} and b_(j) ≠ z, solution S has a cache miss. It evicts
      either block z or some block w ∈ D_(j).
      - If solution S evicts block z, then C_(S,j+1) = D_(j) ∪ {b_(j)}.
        There are two cases, depending on whether b_(j) = y:
        - If b_(j) = y, then solution S′ has a cache hit, so that
          C_(S′,j+1) = C_(S′,j) = D_(j) ∪ {b_(j)}. Thus, C_(S,j+1) =
          C_(S′,j +1).
        - If b_(j) ≠ y, then solution S′ has a cache miss. It evicts
          block y, so that C_(S′,j+1) = D_(j) ∪ {b_(j) }, and again
          C_(S,j+1) = C_(S′,j+1).
      - If solution S evicts some block w ∈ D_(j), then C_(S,j+1) =
        (D_(j) − {w}) ∪ {b_(j), z}. Once again, there are two cases,
        depending on whether b_(j) = y:
        - If b_(j) = y, then solution S′ has a cache hit, so that
          C_(S′,j+1) = C_(S′,j) = D_(j) ∪ {b_(j)}. Since w ∈ D_(j) and w
          was not evicted by solution S′, we have w ∈ C_(S′,j +1).
          Therefore, w ∉ D_(j+1) and b_(j) ∈ D_(j+1), so that D_(j+1) =
          (D_(j) − {w}) ∪ {b_(j) }. Thus, C_(S,j+1) = D_(j+1) ∪
          {z},C_(S′,j+1) = D_(j +1) ∪ {w}, and because w ≠ z, property 1
          holds when block b_(j+1) is requested. (In other words, block
          w replaces block y in property 1.)
        - If b_(j) ≠ y, then solution S′ has a cache miss. It evicts
          block w, so that C_(S′,j +1) = (D_(j) − {w}) ∪ {b_(j), y}.
          Therefore, we have that D_(j+1) = (D_(j) − {w}) ∪ {b_(j) } and
          so C_(S,j+1) = D_(j+1) ∪ {z} and C_(S′,j+1) = D_(j +1) ∪ {y}.

2.  In the above discussion about maintaining property 1, solution S may
    have a cache hit in only the first two cases, and solution S′ has a
    cache hit in these cases if and only if S does.

3.  If C_(S,m) = C_(S′,m), then solution S′ makes the same decision upon
    the request for block z = b_(m) as S makes, so that C_(S,m+1) =
    C_(S′,m+1). If C_(S,m) ≠ C_(S′,m), then by property 1, C_(S,m) =
    D_(m)∪{z} and C_(S′,m) = D_(m)∪{y}, where y ≠ z. In this case,
    solution S has a cache hit, so that C_(S,m+1) = C_(S,m) = D_(m) ∪
    {z}. Solution S′ evicts block y and brings in block z, so that
    C_(S′,m+1) = D_(m) ∪ {z} = C_(S,m+1). Thus, regardless of whether or
    not C_(S,m) = C_(S′,m), we have C_(S,m+1) = C_(S′,m+1), and starting
    with the request for block b_(m+1), solution S′ simply makes the
    same decisions as S.

4.  By property 2, upon the requests for blocks b_(i), … , b_(m−1),
    whenever solution S has a cache hit, so does S′. Only the request
    for block b_(m) = z remains to be considered. If S has a cache miss
    upon the request for b_(m), then regardless of whether S′ has a
    cache hit or a cache miss, we are done: S′ has at most the same
    number of cache misses as S.

    So now suppose that S has a cache hit and S′ has a cache miss upon
    the request for b_(m). We’ll show that there exists a request for at
    least one of blocks b_(i+1), … , b_(m−1) in which the request
    results in a cache miss for S and a cache hit for S′, thereby
    compensating for what happens upon the request for block b_(m). The
    proof is by contradiction. Assume that no request for blocks
    b_(i+1), … , b_(m−1) results in a cache miss for S and a cache hit
    for S′.

    We start by observing that once the caches C_(S,j) and C_(S′j) are
    equal for some j > i, they remain equal thereafter. Observe also
    that if b_(m) ∈ C_(S,m) and b_(m) ∉ C_(S′,m), then C_(S,m) ≠
    C_(S′,m). Therefore, solution S cannot have evicted block z upon the
    requests for blocks b_(i), … , b_(m−1), for if it had, then these
    two cache configurations would be equal. The remaining possibility
    is that upon each of these requests, we had C_(S,j) = D_(j) ∪ {z},
    C_(S′,j) = D_(j) ∪ {y} for some block y ≠ z, and solution S evicted
    some block w ∈ D_(j). Moreover, since none of these requests
    resulted in a cache miss for S and a cache hit for S^(′), the case
    of b_(j) = y never occurred. That is, for every request of blocks
    b_(i+1), … , b_(m−1), the requested block b_(j) was never the block
    y ∈ C_(S′,j) − C_(S,j). In these cases, after processing the
    request, we had C_(S′,j +1) = D_(j +1) ∪ {y}: the difference between
    the two caches did not change. Now, let’s go back to the request for
    block b_(i), where afterward, we had C_(S′,i+1) = D_(i+1) ∪ {x}.
    Because every succeeding request until requesting block b_(m) did
    not change the difference between the caches, we had C_(S′,j) =
    D_(j) ∪ {x} for j = i + 1, … , m.

    By definition, block z = b_(m) is requested after block x. That
    means at least one of blocks b_(i+1), … , b_(m−1) is block x. But
    for j = i + 1, … , m, we have x ∈ C_(S′,j) and x ∉ C_(S,j), so that
    at least one of these requests had a cache hit for S′ and a cache
    miss for S, a contradiction. We conclude that if solution S has a
    cache hit and solution S′ has a cache miss upon the request for
    block b_(m), then some earlier request had the opposite result, and
    so solution S′ produces no more cache misses than solution S. Since
    S is assumed to be optimal, S′ is optimal as well.

▪

Along with the optimal-substructure property, Theorem 15.5 tells us that
the furthest-in-future strategy yields the minimum number of cache
misses.

Exercises

15.4-1

Write pseudocode for a cache manager that uses the furthest-in-future
strategy. It should take as input a set C of blocks in the cache, the
number of blocks k that the cache can hold, a sequence b₁, b₂, … , b_(n)
of requested blocks, and the index i into the sequence for the block
b_(i) being requested. For each request, it should print out whether a
cache hit or cache miss occurs, and for each cache miss, it should also
print out which block, if any, is evicted.

15.4-2

Real cache managers do not know the future requests, and so they often
use the past to decide which block to evict. The least-recently-used, or
LRU, strategy evicts the block that, of all blocks currently in the
cache, was the least recently requested. (You can think of LRU as
“furthest-in-past.”) Give an example of a request sequence in which the
LRU strategy is not optimal, by showing that it induces more cache
misses than the furthest-in-future strategy does on the same request
sequence.

15.4-3

Professor Croesus suggests that in the proof of Theorem 15.5, the last
clause in property 1 can change to C_(S′,j) = D_(j) ∪ {x} or,
equivalently, require the block y given in property 1 to always be the
block x evicted by solution S upon the request for block b_(i). Show
where the proof breaks down with this requirement.

15.4-4

This section has assumed that at most one block is placed into the cache
whenever a block is requested. You can imagine, however, a strategy in
which multiple blocks may enter the cache upon a single request. Show
that for every solution that allows multiple blocks to enter the cache
upon each request, there is another solution that brings in only one
block upon each request and is at least as good.

Problems

15-1     Coin changing

Consider the problem of making change for n cents using the smallest
number of coins. Assume that each coin’s value is an integer.

a. Describe a greedy algorithm to make change consisting of quarters,
dimes, nickels, and pennies. Prove that your algorithm yields an optimal
solution.

b. Suppose that the available coins are in denominations that are powers
of c: the denominations are c⁰, c¹, … , c^(k) for some integers c > 1
and k ≥ 1. Show that the greedy algorithm always yields an optimal
solution.

c. Give a set of coin denominations for which the greedy algorithm does
not yield an optimal solution. Your set should include a penny so that
there is a solution for every value of n.

d. Give an O(nk)-time algorithm that makes change for any set of k
different coin denominations using the smallest number of coins,
assuming that one of the coins is a penny.

15-2     Scheduling to minimize average completion time

You are given a set S = {a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)} of tasks, where task a_(i)
requires p_(i) units of processing time to complete. Let C_(i) be the
completion time of task a_(i), that is, the time at which task a_(i)
completes processing. Your goal is to minimize the average completion
time, that is, to minimize [art]. For example, suppose that there are
two tasks a₁ and a₂ with p₁ = 3 and p₂ = 5, and consider the schedule in
which a₂ runs first, followed by a₁. Then we have C₂ = 5, C₁ = 8, and
the average completion time is (5 + 8)/2 = 6.5. If task a₁ runs first,
however, then we have C₁ = 3, C₂ = 8, and the average completion time is
(3 + 8)/2 = 5.5.

a. Give an algorithm that schedules the tasks so as to minimize the
average completion time. Each task must run nonpreemptively, that is,
once task a_(i) starts, it must run continuously for p_(i) units of time
until it is done. Prove that your algorithm minimizes the average
completion time, and analyze the running time of your algorithm.

b. Suppose now that the tasks are not all available at once. That is,
each task cannot start until its release time b_(i). Suppose also that
tasks may be preempted, so that a task can be suspended and restarted at
a later time. For example, a task a_(i) with processing time p_(i) = 6
and release time b_(i) = 1 might start running at time 1 and be
preempted at time 4. It might then resume at time 10 but be preempted at
time 11, and it might finally resume at time 13 and complete at time 15.
Task a_(i) has run for a total of 6 time units, but its running time has
been divided into three pieces. Give an algorithm that schedules the
tasks so as to minimize the average completion time in this new
scenario. Prove that your algorithm minimizes the average completion
time, and analyze the running time of your algorithm.

Chapter notes

Much more material on greedy algorithms can be found in Lawler [276] and
Papadimitriou and Steiglitz [353]. The greedy algorithm first appeared
in the combinatorial optimization literature in a 1971 article by
Edmonds [131].

The proof of correctness of the greedy algorithm for the
activity-selection problem is based on that of Gavril [179].

Huffman codes were invented in 1952 [233]. Lelewer and Hirschberg [294]
surveys data-compression techniques known as of 1987.

The furthest-in-future strategy was proposed by Belady [41], who
suggested it for virtual-memory systems. Alternative proofs that
furthest-in-future is optimal appear in articles by Lee et al. [284] and
Van Roy [443].

¹ We sometimes refer to the sets S_(k) as subproblems rather than as
just sets of activities. The context will make it clear whether we are
referring to S_(k) as a set of activities or as a subproblem whose input
is that set.

² Because the pseudocode takes s and f as arrays, it indexes into them
with square brackets rather than with subscripts.

16        Amortized Analysis

Imagine that you join Buff’s Gym. Buff charges a membership fee of $60
per month, plus $3 for every time you use the gym. Because you are
disciplined, you visit Buff’s Gym every day during the month of
November. On top of the $60 monthly charge for November, you pay another
3 × $30 = $90 that month. Although you can think of your fees as a flat
fee of $60 and another $90 in daily fees, you can think about it in
another way. All together, you pay $150 over 30 days, or an average of
$5 per day. When you look at your fees in this way, you are amortizing
the monthly fee over the 30 days of the month, spreading it out at $2
per day.

You can do the same thing when you analyze running times. In an
amortized analysis, you average the time required to perform a sequence
of data-structure operations over all the operations performed. With
amortized analysis, you show that if you average over a sequence of
operations, then the average cost of an operation is small, even though
a single operation within the sequence might be expensive. Amortized
analysis differs from average-case analysis in that probability is not
involved. An amortized analysis guarantees the average performance of
each operation in the worst case.

The first three sections of this chapter cover the three most common
techniques used in amortized analysis. Section 16.1 starts with
aggregate analysis, in which you determine an upper bound T (n) on the
total cost of a sequence of n operations. The average cost per operation
is then T (n)/n. You take the average cost as the amortized cost of each
operation, so that all operations have the same amortized cost.

Section 16.2 covers the accounting method, in which you determine an
amortized cost of each operation. When there is more than one type of
operation, each type of operation may have a different amortized cost.
The accounting method overcharges some operations early in the sequence,
storing the overcharge as “prepaid credit” on specific objects in the
data structure. Later in the sequence, the credit pays for operations
that are charged less than they actually cost.

Section 16.3 discusses the potential method, which is like the
accounting method in that you determine the amortized cost of each
operation and may overcharge operations early on to compensate for
undercharges later. The potential method maintains the credit as the
“potential energy” of the data structure as a whole instead of
associating the credit with individual objects within the data
structure.

We’ll use use two examples in this chapter to examine each of these
three methods. One is a stack with the additional operation MULTIPOP,
which pops several objects at once. The other is a binary counter that
counts up from 0 by means of the single operation INCREMENT.

While reading this chapter, bear in mind that the charges assigned
during an amortized analysis are for analysis purposes only. They need
not—and should not—appear in the code. If, for example, you assign a
credit to an object x when using the accounting method, you have no need
to assign an appropriate amount to some attribute, such as x.credit, in
the code.

When you perform an amortized analysis, you often gain insight into a
particular data structure, and this insight can help you optimize the
design. For example, Section 16.4 will use the potential method to
analyze a dynamically expanding and contracting table.

16.1    Aggregate analysis

In aggregate analysis, you show that for all n, a sequence of n
operations takes T (n) worst-case time in total. In the worst case, the
average cost, or amortized cost, per operation is therefore T (n)/n.
This amortized cost applies to each operation, even when there are
several types of operations in the sequence. The other two methods we
shall study in this chapter, the accounting method and the potential
method, may assign different amortized costs to different types of
operations.

Stack operations

As the first example of aggregate analysis, let’s analyze stacks that
have been augmented with a new operation. Section 10.1.3 presented the
two fundamental stack operations, each of which takes O(1) time:

PUSH(S, x) pushes object x onto stack S.

POP(S) pops the top of stack S and returns the popped object. Calling
POP on an empty stack generates an error.

[art]

Figure 16.1 The action of MULTIPOP on a stack S, shown initially in (a).
The top 4 objects are popped by MULTIPOP(S, 4), whose result is shown in
(b). The next operation is MULTIPOP(S, 7), which empties the stack—shown
in (c)—since fewer than 7 objects remained.

Since each of these operations runs in O(1) time, let us consider the
cost of each to be 1. The total cost of a sequence of n PUSH and POP
operations is therefore n, and the actual running time for n operations
is therefore Θ(n).

Now let’s add the stack operation MULTIPOP(S, k), which removes the k
top objects of stack S, popping the entire stack if the stack contains
fewer than k objects. Of course, the procedure assumes that k is
positive, and otherwise, the MULTIPOP operation leaves the stack
unchanged. In the pseudocode for MULTIPOP, the operation STACK-EMPTY
returns TRUE if there are no objects currently on the stack, and FALSE
otherwise. Figure 16.1 shows an example of MULTIPOP.

MULTIPOP(S, k)

  --- ------------------------------------
  1   while not STACK-EMPTY(S) and k > 0
  2   POP(S)
  3   k = k − 1
  --- ------------------------------------

What is the running time of MULTIPOP(S, k) on a stack of s objects? The
actual running time is linear in the number of POP operations actually
executed, and thus we can analyze MULTIPOP in terms of the abstract
costs of 1 each for PUSH and POP. The number of iterations of the while
loop is the number min {s, k} of objects popped off the stack. Each
iteration of the loop makes one call to POP in line 2. Thus, the total
cost of MULTIPOP is min {s, k}, and the actual running time is a linear
function of this cost.

Now let’s analyze a sequence of n PUSH, POP, and MULTIPOP operations on
an initially empty stack. The worst-case cost of a MULTIPOP operation in
the sequence is O(n), since the stack size is at most n. The worst-case
time of any stack operation is therefore O(n), and hence a sequence of n
operations costs O(n²), since the sequence contains at most n MULTIPOP
operations costing O(n) each. Although this analysis is correct, the
O(n²) result, which came from considering the worst-case cost of each
operation individually, is not tight.

Yes, a single MULTIPOP might be expensive, but an aggregate analysis
shows that any sequence of n PUSH, POP, and MULTIPOP operations on an
initially empty stack has an upper bound on its cost of O(n). Why? An
object cannot be popped from the stack unless it was first pushed.
Therefore, the number of times that POP can be called on a nonempty
stack, including calls within MULTIPOP, is at most the number of PUSH
operations, which is at most n. For any value of n, any sequence of n
PUSH, POP, and MULTIPOP operations takes a total of O(n) time. Averaging
over the n operations gives an average cost per operation of O(n)/n =
O(1). Aggregate analysis assigns the amortized cost of each operation to
be the average cost. In this example, therefore, all three stack
operations have an amortized cost of O(1).

To recap: although the average cost, and hence the running time, of a
stack operation is O(1), the analysis did not rely on probabilistic
reasoning. Instead, the analysis yielded a worst-case bound of O(n) on a
sequence of n operations. Dividing this total cost by n yielded that the
average cost per operation—that is, the amortized cost—is O(1).

Incrementing a binary counter

As another example of aggregate analysis, consider the problem of
implementing a k-bit binary counter that counts upward from 0. An array
A[0 : k − 1] of bits represents the counter. A binary number x that is
stored in the counter has its lowest-order bit in A[0] and its
highest-order bit in A[k − 1], so that [art]. Initially, x = 0, and thus
A[i] = 0 for i = 0, 1, … , k − 1. To add 1 (modulo 2^(k)) to the value
in the counter, call the INCREMENT procedure.

INCREMENT(A, k)

  --- ---------------------------
  1   i = 0
  2   while i < k and A[i] == 1
  3   A[i] = 0
  4   i = i + 1
  5   if i < k
  6   A[i] = 1
  --- ---------------------------

Figure 16.2 shows what happens to a binary counter when INCREMENT is
called 16 times, starting with the initial value 0 and ending with the
value 16. Each iteration of the while loop in lines 2–4 adds a 1 into
position i. If A[i] = 1, then adding 1 flips the bit to 0 in position i
and yields a carry of 1, to be added into position i + 1 during the next
iteration of the loop. Otherwise, the loop ends, and then, if i < k,
A[i] must be 0, so that line 6 adds a 1 into position i, flipping the 0
to a 1. If the loop ends with i = k, then the call of INCREMENT flipped
all k bits from 1 to 0. The cost of each INCREMENT operation is linear
in the number of bits flipped.

[art]

Figure 16.2 An 8-bit binary counter as its value goes from 0 to 16 by a
sequence of 16 INCREMENT operations. Bits that flip to achieve the next
value are shaded in blue. The running cost for flipping bits is shown at
the right. The total cost is always less than twice the total number of
INCREMENT operations.

As with the stack example, a cursory analysis yields a bound that is
correct but not tight. A single execution of INCREMENT takes Θ(k) time
in the worst case, in which all the bits in array A are 1. Thus, a
sequence of n INCREMENT operations on an initially zero counter takes
O(nk) time in the worst case.

Although a single call of INCREMENT might flip all k bits, not all bits
flip upon each call. (Note the similarity to MULTIPOP, where a single
call might pop many objects, but not every call pops many objects.) As
Figure 16.2 shows, A[0] does flip each time INCREMENT is called. The
next bit up, A[1], flips only every other time: a sequence of n
INCREMENT operations on an initially zero counter causes A[1] to flip
⌊n/2⌋ times. Similarly, bit A[2] flips only every fourth time, or ⌊n/4⌋
times in a sequence of n INCREMENT operations. In general, for i = 0, 1,
… , k − 1, bit A[i] flips ⌊n/2^(i)⌋ times in a sequence of n INCREMENT
operations on an initially zero counter. For i ≥ k, bit A[i] does not
exist, and so it cannot flip. The total number of flips in the sequence
is thus

[art]

by equation (A.7) on page 1142. Thus, a sequence of n INCREMENT
operations on an initially zero counter takes O(n) time in the worst
case. The average cost of each operation, and therefore the amortized
cost per operation, is O(n)/n = O(1).

Exercises

16.1-1

If the set of stack operations includes a MULTIPUSH operation, which
pushes k items onto the stack, does the O(1) bound on the amortized cost
of stack operations continue to hold?

16.1-2

Show that if a DECREMENT operation is included in the k-bit counter
example, n operations can cost as much as Θ(nk) time.

16.1-3

Use aggregate analysis to determine the amortized cost per operation for
a sequence of n operations on a data structure in which the ith
operation costs i if i is an exact power of 2, and 1 otherwise.

16.2    The accounting method

In the accounting method of amortized analysis, you assign differing
charges to different operations, with some operations charged more or
less than they actually cost. The amount that you charge an operation is
its amortized cost. When an operation’s amortized cost exceeds its
actual cost, you assign the difference to specific objects in the data
structure as credit. Credit can help pay for later operations whose
amortized cost is less than their actual cost. Thus, you can view the
amortized cost of an operation as being split between its actual cost
and credit that is either deposited or used up. Different operations may
have different amortized costs. This method differs from aggregate
analysis, in which all operations have the same amortized cost.

You must choose the amortized costs of operations carefully. If you want
to use amortized costs to show that in the worst case the average cost
per operation is small, you must ensure that the total amortized cost of
a sequence of operations provides an upper bound on the total actual
cost of the sequence. Moreover, as in aggregate analysis, the upper
bound must apply to all sequences of operations. Let’s denote the actual
cost of the ith operation by c_(i) and the amortized cost of the ith
operation by ĉ_(i). Then you need to have

[art]

for all sequences of n operations. The total credit stored in the data
structure is the difference between the total amortized cost and the
total actual cost, or [art]. By inequality (16.1), the total credit
associated with the data structure must be nonnegative at all times. If
you ever allowed the total credit to become negative (the result of
undercharging early operations with the promise of repaying the account
later on), then the total amortized costs incurred at that time would be
below the total actual costs incurred. In that case, for the sequence of
operations up to that time, the total amortized cost would not be an
upper bound on the total actual cost. Thus, you must take care that the
total credit in the data structure never becomes negative.

Stack operations

To illustrate the accounting method of amortized analysis, we return to
the stack example. Recall that the actual costs of the operations were

  ---------- -------------
  PUSH       1,
  POP        1,
  MULTIPOP   min {s, k},
  ---------- -------------

where k is the argument supplied to MULTIPOP and s is the stack size
when it is called. Let us assign the following amortized costs:

  ---------- ----
  PUSH       2,
  POP        0,
  MULTIPOP   0.
  ---------- ----

The amortized cost of MULTIPOP is a constant (0), whereas the actual
cost is variable, and thus all three amortized costs are constant. In
general, the amortized costs of the operations under consideration may
differ from each other, and they may even differ asymptotically.

Now let’s see how to pay for any sequence of stack operations by
charging the amortized costs. Let $1 represent each unit of cost. At
first, the stack is empty. Recall the analogy of Section 10.1.3 between
the stack data structure and a stack of plates in a cafeteria. Upon
pushing a plate onto the stack, use $1 to pay the actual cost of the
push, leaving a credit of $1 (out of the $2 charged). Place that $1 of
credit on top of the plate. At any point in time, every plate on the
stack has $1 of credit on it.

The $1 stored on the plate serves to prepay the cost of popping the
plate from the stack. A POP operation incurs no charge: pay the actual
cost of popping a plate by taking the $1 of credit off the plate. Thus,
by charging the PUSH operation a little bit more, we can view the POP
operation as free.

Moreover, the MULTIPOP operation also incurs no charge, since it’s just
repeated POP operations, each of which is free. If a MULTIPOP operation
pops k plates, then the actual cost is paid by the k dollars stored on
the k plates. Because each plate on the stack has $1 of credit on it,
and the stack always has a nonnegative number of plates, the amount of
credit is always nonnegative. Thus, for any sequence of n PUSH, POP, and
MULTIPOP operations, the total amortized cost is an upper bound on the
total actual cost. Since the total amortized cost is O(n), so is the
total actual cost.

Incrementing a binary counter

As another illustration of the accounting method, let’s analyze the
INCREMENT operation on a binary counter that starts at 0. Recall that
the running time of this operation is proportional to the number of bits
flipped, which serves as the cost for this example. Again, we’ll use $1
to represent each unit of cost (the flipping of a bit in this example).

For the amortized analysis, the amortized cost to set a 0-bit to 1 is
$2. When a bit is set to 1, $1 of the $2 pays to actually set the bit.
The second $1 resides on the bit as credit to be used later if and when
the bit is reset to 0. At any point in time, every 1-bit in the counter
has $1 of credit on it, and thus resetting a bit to 0 can be viewed as
costing nothing, and the $1 on the bit prepays for the reset.

Here is how to determine the amortized cost of INCREMENT. The cost of
resetting the bits to 0 within the while loop is paid for by the dollars
on the bits that are reset. The INCREMENT procedure sets at most one bit
to 1, in line 6, and therefore the amortized cost of an INCREMENT
operation is at most $2. The number of 1-bits in the counter never
becomes negative, and thus the amount of credit stays nonnegative at all
times. Thus, for n INCREMENT operations, the total amortized cost is
O(n), which bounds the total actual cost.

Exercises

16.2-1

You perform a sequence of PUSH and POP operations on a stack whose size
never exceeds k. After every k operations, a copy of the entire stack is
made automatically, for backup purposes. Show that the cost of n stack
operations, including copying the stack, is O(n) by assigning suitable
amortized costs to the various stack operations.

16.2-2

Redo Exercise 16.1-3 using an accounting method of analysis.

16.2-3

You wish not only to increment a counter but also to reset it to 0
(i.e., make all bits in it 0). Counting the time to examine or modify a
bit as Θ(1), show how to implement a counter as an array of bits so that
any sequence of n INCREMENT and RESET operations takes O(n) time on an
initially zero counter. (Hint: Keep a pointer to the high-order 1.)

16.3    The potential method

Instead of representing prepaid work as credit stored with specific
objects in the data structure, the potential method of amortized
analysis represents the prepaid work as “potential energy,” or just
“potential,” which can be released to pay for future operations. The
potential applies to the data structure as a whole rather than to
specific objects within the data structure.

The potential method works as follows. Starting with an initial data
structure D₀, a sequence of n operations occurs. For each i = 1, 2, … ,
n, let c_(i) be the actual cost of the ith operation and D_(i) be the
data structure that results after applying the ith operation to data
structure D_(i−1). A potential function Φ maps each data structure D_(i)
to a real number Φ(D_(i)), which is the potential associated with D_(i).
The amortized cost ĉ_(i) of the ith operation with respect to potential
function Φ is defined by

[art]

The amortized cost of each operation is therefore its actual cost plus
the change in potential due to the operation. By equation (16.2), the
total amortized cost of the n operations is

[art]

The second equation follows from equation (A.12) on page 1143 because
the Φ(D_(i)) terms telescope.

If you can define a potential function Φ so that Φ(D_(n)) ≥ Φ(D₀), then
the total amortized cost [art] gives an upper bound on the total actual
cost [art]. In practice, you don’t always know how many operations might
be performed. Therefore, if you require that Φ(D_(i)) ≥ Φ(D₀) for all i,
then you guarantee, as in the accounting method, that you’ve paid in
advance. It’s usually simplest to just define Φ(D₀) to be 0 and then
show that Φ(D_(i)) ≥ 0 for all i. (See Exercise 16.3-1 for an easy way
to handle cases in which Φ(D₀) ≠ 0.)

Intuitively, if the potential difference Φ(D_(i)) − Φ(D_(i−1)) of the
ith operation is positive, then the amortized cost ĉ_(i) represents an
overcharge to the ith operation, and the potential of the data structure
increases. If the potential difference is negative, then the amortized
cost represents an undercharge to the ith operation, and the decrease in
the potential pays for the actual cost of the operation.

The amortized costs defined by equations (16.2) and (16.3) depend on the
choice of the potential function Φ. Different potential functions may
yield different amortized costs, yet still be upper bounds on the actual
costs. You will often find trade-offs that you can make in choosing a
potential function. The best potential function to use depends on the
desired time bounds.

Stack operations

To illustrate the potential method, we return once again to the example
of the stack operations PUSH, POP, and MULTIPOP. We define the potential
function Φ on a stack to be the number of objects in the stack. The
potential of the empty initial stack D₀ is Φ(D₀) = 0. Since the number
of objects in the stack is never negative, the stack D_(i) that results
after the ith operation has nonnegative potential, and thus

  ---------- --- --------
  Φ(D_(i))   ≥   0
             =   Φ(D₀).
  ---------- --- --------

The total amortized cost of n operations with respect to Φ therefore
represents an upper bound on the actual cost.

Now let’s compute the amortized costs of the various stack operations.
If the ith operation on a stack containing s objects is a PUSH
operation, then the potential difference is

  ----------------------- --- -------------
  Φ(D_(i)) − Φ(D_(i−1))   =   (s + 1) − s
                          =   1.
  ----------------------- --- -------------

By equation (16.2), the amortized cost of this PUSH operation is

  ------- --- -------------------------------
  ĉ_(i)   =   c_(i) + Φ(D_(i)) − Φ(D_(i−1))
          =   1 + 1
          =   2.
  ------- --- -------------------------------

Suppose that the ith operation on the stack of s objects is MULTIPOP(S,
k), which causes k′ = min {s, k} objects to be popped off the stack. The
actual cost of the operation is k′, and the potential difference is

Φ(D_(i)) − Φ(D_(i−1)) = −k′.

Thus, the amortized cost of the MULTIPOP operation is

  ------- --- -------------------------------
  ĉ_(i)   =   c_(i) + Φ(D_(i)) − Φ(D_(i−1))
          =   k′ − k′
          =   0.
  ------- --- -------------------------------

Similarly, the amortized cost of an ordinary POP operation is 0.

The amortized cost of each of the three operations is O(1), and thus the
total amortized cost of a sequence of n operations is O(n). Since
Φ(D_(i)) ≥ Φ(D₀), the total amortized cost of n operations is an upper
bound on the total actual cost. The worst-case cost of n operations is
therefore O(n).

Incrementing a binary counter

As another example of the potential method, we revisit incrementing a
k-bit binary counter. This time, the potential of the counter after the
ith INCREMENT operation is defined to be the number of 1-bits in the
counter after the ith operation, which we’ll denote by b_(i).

Here is how to compute the amortized cost of an INCREMENT operation.
Suppose that the ith INCREMENT operation resets t_(i) bits to 0. The
actual cost c_(i) of the operation is therefore at most t_(i) + 1, since
in addition to resetting t_(i) bits, it sets at most one bit to 1. If
b_(i) = 0, then the ith operation had reset all k bits to 0, and so
b_(i−1) = t_(i) = k. If b_(i) > 0, then b_(i) = b_(i−1) −t_(i) +1. In
either case, b_(i) ≤ b_(i−1) − t_(i) + 1, and the potential difference
is

  ----------------------- --- ---------------------------------
  Φ(D_(i)) − Φ(D_(i−1))   ≤   (b_(i−1) − t_(i) + 1) − b_(i−1)
                          =   1 − t_(i).
  ----------------------- --- ---------------------------------

The amortized cost is therefore

  ------- --- -------------------------------
  ĉ_(i)   =   c_(i) + Φ(D_(i)) − Φ(D_(i−1))
          ≤   (t_(i) + 1) + (1 − t_(i))
          =   2.
  ------- --- -------------------------------

If the counter starts at 0, then Φ(D₀) = 0. Since Φ(D_(i)) ≥ 0 for all
i, the total amortized cost of a sequence of n INCREMENT operations is
an upper bound on the total actual cost, and so the worst-case cost of n
INCREMENT operations is O(n).

The potential method provides a simple and clever way to analyze the
counter even when it does not start at 0. The counter starts with b₀
1-bits, and after n INCREMENT operations it has b_(n) 1-bits, where 0 ≤
b₀, b_(n) ≤ k. Rewrite equation (16.3) as

[art]

Since Φ(D₀) = b₀, Φ(D_(n)) = b_(n), and ĉ_(i) ≤ 2 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, the
total actual cost of n INCREMENT operations is

[art]

In particular, b₀ ≤ k means that as long as k = O(n), the total actual
cost is O(n). In other words, if at least n = Ω(k) INCREMENT operations
occur, the total actual cost is O(n), no matter what initial value the
counter contains.

Exercises

16.3-1

Suppose you have a potential function Φ such that Φ(D_(i)) ≥ Φ(D₀) for
all i, but Φ(D₀) ≠ 0. Show that there exists a potential function Φ′
such that Φ′(D₀) = 0, Φ′(D_(i)) ≥ 0 for all i ≥ 1, and the amortized
costs using Φ′ are the same as the amortized costs using Φ.

16.3-2

Redo Exercise 16.1-3 using a potential method of analysis.

16.3-3

Consider an ordinary binary min-heap data structure supporting the
instructions INSERT and EXTRACT-MIN that, when there are n items in the
heap, implements each operation in O(lg n) worst-case time. Give a
potential function Φ such that the amortized cost of INSERT is O(lg n)
and the amortized cost of EXTRACT-MIN is O(1), and show that your
potential function yields these amortized time bounds. Note that in the
analysis, n is the number of items currently in the heap, and you do not
know a bound on the maximum number of items that can ever be stored in
the heap.

16.3-4

What is the total cost of executing n of the stack operations PUSH, POP,
and MULTIPOP, assuming that the stack begins with s₀ objects and
finishes with s_(n) objects?

16.3-5

Show how to implement a queue with two ordinary stacks (Exercise 10.1-7)
so that the amortized cost of each ENQUEUE and each DEQUEUE operation is
O(1).

16.3-6

Design a data structure to support the following two operations for a
dynamic multiset S of integers, which allows duplicate values:

INSERT(S, x) inserts x into S.

DELETE-LARGER-HALF(S) deletes the largest ⌈|S|/2⌉ elements from S.

Explain how to implement this data structure so that any sequence of m
INSERT and DELETE-LARGER-HALF operations runs in O(m) time. Your
implementation should also include a way to output the elements of S in
O(|S|) time.

16.4    Dynamic tables

When you design an application that uses a table, you do not always know
in advance how many items the table will hold. You might allocate space
for the table, only to find out later that it is not enough. The program
must then reallocate the table with a larger size and copy all items
stored in the original table over into the new, larger table. Similarly,
if many items have been deleted from the table, it might be worthwhile
to reallocate the table with a smaller size. This section studies this
problem of dynamically expanding and contracting a table. Amortized
analyses will show that the amortized cost of insertion and deletion is
only O(1), even though the actual cost of an operation is large when it
triggers an expansion or a contraction. Moreover, you’ll see how to
guarantee that the unused space in a dynamic table never exceeds a
constant fraction of the total space.

Let’s assume that the dynamic table supports the operations TABLE-INSERT
and TABLE-DELETE. TABLE-INSERT inserts into the table an item that
occupies a single slot, that is, a space for one item. Likewise,
TABLE-DELETE removes an item from the table, thereby freeing a slot. The
details of the data-structuring method used to organize the table are
unimportant: it could be a stack (Section 10.1.3), a heap (Chapter 6), a
hash table (Chapter 11), or something else.

It is convenient to use a concept introduced in Section 11.2, where we
analyzed hashing. The load factor α(T) of a nonempty table T is defined
as the number of items stored in the table divided by the size (number
of slots) of the table. An empty table (one with no slots) has size 0,
and its load factor is defined to be 1. If the load factor of a dynamic
table is bounded below by a constant, the unused space in the table is
never more than a constant fraction of the total amount of space.

We start by analyzing a dynamic table that allows only insertion and
then move on to the more general case that supports both insertion and
deletion.

16.4.1    Table expansion

Let’s assume that storage for a table is allocated as an array of slots.
A table fills up when all slots have been used or, equivalently, when
its load factor is 1.¹ In some software environments, upon an attempt to
insert an item into a full table, the only alternative is to abort with
an error. The scenario in this section assumes, however, that the
software environment, like many modern ones, provides a
memory-management system that can allocate and free blocks of storage on
request. Thus, upon inserting an item into a full table, the system can
expand the table by allocating a new table with more slots than the old
table had. Because the table must always reside in contiguous memory,
the system must allocate a new array for the larger table and then copy
items from the old table into the new table.

A common heuristic allocates a new table with twice as many slots as the
old one. If the only table operations are insertions, then the load
factor of the table is always at least 1/2, and thus the amount of
wasted space never exceeds half the total space in the table.

The TABLE-INSERT procedure on the following page assumes that T is an
object representing the table. The attribute T.table contains a pointer
to the block of storage representing the table, T.num contains the
number of items in the table, and T.size gives the total number of slots
in the table. Initially, the table is empty: T.num = T.size = 0.

There are two types of insertion here: the TABLE-INSERT procedure itself
and the elementary insertion into a table in lines 6 and 10. We can
analyze the running time of TABLE-INSERT in terms of the number of
elementary insertions by assigning a cost of 1 to each elementary
insertion. In most computing environments, the overhead for allocating
an initial table in line 2 is constant and the overhead for allocating
and freeing storage in lines 5 and 7 is dominated by the cost of
transfer-ring items in line 6. Thus, the actual running time of
TABLE-INSERT is linear in the number of elementary insertions. An
expansion occurs when lines 5–9 execute.

TABLE-INSERT(T, x)

  ----- --------------------------------------------
    1   if T.size == 0
    2   allocate T.table with 1 slot
    3   T.size = 1
    4   if T.num == T.size
    5   allocate new-table with 2 · T.size slots
    6   insert all items in T.table into new-table
    7   free T.table
    8   T.table = new-table
    9   T.size = 2 · T.size
  10    insert x into T.table
  11    T.num = T.num + 1
  ----- --------------------------------------------

Now, we’ll use all three amortized analysis techniques to analyze a
sequence of n TABLE-INSERT operations on an initially empty table.
First, we need to determine the actual cost c_(i) of the ith operation.
If the current table has room for the new item (or if this is the first
operation), then c_(i) = 1, since the only elementary insertion
performed is the one in line 10. If the current table is full, however,
and an expansion occurs, then c_(i) = i: the cost is 1 for the
elementary insertion in line 10 plus i − 1 for the items copied from the
old table to the new table in line 6. For n operations, the worst-case
cost of an operation is O(n), which leads to an upper bound of O(n²) on
the total running time for n operations.

This bound is not tight, because the table rarely expands in the course
of n TABLE-INSERT operations. Specifically, the ith operation causes an
expansion only when i − 1 is an exact power of 2. The amortized cost of
an operation is in fact O(1), as an aggregate analysis shows. The cost
of the ith operation is

[art]

The total cost of n TABLE-INSERT operations is therefore

[art]

because at most n operations cost 1 each and the costs of the remaining
operations form a geometric series. Since the total cost of n
TABLE-INSERT operations is bounded by 3n, the amortized cost of a single
operation is at most 3.

[art]

Figure 16.3 Analysis of table expansion by the accounting method. Each
call of TABLE-INSERT charges $3 as follows: $1 to pay for the elementary
insertion, $1 on the item inserted as prepayment for it to be reinserted
later, and $1 on an item that was already in the table, also as
prepayment for reinsertion. (a) The table immediately after an
expansion, with 8 slots, 4 items (tan slots), and no stored credit.
(b)–(e) After each of 4 calls to TABLE-INSERT, the table has one more
item, with $1 stored on the new item and $1 stored on one of the 4 items
that were present immediately after the expansion. Slots with these new
items are blue. (f) Upon the next call to TABLE-INSERT, the table is
full, and so it expands again. Each item had $1 to pay for it to be
reinserted. Now the table looks as it did in part (a), with no stored
credit but 16 slots and 8 items.

The accounting method can provide some intuition for why the amortized
cost of a TABLE-INSERT operation should be 3. You can think of each item
paying for three elementary insertions: inserting itself into the
current table, moving itself the next time that the table expands, and
moving some other item that was already in the table the next time that
the table expands. For example, suppose that the size of the table is m
immediately after an expansion, as shown in Figure 16.3 for m = 8. Then
the table holds m/2 items, and it contains no credit. Each call of
TABLE-INSERT charges $3. The elementary insertion that occurs
immediately costs $1. Another $1 resides on the item inserted as credit.
The third $1 resides as credit on one of the m/2 items already in the
table. The table will not fill again until another m/2 − 1 items have
been inserted, and thus, by the time the table contains m items and is
full, each item has $1 on it to pay for it to be reinserted it during
the expansion.

Now, let’s see how to use the potential method. We’ll use it again in
Section 16.4.2 to design a TABLE-DELETE operation that has an O(1)
amortized cost as well. Just as the accounting method had no stored
credit immediately after an expansion—that is, when T.num =
T.size/2—let’s define the potential to be 0 when T.num = T.size/2. As
elementary insertions occur, the potential needs to increase enough to
pay for all the reinsertions that will happen when the table next
expands. The table fills after another T.size/2 calls of TABLE-INSERT,
when T.num = T.size. The next call of TABLE-INSERT after these T.size/2
calls triggers an expansion with a cost of T.size to reinsert all the
items. Therefore, over the course of T.size/2 calls of TABLE-INSERT, the
potential must increase from 0 to T.size. To achieve this increase,
let’s design the potential so that each call of TABLE-INSERT increases
it by

[art]

until the table expands. You can see that the potential function

[art]

equals 0 immediately after the table expands, when T.num = T.size/2, and
it increases by 2 upon each insertion until the table fills. Once the
table fills, that is, when T.num = T.size, the potential Φ(T) equals
T.size. The initial value of the potential is 0, and since the table is
always at least half full, T.num ≥ T.size/2, which implies that Φ(T) is
always nonnegative. Thus, the sum of the amortized costs of n
TABLE-INSERT operations gives an upper bound on the sum of the actual
costs.

To analyze the amortized costs of table operations, it is convenient to
think in terms of the change in potential due to each operation. Letting
Φ_(i) denote the potential after the ith operation, we can rewrite
equation (16.2) as

  ------- --- -------------------------
  ĉ_(i)   =   c_(i) + Φ_(i) − Φ_(i−1)
          =   c_(i) + ΔΦ_(i),
  ------- --- -------------------------

where ΔΦ_(i) is the change in potential due to the ith operation. First,
consider the case when the ith insertion does not cause the table to
expand. In this case, ΔΦ_(i) is 2. Since the actual cost c_(i) is 1, the
amortized cost is

  ------- --- ----------------
  ĉ_(i)   =   c_(i) + ΔΦ_(i)
          =   1 + 2
          =   3.
  ------- --- ----------------

Now, consider the change in potential when the table does expand during
the ith insertion because it was full immediately before the insertion.
Let num_(i) denote the number of items stored in the table after the ith
operation and size_(i) denote the total size of the table after the ith
operation, so that size_(i−1) = num_(i−1) = i − 1 and therefore Φ_(i−1)
= 2(size_(i−1) − size_(i−1)/2) = size_(i−1) = i − 1. Immediately after
the expansion, the potential goes down to 0, and then the new item is
inserted, causing the potential to increase to Φ_(i) = 2. Thus, when the
ith insertion triggers an expansion, ΔΦ_(i) = 2 − (i − 1) = 3 − i. When
the table expands in the ith TABLE-INSERT operation, the actual cost
c_(i) equals i (to reinsert i − 1 items and insert the ith item), giving
an amortized cost of

  ------- --- ----------------
  ĉ_(i)   =   c_(i) + ΔΦ_(i)
          =   i + (3 − i)
          =   3.
  ------- --- ----------------

Figure 16.4 plots the values of num_(i), size_(i), and Φ_(i) against i.
Notice how the potential builds to pay for expanding the table.

[art]

Figure 16.4 The effect of a sequence of n TABLE-INSERT operations on the
number num_(i) of items in the table (the brown line), the number
size_(i) of slots in the table (the blue line), and the potential Φ_(i)
= 2(num_(i) − size_(i)/2) (the red line), each being measured after the
ith operation. Immediately before an expansion, the potential has built
up to the number of items in the table, and therefore it can pay for
moving all the items to the new table. Afterward, the potential drops to
0, but it immediately increases by 2 upon insertion of the item that
caused the expansion.

16.4.2    Table expansion and contraction

To implement a TABLE-DELETE operation, it is simple enough to remove the
specified item from the table. In order to limit the amount of wasted
space, however, you might want to contract the table when the load
factor becomes too small. Table contraction is analogous to table
expansion: when the number of items in the table drops too low, allocate
a new, smaller table and then copy the items from the old table into the
new one. You can then free the storage for the old table by returning it
to the memory-management system. In order to not waste space, yet keep
the amortized costs low, the insertion and deletion procedures should
preserve two properties:

- the load factor of the dynamic table is bounded below by a positive
  constant, as well as above by 1, and
- the amortized cost of a table operation is bounded above by a
  constant.

The actual cost of each operation equals the number of elementary
insertions or deletions.

You might think that if you double the table size upon inserting an item
into a full table, then you should halve the size when deleting an item
that would cause the table to become less than half full. This strategy
does indeed guarantee that the load factor of the table never drops
below 1/2. Unfortunately, it can also cause the amortized cost of an
operation to be quite large. Consider the following scenario. Perform n
operations on a table T of size n/2, where n is an exact power of 2. The
first n/2 operations are insertions, which by our previous analysis cost
a total of Θ(n). At the end of this sequence of insertions, T.num =
T.size = n/2. For the second n/2 operations, perform the following
sequence:

insert, delete, delete, insert, insert, delete, delete, insert, insert,
….

The first insertion causes the table to expand to size n. The two
deletions that follow cause the table to contract back to size n/2. Two
further insertions cause another expansion, and so forth. The cost of
each expansion and contraction is Θ(n), and there are Θ(n) of them.
Thus, the total cost of the n operations is Θ(n²), making the amortized
cost of an operation Θ(n).

The problem with this strategy is that after the table expands, not
enough deletions occur to pay for a contraction. Likewise, after the
table contracts, not enough insertions take place to pay for an
expansion.

How can we solve this problem? Allow the load factor of the table to
drop below 1/2. Specifically, continue to double the table size upon
inserting an item into a full table, but halve the table size when
deleting an item causes the table to become less than 1/4 full, rather
than 1/2 full as before. The load factor of the table is therefore
bounded below by the constant 1/4, and the load factor is 1/2
immediately after a contraction.

An expansion or contraction should exhaust all the built-up potential,
so that immediately after expansion or contraction, when the load factor
is 1/2, the table’s potential is 0. Figure 16.5 shows the idea. As the
load factor deviates from 1/2, the potential increases so that by the
time an expansion or contraction occurs, the table has garnered
sufficient potential to pay for copying all the items into the newly
allocated table. Thus, the potential function should grow to T.num by
the time that the load factor has either increased to 1 or decreased to
1/4. Immediately after either expanding or contracting the table, the
load factor goes back to 1/2 and the table’s potential reduces back to
0.

[art]

Figure 16.5 How to think about the potential function Φ for table
insertion and deletion. When the load factor α is 1/2, the potential is
0. In order to accumulate sufficient potential to pay for reinserting
all T.size items when the table fills, the potential needs to increase
by 2 upon each insertion when α ≥ 1/2. Correspondingly, the potential
decreases by 2 upon each deletion that leaves α ≥ 1/2. In order to
accrue enough potential to cover the cost of reinserting all T.size/4
items when the table contracts, the potential needs to increase by 1
upon each deletion when α < 1/2, and correspondingly the potential
decreases by 1 upon each insertion that leaves α < 1/2. The red area
represents load factors less than 1/4, which are not allowed.

We omit the code for TABLE-DELETE, since it is analogous to
TABLE-INSERT. We assume that if a contraction occurs during
TABLE-DELETE, it occurs after the item is deleted from the table. The
analysis assumes that whenever the number of items in the table drops to
0, the table occupies no storage. That is, if T.num = 0, then T.size =
0.

How do we design a potential function that gives constant amortized time
for both insertion and deletion? When the load factor is at least 1/2,
the same potential function, Φ(T) = 2(T.num − T.size/2), that we used
for insertion still works. When the table is at least half full, each
insertion increases the potential by 2 if the table does not expand, and
each deletion reduces the potential by 2 if it does not cause the load
factor to drop below 1/2.

What about when the load factor is less than 1/2, that is, when 1/4 ≤
α(T) < 1/2? As before, when α(T) = 1/2, so that T.num = T.size/2, the
potential Φ(T) should be 0. To get the load factor from 1/2 down to 1/4,
T.size/4 deletions need to occur, at which time T.num = T.size/4. To pay
for all the reinsertions, the potential must increase from 0 to T.size/4
over these T.size/4 deletions. Therefore, for each call of TABLE-DELETE
until the table contracts, the potential should increase by

[art]

Likewise, when α < 1/2, each call of TABLE-INSERT should decrease the
potential by 1. When 1/4 ≤ α(T) < 1/2, the potential function

Φ(T) = T.size/2 − T.num

produces this desired behavior.

Putting the two cases together, we get the potential function

[art]

The potential of an empty table is 0 and the potential is never
negative. Thus, the total amortized cost of a sequence of operations
with respect to Φ provides an upper bound on the actual cost of the
sequence. Figure 16.6 illustrates how the potential function behaves
over a sequence of insertions and deletions.

Now, let’s determine the amortized costs of each operation. As before,
let num_(i) denote the number of items stored in the table after the ith
operation, size_(i) denote the total size of the table after the ith
operation, α_(i) = num_(i)/size_(i) denote the load factor after the ith
operation, Φ_(i) denote the potential after the ith operation, and
ΔΦ_(i) denote the change in potential due to the ith operation.
Initially, num₀ = 0, size₀ = 0, and Φ₀ = 0.

The cases in which the table does not expand or contract and the load
factor does not cross α = 1/2 are straightforward. As we have seen, if
α_(i−1) ≥ 1/2 and the ith operation is an insertion that does not cause
the table to expand, then ΔΦ_(i) = 2. Likewise, if the ith operation is
a deletion and α_(i) ≥ 1/2, then ΔΦ_(i) = −2. Furthermore, if α_(i−1) <
1/2 and the ith operation is a deletion that does not trigger a
contraction, then ΔΦ_(i) = 1, and if the ith operation is an insertion
and α_(i) < 1/2, then ΔΦ_(i) = −1. In other words, if no expansion or
contraction occurs and the load factor does not cross α = 1/2, then

- if the load factor stays at or above 1/2, then the potential increases
  by 2 for an insertion and decreases by 2 for a deletion, and
- if the load factor stays below 1/2, then the potential increases by 1
  for a deletion and decreases by 1 for an insertion.

In each of these cases, the actual cost c_(i) of the ith operation is
just 1, and so

[art]

Figure 16.6 The effect of a sequence of n TABLE-INSERT and TABLE-DELETE
operations on the number num_(i) of items in the table (the brown line),
the number size_(i) of slots in the table (the blue line), and the
potential (the red line)

[art]

where α_(i) = num_(i)/size_(i), each measured after the ith operation.
Immediately before an expansion or contraction, the potential has built
up to the number of items in the table, and therefore it can pay for
moving all the items to the new table.

- if the ith operation is an insertion, its amortized cost ĉ_(i) is
  c_(i) + ΔΦ_(i), which is 1 + 2 = 3 if the load factor stays at or
  above 1/2, and 1 + (−1) = 0 if the load factor stays below 1/2, and
- if the ith operation is a deletion, its amortized cost ĉ_(i) is
  c_(i) + ΔΦ_(i), which is 1 + (−2) = −1 if the load factor stays at or
  above 1/2, and 1 + 1 = 2 if the load factor stays below 1/2.

Four cases remain: an insertion that takes the load factor from below
1/2 to 1/2, a deletion that takes the load factor from 1/2 to below 1/2,
a deletion that causes the table to contract, and an insertion that
causes the table to expand. We analyzed that last case at the end of
Section 16.4.1 to show that its amortized cost is 3.

When the ith operation is a deletion that causes the table to contract,
we have num_(i−1) = size_(i−1)/4 before the contraction, then the item
is deleted, and finally num_(i) = size_(i)/2 − 1 after the contraction.
Thus, by equation (16.5) we have

  --------- --- -----------------------------
  Φ_(i−1)   =   size_(i−1)/2 − num_(i−1)
            =   size_(i−1)/2 − size_(i−1)/4
            =   size_(i−1)/4,
  --------- --- -----------------------------

which also equals the actual cost c_(i) of deleting one item and copying
size_(i−1)/4 − 1 items into the new, smaller table. Since num_(i) =
size_(i)/2 − 1 after the operation has completed, α_(i) < 1/2, and so

  ------- --- ----------------------
  Φ_(i)   =   size_(i)/2 − num_(i)
          =   1,
  ------- --- ----------------------

giving ΔΦ_(i) = 1 − size_(i−1)/4. Therefore, when the ith operation is a
deletion that triggers a contraction, its amortized cost is

  ------- --- -----------------------------------
  ĉ_(i)   =   c_(i) + ΔΦ_(i)
          =   size_(i−1)/4 + (1 − size_(i−1)/4)
          =   1.
  ------- --- -----------------------------------

Finally, we handle the cases where the load factor fits one case of
equation (16.5) before the operation and the other case afterward. We
start with deletion, where we have num_(i−1) = size_(i−1)/2, so that
α_(i−1) = 1/2, beforehand, and num_(i) = size_(i)/2−1, so that α_(i) <
1/2 afterward. Because α_(i−1) = 1/2, we have Φ_(i−1) = 0, and because
α_(i) < 1/2, we have Φ_(i) = size_(i)/2 − num_(i) = 1. Thus we get that
ΔΦ_(i) = 1 − 0 = 1. Since the ith operation is a deletion that does not
cause a contraction, the actual cost c_(i) equals 1, and the amortized
cost ĉ_(i) is c_(i) + ΔΦ_(i) = 1 + 1 = 2.

Conversely, if the ith operation is an insertion that takes the load
factor from below 1/2 to equaling 1/2, the change in potential ΔΦ_(i)
equals −1. Again, the actual cost c_(i) is 1, and now the amortized cost
ĉ_(i) is c_(i) + ΔΦ_(i) = 1 + (−1) = 0.

In summary, since the amortized cost of each operation is bounded above
by a constant, the actual time for any sequence of n operations on a
dynamic table is O(n).

Exercises

16.4-1

Using the potential method, analyze the amortized cost of the first
table insertion.

16.4-2

You wish to implement a dynamic, open-address hash table. Why might you
consider the table to be full when its load factor reaches some value α
that is strictly less than 1? Describe briefly how to make insertion
into a dynamic, open-address hash table run in such a way that the
expected value of the amortized cost per insertion is O(1). Why is the
expected value of the actual cost per insertion not necessarily O(1) for
all insertions?

16.4-3

Discuss how to use the accounting method to analyze both the insertion
and deletion operations, assuming that the table doubles in size when
its load factor exceeds 1 and the table halves in size when its load
factor goes below 1/4.

16.4-4

Suppose that instead of contracting a table by halving its size when its
load factor drops below 1/4, you contract the table by multiplying its
size by 2/3 when its load factor drops below 1/3. Using the potential
function

Φ(T) = |2(T.num − T.size/2)|,

show that the amortized cost of a TABLE-DELETE that uses this strategy
is bounded above by a constant.

Problems

16-1     Binary reflected Gray code

A binary Gray code represents a sequence of nonnegative integers in
binary such that to go from one integer to the next, exactly one bit
flips every time. The binary reflected Gray code represents a sequence
of the integers 0 to 2^(k) − 1 for some positive integer k according to
the following recursive method:

- For k = 1, the binary reflected Gray code is 〈0, 1〉.
- For k ≥ 2, first form the binary reflected Gray code for k − 1, giving
  the 2^(k−1) integers 0 to 2^(k−1) − 1. Then form the reflection of
  this sequence, which is just the sequence in reverse. (That is, the j
  th integer in the sequence becomes the (2^(k−1) − j − 1)st integer in
  the reflection). Next, add 2^(k−1) to each of the 2^(k−1) integers in
  the reflected sequence. Finally, concatenate the two sequences.

For example, for k = 2, first form the binary reflected Gray code 〈0,
1〉 for k = 1. Its reflection is the sequence 〈1, 0〉. Adding 2^(k−1) =
2 to each integer in the reflection gives the sequence 〈3, 2〉.
Concatenating the two sequences gives 〈0, 1, 3, 2〉 or, in binary,
〈00, 01, 11, 10〉, so that each integer differs from its predecessor by
exactly one bit. For k = 3, the reflection of the binary reflected Gray
code for k = 2 is 〈2, 3, 1, 0〉 and adding 2^(k−1) = 4 gives 〈6, 7, 5,
4〉. Concatenating produces the sequence 〈0, 1, 3, 2, 6, 7, 5, 4〉,
which in binary is 〈000, 001, 011, 010, 110, 111, 101,100〉. In the
binary reflected Gray code, only one bit flips even when wrapping around
from the last integer to the first.

a. Index the integers in a binary reflected Gray code from 0 to 2^(k) −
1, and consider the ith integer in the binary reflected Gray code. To go
from the (i −1)st integer to the ith integer in the binary reflected
Gray code, exactly one bit flips. Show how to determine which bit flips,
given the index i.

b. Assuming that given a bit number j, you can flip bit j of an integer
in constant time, show how to compute the entire binary reflected Gray
code sequence of 2^(k) numbers in Θ(2^(k)) time.

16-2     Making binary search dynamic

Binary search of a sorted array takes logarithmic search time, but the
time to insert a new element is linear in the size of the array. You can
improve the time for insertion by keeping several sorted arrays.

Specifically, suppose that you wish to support SEARCH and INSERT on a
set of n elements. Let k = ⌈lg(n + 1)⌉, and let the binary
representation of n be 〈n_(k−1), n_(k−2), … , n₀〉. Maintain k sorted
arrays A₀, A₁, … , A_(k−1), where for i = 0, 1, … , k − 1, the length of
array A_(i) is 2^(i). Each array is either full or empty, depending on
whether n_(i) = 1 or n_(i) = 0, respectively. The total number of
elements held in all k arrays is therefore [art]. Although each
individual array is sorted, elements in different arrays bear no
particular relationship to each other.

a. Describe how to perform the SEARCH operation for this data structure.
Analyze its worst-case running time.

b. Describe how to perform the INSERT operation. Analyze its worst-case
and amortized running times, assuming that the only operations are
INSERT and SEARCH.

c. Describe how to implement DELETE. Analyze its worst-case and
amortized running times, assuming that there can be DELETE, INSERT, and
SEARCH operations.

16-3     Amortized weight-balanced trees

Consider an ordinary binary search tree augmented by adding to each node
x the attribute x.size, which gives the number of keys stored in the
subtree rooted at x. Let α be a constant in the range 1/2 ≤ α < 1. We
say that a given node x is α-balanced if x.left.size ≤ α · x.size and
x.right.size ≤ α · x.size. The tree as a whole is α-balanced if every
node in the tree is α-balanced. The following amortized approach to
maintaining weight-balanced trees was suggested by G. Varghese.

a. A 1/2-balanced tree is, in a sense, as balanced as it can be. Given a
node x in an arbitrary binary search tree, show how to rebuild the
subtree rooted at x so that it becomes 1/2-balanced. Your algorithm
should run in Θ(x.size) time, and it can use O(x.size) auxiliary
storage.

b. Show that performing a search in an n-node α-balanced binary search
tree takes O(lg n) worst-case time.

For the remainder of this problem, assume that the constant α is
strictly greater than 1/2. Suppose that you implement INSERT and DELETE
as usual for an n-node binary search tree, except that after every such
operation, if any node in the tree is no longer α-balanced, then you
“rebuild” the subtree rooted at the highest such node in the tree so
that it becomes 1/2-balanced.

We’ll analyze this rebuilding scheme using the potential method. For a
node x in a binary search tree T, define

Δ(x) = |x.left.size − x.right.size|.

Define the potential of T as

[art]

where c is a sufficiently large constant that depends on α.

c. Argue that any binary search tree has nonnegative potential and also
that a 1/2-balanced tree has potential 0.

d. Suppose that m units of potential can pay for rebuilding an m-node
subtree. How large must c be in terms of α in order for it to take O(1)
amortized time to rebuild a subtree that is not α-balanced?

e. Show that inserting a node into or deleting a node from an n-node
α-balanced tree costs O(lg n) amortized time.

16-4     The cost of restructuring red-black trees

There are four basic operations on red-black trees that perform
structural modifications: node insertions, node deletions, rotations,
and color changes. We have seen that RB-INSERT and RB-DELETE use only
O(1) rotations, node insertions, and node deletions to maintain the
red-black properties, but they may make many more color changes.

a. Describe a legal red-black tree with n nodes such that calling
RB-INSERT to add the (n + 1)st node causes Ω(lg n) color changes. Then
describe a legal red-black tree with n nodes for which calling RB-DELETE
on a particular node causes Ω(lg n) color changes.

Although the worst-case number of color changes per operation can be
logarithmic, you will prove that any sequence of m RB-INSERT and
RB-DELETE operations on an initially empty red-black tree causes O(m)
structural modifications in the worst case.

b. Some of the cases handled by the main loop of the code of both
RB-INSERT-FIXUP and RB-DELETE-FIXUP are terminating: once encountered,
they cause the loop to terminate after a constant number of additional
operations. For each of the cases of RB-INSERT-FIXUP and
RB-DELETE-FIXUP, specify which are terminating and which are not. (Hint:
Look at Figures 13.5, 13.6, and 13.7 in Sections 13.3 and 13.4.)

You will first analyze the structural modifications when only insertions
are performed. Let T be a red-black tree, and define Φ(T) to be the
number of red nodes in T. Assume that one unit of potential can pay for
the structural modifications performed by any of the three cases of
RB-INSERT-FIXUP.

c. Let T′ be the result of applying Case 1 of RB-INSERT-FIXUP to T.
Argue that Φ(T′) = Φ(T) − 1.

d. We can break the operation of the RB-INSERT procedure into three
parts. List the structural modifications and potential changes resulting
from lines 1–16 of RB-INSERT, from nonterminating cases of
RB-INSERT-FIXUP, and from terminating cases of RB-INSERT-FIXUP.

e. Using part (d), argue that the amortized number of structural
modifications performed by any call of RB-INSERT is O(1).

Next you will prove that there are O(m) structural modifications when
both insertions and deletions occur. Define, for each node x,

[art]

Now redefine the potential of a red-black tree T as

[art]

and let T′ be the tree that results from applying any nonterminating
case of RB-INSERT-FIXUP or RB-DELETE-FIXUP to T.

f. Show that Φ(T′) ≤ Φ(T) − 1 for all nonterminating cases of
RB-INSERT-FIXUP. Argue that the amortized number of structural
modifications performed by any call of RB-INSERT-FIXUP is O(1).

g. Show that Φ(T′) ≤ Φ(T) − 1 for all nonterminating cases of
RB-DELETE-FIXUP. Argue that the amortized number of structural
modifications performed by any call of RB-DELETE-FIXUP is O(1).

h. Complete the proof that in the worst case, any sequence of m
RB-INSERT and RB-DELETE operations performs O(m) structural
modifications.

Chapter notes

Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5] used aggregate analysis to determine the
running time of operations on a disjoint-set forest. We’ll analyze this
data structure using the potential method in Chapter 19. Tarjan [430]
surveys the accounting and potential methods of amortized analysis and
presents several applications. He attributes the accounting method to
several authors, including M. R. Brown, R. E. Tarjan, S. Huddleston, and
K. Mehlhorn. He attributes the potential method to D. D. Sleator. The
term “amortized” is due to D. D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan.

Potential functions are also useful for proving lower bounds for certain
types of problems. For each configuration of the problem, define a
potential function that maps the configuration to a real number. Then
determine the potential Φ_(init) of the initial configuration, the
potential Φ_(final) of the final configuration, and the maximum change
in potential ΔΦ_(max) due to any step. The number of steps must
therefore be at least |Φ_(final) − Φ_(init)| / | ΔΦ_(max)|. Examples of
potential functions to prove lower bounds in I/O complexity appear in
works by Cormen, Sundquist, and Wisniewski [105], Floyd [146], and
Aggarwal and Vitter [3]. Krumme, Cybenko, and Venkataraman [271] applied
potential functions to prove lower bounds on gossiping: communicating a
unique item from each vertex in a graph to every other vertex.

¹ In some situations, such as an open-address hash table, it’s better to
consider a table to be full if its load factor equals some constant
strictly less than 1. (See Exercise 16.4-2.)

Part V    Advanced Data Structures

 

 

Introduction

This part returns to studying data structures that support operations on
dynamic sets, but at a more advanced level than Part III. One of the
chapters, for example, makes extensive use of the amortized analysis
techniques from Chapter 16.

Chapter 17 shows how to augment red-black trees—adding additional
information in each node—to support dynamic-set operations in addition
to those covered in Chapters 12 and 13. The first example augments
red-black trees to dynamically maintain order statistics for a set of
keys. Another example augments them in a different way to maintain
intervals of real numbers. Chapter 17 includes a theorem giving
sufficient conditions for when a red-black tree can be augmented while
maintaining the O(lg n) running times for insertion and deletion.

Chapter 18 presents B-trees, which are balanced search trees
specifically designed to be stored on disks. Since disks operate much
more slowly than random-access memory, B-tree performance depends not
only on how much computing time the dynamic-set operations consume but
also on how many disk accesses they perform. For each B-tree operation,
the number of disk accesses increases with the height of the B-tree, but
B-tree operations keep the height low.

Chapter 19 examines data structures for disjoint sets. Starting with a
universe of n elements, each initially in its own singleton set, the
operation UNION unites two sets. At all times, the n elements are
partitioned into disjoint sets, even as calls to the UNION operation
change the members of a set dynamically. The query FIND-SET identifies
the unique set that contains a given element at the moment. Representing
each set as a simple rooted tree yields surprisingly fast operations: a
sequence of m operations runs in O(mα(n)) time, where α(n) is an
incredibly slowly growing function—α(n) is at most 4 in any conceivable
application. The amortized analysis that proves this time bound is as
complex as the data structure is simple.

The topics covered in this part are by no means the only examples of
“advanced” data structures. Other advanced data structures include the
following:

- Fibonacci heaps [156] implement mergeable heaps (see Problem 10-2 on
  page 268) with the operations INSERT, MINIMUM, and UNION taking only
  O(1) actual and amortized time, and the operations EXTRACT-MIN and
  DELETE taking O(lg n) amortized time. The most significant advantage
  of these data structures, however, is that DECREASE-KEY takes only
  O(1) amortized time. Strict Fibonacci heaps [73], developed later,
  made all of these time bounds actual. Because the DECREASE-KEY
  operation takes constant amortized time, (strict) Fibonacci heaps
  constitute key components of some of the asymptotically fastest
  algorithms to date for graph problems.
- Dynamic trees [415, 429] maintain a forest of disjoint rooted trees.
  Each edge in each tree has a real-valued cost. Dynamic trees support
  queries to find parents, roots, edge costs, and the minimum edge cost
  on a simple path from a node up to a root. Trees may be manipulated by
  cutting edges, updating all edge costs on a simple path from a node up
  to a root, linking a root into another tree, and making a node the
  root of the tree it appears in. One implementation of dynamic trees
  gives an O(lg n) amortized time bound for each operation, while a more
  complicated implementation yields O(lg n) worst-case time bounds.
  Dynamic trees are used in some of the asymptotically fastest
  network-flow algorithms.
- Splay trees [418, 429] are a form of binary search tree on which the
  standard search-tree operations run in O(lg n) amortized time. One
  application of splay trees simplifies dynamic trees.
- Persistent data structures allow queries, and sometimes updates as
  well, on past versions of a data structure. For example, linked data
  structures can be made persistent with only a small time and space
  cost [126]. Problem 13-1 gives a simple example of a persistent
  dynamic set.
- Several data structures allow a faster implementation of dictionary
  operations (INSERT, DELETE, and SEARCH) for a restricted universe of
  keys. By taking advantage of these restrictions, they are able to
  achieve better worst-case asymptotic running times than
  comparison-based data structures. If the keys are unique integers
  drawn from the set {0, 1, 2, … , u − 1}, where u is an exact power of
  2, then a recursive data structure known as a van Emde Boas tree [440,
  441] supports each of the operations SEARCH, INSERT, DELETE, MINIMUM,
  MAXIMUM, SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR in O(lg lg u) time. Fusion trees
  [157] were the first data structure to allow faster dictionary
  operations when the universe is restricted to integers, implementing
  these operations in O(lg n/lg lg n) time. Several subsequent data
  structures, including exponential search trees [17], have also given
  improved bounds on some or all of the dictionary operations and are
  mentioned in the chapter notes throughout this book.
- Dynamic graph data structures support various queries while allowing
  the structure of a graph to change through operations that insert or
  delete vertices or edges. Examples of the queries that they support
  include vertex connectivity [214], edge connectivity, minimum spanning
  trees [213], biconnectivity, and transitive closure [212].

Chapter notes throughout this book mention additional data structures.

17        Augmenting Data Structures

Some solutions require no more than a “textbook” data structure—such as
a doubly linked list, a hash table, or a binary search tree—but many
others require a dash of creativity. Rarely will you need to create an
entirely new type of data structure, though. More often, you can augment
a textbook data structure by storing additional information in it. You
can then program new operations for the data structure to support your
application. Augmenting a data structure is not always straightforward,
however, since the added information must be updated and maintained by
the ordinary operations on the data structure.

This chapter discusses two data structures based on red-black trees that
are augmented with additional information. Section 17.1 describes a data
structure that supports general order-statistic operations on a dynamic
set: quickly finding the ith smallest number or the rank of a given
element. Section 17.2 abstracts the process of augmenting a data
structure and provides a theorem that you can use when augmenting
red-black trees. Section 17.3 uses this theorem to help design a data
structure for maintaining a dynamic set of intervals, such as time
intervals. You can use this data structure to quickly find an interval
that overlaps a given query interval.

17.1    Dynamic order statistics

Chapter 9 introduced the notion of an order statistic. Specifically, the
ith order statistic of a set of n elements, where i ∈ {1, 2, … , n}, is
simply the element in the set with the ith smallest key. In Chapter 9,
you saw how to determine any order statistic in O(n) time from an
unordered set. This section shows how to modify red-black trees so that
you can determine any order statistic for a dynamic set in O(lg n) time
and also compute the rank of an element—its position in the linear order
of the set—in O(lg n) time.

[art]

Figure 17.1 An order-statistic tree, which is an augmented red-black
tree. In addition to its usual attributes, each node x has an attribute
x.size, which is the number of nodes, other than the sentinel, in the
subtree rooted at x.

Figure 17.1 shows a data structure that can support fast order-statistic
operations. An order-statistic tree T is simply a red-black tree with
additional information stored in each node. Each node x contains the
usual red-black tree attributes x.key, x.color, x.p, x.left, and
x.right, along with a new attribute, x.size. This attribute contains the
number of internal nodes in the subtree rooted at x (including x itself,
but not including any sentinels), that is, the size of the subtree. If
we define the sentinel’s size to be 0—that is, we set T.nil.size to be
0—then we have the identity

x.size = x.left.size + x.right.size + 1.

Keys need not be distinct in an order-statistic tree. For example, the
tree in Figure 17.1 has two keys with value 14 and two keys with value
21. When equal keys are present, the above notion of rank is not well
defined. We remove this ambiguity for an order-statistic tree by
defining the rank of an element as the position at which it would be
printed in an inorder walk of the tree. In Figure 17.1, for example, the
key 14 stored in a black node has rank 5, and the key 14 stored in a red
node has rank 6.

Retrieving the element with a given rank

Before we show how to maintain the size information during insertion and
deletion, let’s see how to implement two order-statistic queries that
use this additional information. We begin with an operation that
retrieves the element with a given rank. The procedure OS-SELECT(x, i)
on the following page returns a pointer to the node containing the ith
smallest key in the subtree rooted at x. To find the node with the ith
smallest key in an order-statistic tree T, call OS-SELECT(T.root, i).

Here is how OS-SELECT works. Line 1 computes r, the rank of node x
within the subtree rooted at x. The value of x.left.size is the number
of nodes that come before x in an inorder tree walk of the subtree
rooted at x. Thus, x.left.size + 1 is the rank of x within the subtree
rooted at x. If i = r, then node x is the ith smallest element, and so
line 3 returns x. If i < r, then the ith smallest element resides in x’s
left subtree, and therefore, line 5 recurses on x.left. If i > r, then
the ith smallest element resides in x’s right subtree. Since the subtree
rooted at x contains r elements that come before x’s right subtree in an
inorder tree walk, the ith smallest element in the subtree rooted at x
is the (i − r)th smallest element in the subtree rooted at x.right. Line
6 determines this element recursively.

OS-SELECT(x, i)

+---+---------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 1 | r = x.left.size + 1 | // rank of x within the subtree rooted at  |
|   |                     | x                                          |
+---+---------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2 | if i == r                                                        |
+---+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3 | return x                                                         |
+---+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4 | elseif i < r                                                     |
+---+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5 | return OS-SELECT(x.left, i)                                      |
+---+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6 | else return OS-SELECT(x.right, i − r)                            |
+---+------------------------------------------------------------------+

As an example of how OS-SELECT operates, consider a search for the 17th
smallest element in the order-statistic tree of Figure 17.1. The search
starts with x as the root, whose key is 26, and with i = 17. Since the
size of 26’s left subtree is 12, its rank is 13. Thus, the node with
rank 17 is the 17 − 13 = 4th smallest element in 26’s right subtree. In
the recursive call, x is the node with key 41, and i = 4. Since the size
of 41’s left subtree is 5, its rank within its subtree is 6. Therefore,
the node with rank 4 is the 4th smallest element in 41’s left subtree.
In the recursive call, x is the node with key 30, and its rank within
its subtree is 2. The procedure recurses once again to find the 4 − 2 =
2nd smallest element in the subtree rooted at the node with key 38. Its
left subtree has size 1, which means it is the second smallest element.
Thus, the procedure returns a pointer to the node with key 38.

Because each recursive call goes down one level in the order-statistic
tree, the total time for OS-SELECT is at worst proportional to the
height of the tree. Since the tree is a red-black tree, its height is
O(lg n), where n is the number of nodes. Thus, the running time of
OS-SELECT is O(lg n) for a dynamic set of n elements.

Determining the rank of an element

Given a pointer to a node x in an order-statistic tree T, the procedure
OS-RANK on the facing page returns the position of x in the linear order
determined by an inorder tree walk of T.

OS-RANK(T, x)

+---+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| 1 | r = x.left.size + 1 | // rank of x within the subtree rooted at |
|   |                     | x                                         |
+---+---------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| 2 | y = x               | // root of subtree being examined         |
+---+---------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| 3 | while y ≠ T.root                                                |
+---+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| 4 | if y == y.p.right   |                     | // if root of a     |
|   |                     |                     | right subtree …     |
+---+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| 5 | r = r +             |                     | // … add in parent  |
|   | y.p.left.size + 1   |                     | and its left        |
|   |                     |                     | subtree             |
+---+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| 6 | y = y.p             |                     | // move y toward    |
|   |                     |                     | the root            |
+---+---------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| 7 | return r                                                        |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

The OS-RANK procedure works as follows. You can think of node x’s rank
as the number of nodes preceding x in an inorder tree walk, plus 1 for x
itself. OS-RANK maintains the following loop invariant:

At the start of each iteration of the while loop of lines 3–6, r is the
rank of x.key in the subtree rooted at node y.

We use this loop invariant to show that OS-RANK works correctly as
follows:

Initialization: Prior to the first iteration, line 1 sets r to be the
rank of x.key within the subtree rooted at x. Setting y = x in line 2
makes the invariant true the first time the test in line 3 executes.

Maintenance: At the end of each iteration of the while loop, line 6 sets
y = y.p. Thus, we must show that if r is the rank of x.key in the
subtree rooted at y at the start of the loop body, then r is the rank of
x.key in the subtree rooted at y.p at the end of the loop body. In each
iteration of the while loop, consider the subtree rooted at y.p. The
value of r already includes the number of nodes in the subtree rooted at
node y that precede x in an inorder walk, and so the procedure must add
the nodes in the subtree rooted at y’s sibling that precede x in an
inorder walk, plus 1 for y.p if it, too, precedes x. If y is a left
child, then neither y.p nor any node in y.p’s right subtree precedes x,
and so OS-RANK leaves r alone. Otherwise, y is a right child and all the
nodes in y.p’s left subtree precede x, as does y.p itself. In this case,
line 5 adds y.p.left.size + 1 to the current value of r.

Termination: Because each iteration of the loop moves y toward the root
and the loop terminates when y = T.root, the loop eventually terminates.
Moreover, the subtree rooted at y is the entire tree. Thus, the value of
r is the rank of x.key in the entire tree.

As an example, when OS-RANK runs on the order-statistic tree of Figure
17.1 to find the rank of the node with key 38, the following sequence of
values of y.key and r occurs at the top of the while loop:

  ----------- ------- ----
  iteration   y.key   r
  1           38      2
  2           30      4
  3           41      4
  4           26      17
  ----------- ------- ----

The procedure returns the rank 17.

Since each iteration of the while loop takes O(1) time, and y goes up
one level in the tree with each iteration, the running time of OS-RANK
is at worst proportional to the height of the tree: O(lg n) on an n-node
order-statistic tree.

Maintaining subtree sizes

Given the size attribute in each node, OS-SELECT and OS-RANK can quickly
compute order-statistic information. But if the basic modifying
operations on red-black trees cannot efficiently maintain the size
attribute, our work will have been for naught. Let’s see how to maintain
subtree sizes for both insertion and deletion without affecting the
asymptotic running time of either operation.

Recall from Section 13.3 that insertion into a red-black tree consists
of two phases. The first phase goes down the tree from the root,
inserting the new node as a child of an existing node. The second phase
goes up the tree, changing colors and performing rotations to maintain
the red-black properties.

To maintain the subtree sizes in the first phase, simply increment
x.size for each node x on the simple path traversed from the root down
toward the leaves. The new node added gets a size of 1. Since there are
O(lg n) nodes on the traversed path, the additional cost of maintaining
the size attributes is O(lg n).

In the second phase, the only structural changes to the underlying
red-black tree are caused by rotations, of which there are at most two.
Moreover, a rotation is a local operation: only two nodes have their
size attributes invalidated. The link around which the rotation is
performed is incident on these two nodes. Referring to the code for
LEFT-ROTATE(T, x) on page 336, add the following lines:

  ---- -----------------------------------------
  13   y.size = x.size
  14   x.size = x.left.size + x.right.size + 1
  ---- -----------------------------------------

Figure 17.2 illustrates how the attributes are updated. The change to
RIGHT-ROTATE is symmetric.

Since inserting into a red-black tree requires at most two rotations,
updating the size attributes in the second phase costs only O(1)
additional time. Thus, the total time for insertion into an n-node
order-statistic tree is O(lg n), which is asymptotically the same as for
an ordinary red-black tree.

[art]

Figure 17.2 Updating subtree sizes during rotations. The updates are
local, requiring only the size information stored in x, y, and the roots
of the subtrees shown as triangles.

Deletion from a red-black tree also consists of two phases: the first
operates on the underlying search tree, and the second causes at most
three rotations and otherwise performs no structural changes. (See
Section 13.4.) The first phase removes one node z from the tree and
could move at most two other nodes within the tree (nodes y and x in
Figure 12.4 on page 323). To update the subtree sizes, simply traverse a
simple path from the lowest node that moves (starting from its original
position within the tree) up to the root, decrementing the size
attribute of each node on the path. Since this path has length O(lg n)
in an n-node red-black tree, the additional time spent maintaining size
attributes in the first phase is O(lg n). For the O(1) rotations in the
second phase of deletion, handle them in the same manner as for
insertion. Thus, both insertion and deletion, including maintaining the
size attributes, take O(lg n) time for an n-node order-statistic tree.

Exercises

17.1-1

Show how OS-SELECT(T.root, 10) operates on the red-black tree T shown in
Figure 17.1.

17.1-2

Show how OS-RANK(T, x) operates on the red-black tree T shown in Figure
17.1 and the node x with x.key = 35.

17.1-3

Write a nonrecursive version of OS-SELECT.

17.1-4

Write a procedure OS-KEY-RANK(T, k) that takes an order-statistic tree T
and a key k and returns the rank of k in the dynamic set represented by
T. Assume that the keys of T are distinct.

17.1-5

Given an element x in an n-node order-statistic tree and a natural
number i, show how to determine the ith successor of x in the linear
order of the tree in O(lg n) time.

17.1-6

The procedures OS-SELECT and OS-RANK use the size attribute of a node
only to compute a rank. Suppose that you store in each node its rank in
the subtree of which it is the root instead of the size attribute. Show
how to maintain this information during insertion and deletion.
(Remember that these two operations can cause rotations.)

17.1-7

Show how to use an order-statistic tree to count the number of
inversions (see Problem 2-4 on page 47) in an array of n distinct
elements in O(n lg n) time.

★ 17.1-8

Consider n chords on a circle, each defined by its endpoints. Describe
an O(n lg n)-time algorithm to determine the number of pairs of chords
that intersect inside the circle. (For example, if the n chords are all
diameters that meet at the center, then the answer is [art].) Assume
that no two chords share an endpoint.

17.2    How to augment a data structure

The process of augmenting a basic data structure to support additional
functionality occurs quite frequently in algorithm design. We’ll use it
again in the next section to design a data structure that supports
operations on intervals. This section examines the steps involved in
such augmentation. It includes a useful theorem that allows you to
augment red-black trees easily in many cases.

You can break the process of augmenting a data structure into four
steps:

1.  Choose an underlying data structure.
2.  Determine additional information to maintain in the underlying data
    structure.
3.  Verify that you can maintain the additional information for the
    basic modifying operations on the underlying data structure.
4.  Develop new operations.

As with any prescriptive design method, you’ll rarely be able to follow
the steps precisely in the order given. Most design work contains an
element of trial and error, and progress on all steps usually proceeds
in parallel. There is no point, for example, in determining additional
information and developing new operations (steps 2 and 4) if you cannot
maintain the additional information efficiently. Nevertheless, this
four-step method provides a good focus for your efforts in augmenting a
data structure, and it is also a good framework for documenting an
augmented data structure.

We followed these four steps in Section 17.1 to design order-statistic
trees. For step 1, we chose red-black trees as the underlying data
structure. Red-black trees seemed like a good starting point because
they efficiently support other dynamic-set operations on a total order,
such as MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR.

In Step 2, we added the size attribute, so that each node x stores the
size of the subtree rooted at x. Generally, the additional information
makes operations more efficient. For example, it is possible to
implement OS-SELECT and OS-RANK using just the keys stored in the tree,
but then they would not run in O(lg n) time. Sometimes, the additional
information is pointer information rather than data, as in Exercise
17.2-1.

For step 3, we ensured that insertion and deletion can maintain the size
attributes while still running in O(lg n) time. Ideally, you would like
to update only a few elements of the data structure in order to maintain
the additional information. For example, if each node simply stores its
rank in the tree, the OS-SELECT and OS-RANK procedures run quickly, but
inserting a new minimum element might cause a change to this information
in every node of the tree. Because we chose to store subtree sizes
instead, inserting a new element causes information to change in only
O(lg n) nodes.

In Step 4, we developed the operations OS-SELECT and OS-RANK. After all,
the need for new operations is why anyone bothers to augment a data
structure in the first place. Occasionally, rather than developing new
operations, you can use the additional information to expedite existing
ones, as in Exercise 17.2-1.

Augmenting red-black trees

When red-black trees underlie an augmented data structure, we can prove
that insertion and deletion can always efficiently maintain certain
kinds of additional information, thereby simplifying step 3. The proof
of the following theorem is similar to the argument from Section 17.1
that we can maintain the size attribute for order-statistic trees.

Theorem 17.1 (Augmenting a red-black tree)

Let f be an attribute that augments a red-black tree T of n nodes, and
suppose that the value of f for each node x depends only the information
in nodes x, x.left, and x.right (possibly including x.left.f and
x.right.f), and that the value of x.f can be computed from this
information in O(1) time. Then, the insertion and deletion operations
can maintain the values of f in all nodes of T without asymptotically
affecting the O(lg n) running times of these operations.

Proof   The main idea of the proof is that a change to an f attribute in
a node x propagates only to ancestors of x in the tree. That is,
changing x.f may require x.p.f to be updated, but nothing else; updating
x.p.f may require x.p.p.f to be updated, but nothing else; and so on up
the tree. After updating T.root.f, no other node depends on the new
value, and so the process terminates. Since the height of a red-black
tree is O(lg n), changing an f attribute in a node costs O(lg n) time in
updating all nodes that depend on the change.

As we saw in Section 13.3, insertion of a node x into red-black tree T
consists of two phases. If the tree T is empty, then the first phase
simply makes x be the root of T. If T is not empty, then the first phase
inserts x as a child of an existing node. Because we assume that the
value of x.f depends only on information in the other attributes of x
itself and the information in x’s children, and because x’s children are
both the sentinel T.nil, it takes only O(1) time to compute the value of
x.f. Having computed x.f, the change propagates up the tree. Thus, the
total time for the first phase of insertion is O(lg n). During the
second phase, the only structural changes to the tree come from
rotations. Since only two nodes change in a rotation, but a change to an
attribute might need to propagate up to the root, the total time for
updating the f attributes is O(lg n) per rotation. Since the number of
rotations during insertion is at most two, the total time for insertion
is O(lg n).

Like insertion, deletion has two phases, as Section 13.4 discusses. In
the first phase, changes to the tree occur when a node is deleted, and
at most two other nodes could move within the tree. Propagating the
updates to f caused by these changes costs at most O(lg n), since the
changes modify the tree locally along a simple path from the lowest
changed node to the root. Fixing up the red-black tree during the second
phase requires at most three rotations, and each rotation requires at
most O(lg n) time to propagate the updates to f. Thus, like insertion,
the total time for deletion is O(lg n).

▪

In many cases, such as maintaining the size attributes in
order-statistic trees, the cost of updating after a rotation is O(1),
rather than the O(lg n) derived in the proof of Theorem 17.1. Exercise
17.2-3 gives an example.

On the other hand, when an update after a rotation requires a traversal
all the way up to the root, it is important that insertion into and
deletion from a red-black tree require a constant number of rotations.
The chapter notes for Chapter 13 list other schemes for balancing search
trees that do not bound the number of rotations per insertion or
deletion by a constant. If each operation might require Θ(lg n)
rotations and each rotation traverses a path up to the root, then a
single operation could require Θ(lg²n) time, rather than the O(lg n)
time bound given by Theorem 17.1.

Exercises

17.2-1

Show, by adding pointers to the nodes, how to support each of the
dynamic-set queries MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR in O(1)
worst-case time on an augmented order-statistic tree. The asymptotic
performance of other operations on order-statistic trees should not be
affected.

17.2-2

Can you maintain the black-heights of nodes in a red-black tree as
attributes in the nodes of the tree without affecting the asymptotic
performance of any of the red-black tree operations? Show how, or argue
why not. How about maintaining the depths of nodes?

17.2-3

Let ⊗ be an associative binary operator, and let a be an attribute
maintained in each node of a red-black tree. Suppose that you want to
include in each node x an additional attribute f such that x.f = x₁.a ⊗
x₂.a ⊗ … ⊗ x_(m).a, where x₁, x₂, … , x_(m) is the inorder listing of
nodes in the subtree rooted at x. Show how to update the f attributes in
O(1) time after a rotation. Modify your argument slightly to apply it to
the size attributes in order-statistic trees.

17.3    Interval trees

This section shows how to augment red-black trees to support operations
on dynamic sets of intervals. In this section, we’ll assume that
intervals are closed. Extending the results to open and half-open
intervals is conceptually straightforward. (See page 1157 for
definitions of closed, open, and half-open intervals.)

Intervals are convenient for representing events that each occupy a
continuous period of time. For example, you could query a database of
time intervals to find out which events occurred during a given
interval. The data structure in this section provides an efficient means
for maintaining such an interval database.

A simple way to represent an interval [t₁, t₂] is as an object i with
attributes i.low = t₁ (the low endpoint) and i.high = t₂ (the high
endpoint). We say that intervals i and i′ overlap if i ∩i′ ≠ ∅, that is,
if i.low ≤ i′.high and i′.low ≤ i.high.

[art]

Figure 17.3 The interval trichotomy for two closed intervals i and i′.
(a) If i and i′ overlap, there are four situations, and in each, i.low ≤
i′.high and i′.low ≤ i.high. (b) The intervals do not overlap, and
i.high < i′.low. (c) The intervals do not overlap, and i′.high < i.low.

As Figure 17.3 shows, any two intervals i and i′ satisfy the interval
trichotomy, that is, exactly one of the following three properties
holds:

a. i and i′ overlap,

b. i is to the left of i′ (i.e., i.high < i′.low),

c. i is to the right of i′ (i.e., i′.high < i.low).

An interval tree is a red-black tree that maintains a dynamic set of
elements, with each element x containing an interval x.int. Interval
trees support the following operations:

INTERVAL-INSERT(T, x) adds the element x, whose int attribute is assumed
to contain an interval, to the interval tree T.

INTERVAL-DELETE(T, x) removes the element x from the interval tree T.

INTERVAL-SEARCH(T, i) returns a pointer to an element x in the interval
tree T such that x.int overlaps interval i, or a pointer to the sentinel
T.nil if no such element belongs to the set.

Figure 17.4 shows how an interval tree represents a set of intervals.
The four-step method from Section 17.2 will guide our design of an
interval tree and the operations that run on it.

Step 1: Underlying data structure

A red-black tree serves as the underlying data structure. Each node x
contains an interval x.int. The key of x is the low endpoint, x.int.low,
of the interval. Thus, an inorder tree walk of the data structure lists
the intervals in sorted order by low endpoint.

[art]

Figure 17.4 An interval tree. (a) A set of 10 intervals, shown sorted
bottom to top by left endpoint. (b) The interval tree that represents
them. Each node x contains an interval, shown above the dashed line, and
the maximum value of any interval endpoint in the subtree rooted at x,
shown below the dashed line. An inorder tree walk of the tree lists the
nodes in sorted order by left endpoint.

Step 2: Additional information

In addition to the intervals themselves, each node x contains a value
x.max, which is the maximum value of any interval endpoint stored in the
subtree rooted at x.

Step 3: Maintaining the information

We must verify that insertion and deletion take O(lg n) time on an
interval tree of n nodes. It is simple enough to determine x.max in O(1)
time, given interval x.int and the max values of node x’s children:

x.max = max {x.int.high, x.left.max, x.right.max}.

Thus, by Theorem 17.1, insertion and deletion run in O(lg n) time. In
fact, you can use either Exercise 17.2-3 or 17.3-1 to show how to update
all the max attributes that change after a rotation in just O(1) time.

Step 4: Developing new operations

The only new operation is INTERVAL-SEARCH(T, i), which finds a node in
tree T whose interval overlaps interval i. If there is no interval in
the tree that overlaps i, the procedure returns a pointer to the
sentinel T.nil.

INTERVAL-SEARCH(T, i)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | x = T.root                                                      |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2 | while x ≠ T.nil and i does not overlap x.int                    |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3 | if x.left ≠ T.nil and x.left.max ≥ i.low                        |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4 | x = x.left                     | // overlap in left subtree or  |
|   |                                | no overlap in right subtree    |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 5 | else x = x.right               | // no overlap in left subtree  |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 6 | return x                                                        |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

The search for an interval that overlaps i starts at the root of the
tree and proceeds downward. It terminates when either it finds an
overlapping interval or it reaches the sentinel T.nil. Since each
iteration of the basic loop takes O(1) time, and since the height of an
n-node red-black tree is O(lg n), the INTERVAL-SEARCH procedure takes
O(lg n) time.

Before we see why INTERVAL-SEARCH is correct, let’s examine how it works
on the interval tree in Figure 17.4. Let’s look for an interval that
overlaps the interval i = [22, 25]. Begin with x as the root, which
contains [16, 21] and does not overlap i. Since x.left.max = 23 is
greater than i.low = 22, the loop continues with x as the left child of
the root—the node containing [8, 9], which also does not overlap i. This
time, x.left.max = 10 is less than i.low = 22, and so the loop continues
with the right child of x as the new x. Because the interval [15, 23]
stored in this node overlaps i, the procedure returns this node.

Now let’s try an unsuccessful search, for an interval that overlaps i =
[11, 14] in the interval tree of Figure 17.4. Again, begin with x as the
root. Since the root’s interval [16, 21] does not overlap i, and since
x.left.max = 23 is greater than i.low = 11, go left to the node
containing [8, 9]. Interval [8, 9] does not overlap i, and x.left.max =
10 is less than i.low = 11, and so the search goes right. (No interval
in the left subtree overlaps i.) Interval [15, 23] does not overlap i,
and its left child is T.nil, so again the search goes right, the loop
terminates, and INTERVAL-SEARCH returns the sentinel T.nil.

To see why INTERVAL-SEARCH is correct, we must understand why it
suffices to examine a single path from the root. The basic idea is that
at any node x, if x.int does not overlap i, the search always proceeds
in a safe direction: the search will definitely find an overlapping
interval if the tree contains one. The following theorem states this
property more precisely.

Theorem 17.2

Any execution of INTERVAL-SEARCH(T, i) either returns a node whose
interval overlaps i, or it returns T.nil and the tree T contains no node
whose interval overlaps i.

Proof   The while loop of lines 2–5 terminates when either x = T.nil or
i overlaps x.int. In the latter case, it is certainly correct to return
x. Therefore, we focus on the former case, in which the while loop
terminates because x = T.nil, which is the node that INTERVAL-SEARCH
returns.

We’ll prove that if the procedure returns T.nil, then it did not miss
any intervals in T that overlap i. The idea is to show that whether the
search goes left in line 4 or right in line 5, it always heads toward a
node containing an interval overlapping i, if any such interval exists.
In particular, we’ll prove that

1.  If the search goes left in line 4, then the left subtree of node x
    contains an interval that overlaps i or the right subtree of x
    contains no interval that overlaps i. Therefore, even if x’s left
    subtree contains no interval that overlaps i but the search goes
    left, it does not make a mistake, because x’s right subtree does not
    contain an interval overlapping i, either.
2.  If the search goes right in line 5, then the left subtree of x
    contains no interval that overlaps i. Thus, if the search goes
    right, it does not make a mistake.

For both cases, we rely on the interval trichotomy. Let’s start with the
case where the search goes right, whose proof is simpler. By the tests
in line 3, we know that x.left = T.nil or x.left.max < i.low. If x.left
= T.nil, then x’s left subtree contains no interval that overlaps i,
since it contains no intervals at all. Now suppose that x.left ≠ T.nil,
so that we must have x.left.max < i.low. Consider any interval i′ in x’s
left subtree. Because x.left.max is the maximum endpoint in x’s left
subtree, we have i′.high ≤ x.left.max. Thus, as Figure 17.5(a) shows,

  --------- --- ------------
  i′.high   ≤   x.left.max
            <   i.low.
  --------- --- ------------

By the interval trichotomy, therefore, intervals i and i′ do not
overlap, and so x’s left subtree contains no interval that overlaps i.

[art]

Figure 17.5 Intervals in the proof of Theorem 17.2. The value of
x.left.max is shown in each case as a dashed line. (a) The search goes
right. No interval i′ in x’s left subtree can overlap i. (b) The search
goes left. The left subtree of x contains an interval that overlaps i
(situation not shown), or x’s left subtree contains an interval i′ such
that i′.high = x.left.max. Since i does not overlap i′, neither does it
overlap any interval i″ in x’s right subtree, since i′.low ≤ i″.low.

Now we examine the case in which the search goes left. If the left
subtree of node x contains an interval that overlaps i, we’re done, so
let’s assume that no node in x’s left subtree overlaps i. We need to
show that in this case, no node in x’s right subtree overlaps i, so that
going left will not miss any overlaps in x’s right subtree. By the tests
in line 3, the left subtree of x is not empty and x.left.max ≥ i.low. By
the definition of the max attribute, x’s left subtree contains some
interval i′ such that

  --------- --- ------------
  i′.high   =   x.left.max
            ≥   i.low,
  --------- --- ------------

as illustrated in Figure 17.5(b). Since i′ is in x’s left subtree, it
does not overlap i, and since i′.high ≥ i.low, the interval trichotomy
tells us that i.high < i′.low. Now we bring in the property that
interval trees are keyed on the low endpoints of intervals. Because i′
is in x’s left subtree, we have i′.low ≤ x.int.low. Now consider any
interval i″ in x’s right subtree, so that x.int.low ≤ i″.low. Putting
inequalities together, we get

  -------- --- -----------
  i.high   <   i′.low
           ≤   x.int.low
           ≤   i″.low.
  -------- --- -----------

Because i.high < i″.low, the interval trichotomy tells us that i and i″
do not overlap. Since we chose i″ as any interval in x’s right subtree,
no node in x’s right subtree overlaps i.

▪

Thus, the INTERVAL-SEARCH procedure works correctly.

Exercises

17.3-1

Write pseudocode for LEFT-ROTATE that operates on nodes in an interval
tree and updates all the max attributes that change in O(1) time.

17.3-2

Describe an efficient algorithm that, given an interval i, returns an
interval overlapping i that has the minimum low endpoint, or T.nil if no
such interval exists.

17.3-3

Given an interval tree T and an interval i, describe how to list all
intervals in T that overlap i in O(min {n, k lg n}) time, where k is the
number of intervals in the output list. (Hint: One simple method makes
several queries, modifying the tree between queries. A slightly more
complicated method does not modify the tree.)

17.3-4

Suggest modifications to the interval-tree procedures to support the new
operation INTERVAL-SEARCH-EXACTLY(T, i), where T is an interval tree and
i is an interval. The operation should return a pointer to a node x in T
such that x.int.low = i.low and x.int.high = i.high, or T.nil if T
contains no such node. All operations, including
INTERVAL-SEARCH-EXACTLY, should run in O(lg n) time on an n-node
interval tree.

17.3-5

Show how to maintain a dynamic set Q of numbers that supports the
operation MIN-GAP, which gives the absolute value of the difference of
the two closest numbers in Q. For example, if we have Q = {1, 5, 9, 15,
18, 22}, then MIN-GAP(Q) returns 3, since 15 and 18 are the two closest
numbers in Q. Make the operations INSERT, DELETE, SEARCH, and MIN-GAP as
efficient as possible, and analyze their running times.

★ 17.3-6

VLSI databases commonly represent an integrated circuit as a list of
rectangles. Assume that each rectangle is rectilinearly oriented (sides
parallel to the x- and y-axes), so that each rectangle is represented by
four values: its minimum and maximum x- and y-coordinates. Give an O(n
lg n)-time algorithm to decide whether a set of n rectangles so
represented contains two rectangles that overlap. Your algorithm need
not report all intersecting pairs, but it must report that an overlap
exists if one rectangle entirely covers another, even if the boundary
lines do not intersect. (Hint: Move a “sweep” line across the set of
rectangles.)

Problems

17-1     Point of maximum overlap

You wish to keep track of a point of maximum overlap in a set of
intervals—a point with the largest number of intervals in the set that
overlap it.

a. Show that there is always a point of maximum overlap that is an
endpoint of one of the intervals.

b. Design a data structure that efficiently supports the operations
INTERVAL-INSERT, INTERVAL-DELETE, and FIND-POM, which returns a point of
maximum overlap. (Hint: Keep a red-black tree of all the endpoints.
Associate a value of +1 with each left endpoint, and associate a value
of −1 with each right endpoint. Augment each node of the tree with some
extra information to maintain the point of maximum overlap.)

17-2     Josephus permutation

We define the Josephus problem as follows. A group of n people form a
circle, and we are given a positive integer m ≤ n. Beginning with a
designated first person, proceed around the circle, removing every mth
person. After each person is removed, counting continues around the
circle that remains. This process continues until nobody remains in the
circle. The order in which the people are removed from the circle
defines the (n, m)-Josephus permutation of the integers 1, 2, … , n. For
example, the (7, 3)-Josephus permutation is 〈3, 6, 2, 7, 5, 1, 4〉.

a. Suppose that m is a constant. Describe an O(n)-time algorithm that,
given an integer n, outputs the (n, m)-Josephus permutation.

b. Suppose that m is not necessarily a constant. Describe an O(n lg
n)-time algorithm that, given integers n and m, outputs the (n,
m)-Josephus permutation.

Chapter notes

In their book, Preparata and Shamos [364] describe several of the
interval trees that appear in the literature, citing work by H.
Edelsbrunner (1980) and E. M. McCreight (1981). The book details an
interval tree that, given a static database of n intervals, allows us to
enumerate all k intervals that overlap a given query interval in O(k +
lg n) time.

18        B-Trees

B-trees are balanced search trees designed to work well on disk drives
or other direct-access secondary storage devices. B-trees are similar to
red-black trees (Chapter 13), but they are better at minimizing the
number of operations that access disks. (We often say just “disk”
instead of “disk drive.”) Many database systems use B-trees, or variants
of B-trees, to store information.

B-trees differ from red-black trees in that B-tree nodes may have many
children, from a few to thousands. That is, the “branching factor” of a
B-tree can be quite large, although it usually depends on
characteristics of the disk drive used. B-trees are similar to red-black
trees in that every n-node B-tree has height O(lg n), so that B-trees
can implement many dynamic-set operations in O(lg n) time. But a B-tree
has a larger branching factor than a red-black tree, so the base of the
logarithm that expresses its height is larger, and hence its height can
be considerably lower.

B-trees generalize binary search trees in a natural manner. Figure 18.1
shows a simple B-tree. If an internal B-tree node x contains x.n keys,
then x has x.n + 1 children. The keys in node x serve as dividing points
separating the range of keys handled by x into x.n + 1 subranges, each
handled by one child of x. A search for a key in a B-tree makes an
(x.n + 1)-way decision based on comparisons with the x.n keys stored at
node x. An internal node contains pointers to its children, but a leaf
node does not.

Section 18.1 gives a precise definition of B-trees and proves that the
height of a B-tree grows only logarithmically with the number of nodes
it contains. Section 18.2 describes how to search for a key and insert a
key into a B-tree, and Section 18.3 discusses deletion. Before
proceeding, however, we need to ask why we evaluate data structures
designed to work on a disk drive differently from data structures
designed to work in main random-access memory.

[art]

Figure 18.1 A B-tree whose keys are the consonants of English. An
internal node x containing x.n keys has x.n + 1 children. All leaves are
at the same depth in the tree. The blue nodes are examined in a search
for the letter R.

Data structures on secondary storage

Computer systems take advantage of various technologies that provide
memory capacity. The main memory of a computer system normally consists
of silicon memory chips. This technology is typically more than an order
of magnitude more expensive per bit stored than magnetic storage
technology, such as tapes or disk drives. Most computer systems also
have secondary storage based on solid-state drives (SSDs) or magnetic
disk drives. The amount of such secondary storage often exceeds the
amount of primary memory by one to two orders of magnitude. SSDs have
faster access times than magnetic disk drives, which are mechanical
devices. In recent years, SSD capacities have increased while their
prices have decreased. Magnetic disk drives typically have much higher
capacities than SSDs, and they remain a more cost-effective means for
storing massive amounts of information. Disk drives that store several
terabytes¹ can be found for under $100.

Figure 18.2 shows a typical disk drive. The drive consists of one or
more platters, which rotate at a constant speed around a common spindle.
A magnetizable material covers the surface of each platter. The drive
reads and writes each platter by a head at the end of an arm. The arms
can move their heads toward or away from the spindle. The surface that
passes underneath a given head when it is stationary is called a track.

Although disk drives are cheaper and have higher capacity than main
memory, they are much, much slower because they have moving mechanical
parts. The mechanical motion has two components: platter rotation and
arm movement. As of this writing, commodity disk drives rotate at speeds
of 5400–15,000 revolutions per minute (RPM). Typical speeds are 15,000
RPM in server-grade drives, 7200 RPM in drives for desktops, and 5400
RPM in drives for laptops. Although 7200 RPM may seem fast, one rotation
takes 8.33 milliseconds, which is over 5 orders of magnitude longer than
the 50 nanosecond access times (more or less) commonly found for main
memory. In other words, if a computer waits a full rotation for a
particular item to come under the read/write head, it could access main
memory more than 100,000 times during that span. The average wait is
only half a rotation, but still, the difference in access times for main
memory compared with disk drives is enormous. Moving the arms also takes
some time. As of this writing, average access times for commodity disk
drives are around 4 milliseconds.

[art]

Figure 18.2 A typical magnetic disk drive. It consists of one or more
platters covered with a magnetizable material (two platters are shown
here) that rotate around a spindle. Each platter is read and written
with a head, shown in red, at the end of an arm. Arms rotate around a
common pivot axis. A track, drawn in blue, is the surface that passes
beneath the read/write head when the head is stationary.

In order to amortize the time spent waiting for mechanical movements,
also known as latency, disk drives access not just one item but several
at a time. Information is divided into a number of equal-sized blocks of
bits that appear consecutively within tracks, and each disk read or
write is of one or more entire blocks.² Typical disk drives have block
sizes running from 512 to 4096 bytes. Once the read/write head is
positioned correctly and the platter has rotated to the beginning of the
desired block, reading or writing a magnetic disk drive is entirely
electronic (aside from the rotation of the platter), and the disk drive
can quickly read or write large amounts of data.

Often, accessing a block of information and reading it from a disk drive
takes longer than processing all the information read. For this reason,
in this chapter we’ll look separately at the two principal components of
the running time:

- the number of disk accesses, and
- the CPU (computing) time.

We measure the number of disk accesses in terms of the number of blocks
of information that need to be read from or written to the disk drive.
Although disk-access time is not constant—it depends on the distance
between the current track and the desired track and also on the initial
rotational position of the platters—the number of blocks read or written
provides a good first-order approximation of the total time spent
accessing the disk drive.

In a typical B-tree application, the amount of data handled is so large
that all the data do not fit into main memory at once. The B-tree
algorithms copy selected blocks from disk into main memory as needed and
write back onto disk the blocks that have changed. B-tree algorithms
keep only a constant number of blocks in main memory at any time, and
thus the size of main memory does not limit the size of B-trees that can
be handled.

B-tree procedures need to be able to read information from disk into
main memory and write information from main memory to disk. Consider
some object x. If x is currently in the computer’s main memory, then the
code can refer to the attributes of x as usual: x.key, for example. If x
resides on disk, however, then the procedure must perform the operation
DISK-READ(x) to read the block containing object x into main memory
before it can refer to x’s attributes. (Assume that if x is already in
main memory, then DISK-READ(x) requires no disk accesses: it is a
“no-op.”) Similarly, procedures call DISK-WRITE(x) to save any changes
that have been made to the attributes of object x by writing to disk the
block containing x. Thus, the typical pattern for working with an object
is as follows:

+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| x = a pointer to some object                                         |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| DISK-READ(x)                                                         |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| operations that access and/or modify the attributes of x             |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| DISK-WRITE(x)                   | // omitted if no attributes of x   |
|                                 | were changed                       |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| other operations that access but do not modify attributes of x       |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

The system can keep only a limited number of blocks in main memory at
any one time. Our B-tree algorithms assume that the system automatically
flushes from main memory blocks that are no longer in use.

Since in most systems the running time of a B-tree algorithm depends
primarily on the number of DISK-READ and DISK-WRITE operations it
performs, we typically want each of these operations to read or write as
much information as possible. Thus, a B-tree node is usually as large as
a whole disk block, and this size limits the number of children a B-tree
node can have.

[art]

Figure 18.3 A B-tree of height 2 containing over one billion keys. Shown
inside each node x is x.n, the number of keys in x. Each internal node
and leaf contains 1000 keys. This B-tree has 1001 nodes at depth 1 and
over one million leaves at depth 2.

Large B-trees stored on disk drives often have branching factors between
50 and 2000, depending on the size of a key relative to the size of a
block. A large branching factor dramatically reduces both the height of
the tree and the number of disk accesses required to find any key.
Figure 18.3 shows a B-tree with a branching factor of 1001 and height 2
that can store over one billion keys. Nevertheless, if the root node is
kept permanently in main memory, at most two disk accesses suffice to
find any key in this tree.

18.1    Definition of B-trees

To keep things simple, let’s assume, as we have for binary search trees
and red-black trees, that any satellite information associated with a
key resides in the same node as the key. In practice, you might actually
store with each key just a pointer to another disk block containing the
satellite information for that key. The pseudocode in this chapter
implicitly assumes that the satellite information associated with a key,
or the pointer to such satellite information, travels with the key
whenever the key is moved from node to node. A common variant on a
B-tree, known as a B⁺-tree, stores all the satellite information in the
leaves and stores only keys and child pointers in the internal nodes,
thus maximizing the branching factor of the internal nodes.

A B-tree T is a rooted tree with root T.root having the following
properties:

1.  Every node x has the following attributes:

    a. x.n, the number of keys currently stored in node x,

    b. the x.n keys themselves, x.key₁, x.key₂, … , x.key_(x.n), stored
    in monotonically increasing order, so that x.key₁ ≤ x.key₂ ≤ ⋯ ≤
    x.key_(x.n),

    c. x.leaf, a boolean value that is TRUE if x is a leaf and FALSE if
    x is an internal node.

2.  Each internal node x also contains x.n + 1 pointers x.c₁, x.c₂, … ,
    x.c_(x.n+1) to its children. Leaf nodes have no children, and so
    their c_(i) attributes are undefined.

3.  The keys x.key_(i) separate the ranges of keys stored in each
    subtree: if k_(i) is any key stored in the subtree with root
    x.c_(i), then

    k₁ ≤ x.key₁ ≤ k₂ ≤ x.key₂ ≤ ⋯ ≤ x.key_(x.n) ≤ k_(x.n+1).

4.  All leaves have the same depth, which is the tree’s height h.

5.  Nodes have lower and upper bounds on the number of keys they can
    contain, expressed in terms of a fixed integer t ≥ 2 called the
    minimum degree of the B-tree:

    a. Every node other than the root must have at least t − 1 keys.
    Every internal node other than the root thus has at least t
    children. If the tree is nonempty, the root must have at least one
    key.

    b. Every node may contain at most 2t − 1 keys. Therefore, an
    internal node may have at most 2t children. We say that a node is
    full if it contains exactly 2t − 1 keys.³

The simplest B-tree occurs when t = 2. Every internal node then has
either 2, 3, or 4 children, and it is a 2-3-4 tree. In practice,
however, much larger values of t yield B-trees with smaller height.

The height of a B-tree

The number of disk accesses required for most operations on a B-tree is
proportional to the height of the B-tree. The following theorem bounds
the worst-case height of a B-tree.

[art]

Figure 18.4 A B-tree of height 3 containing a minimum possible number of
keys. Shown inside each node x is x.n.

Theorem 18.1

If n ≥ 1, then for any n-key B-tree T of height h and minimum degree t ≥
2,

[art]

Proof   By definition, the root of a nonempty B-tree T contains at least
one key, and all other nodes contain at least t − 1 keys. Let h be the
height of T. Then T contains at least 2 nodes at depth 1, at least 2t
nodes at depth 2, at least 2t₂ nodes at depth 3, and so on, until at
depth h, it has at least 2t^(h−1) nodes. Figure 18.4 illustrates such a
tree for h = 3. The number n of keys therefore satisfies the inequality

[art]

so that t^(h) ≤ (n + 1)/2. Taking base-t logarithms of both sides proves
the theorem.

▪

You can see the power of B-trees as compared with red-black trees.
Although the height of the tree grows as O(log n) in both cases (recall
that t is a constant), for B-trees the base of the logarithm can be many
times larger. Thus, B-trees save a factor of about lg t over red-black
trees in the number of nodes examined for most tree operations. Because
examining an arbitrary node in a tree usually entails accessing the
disk, B-trees avoid a substantial number of disk accesses.

Exercises

18.1-1

Why isn’t a minimum degree of t = 1 allowed?

18.1-2

For what values of t is the tree of Figure 18.1 a legal B-tree?

18.1-3

Show all legal B-trees of minimum degree 2 that store the keys 1, 2, 3,
4, 5.

18.1-4

As a function of the minimum degree t, what is the maximum number of
keys that can be stored in a B-tree of height h?

18.1-5

Describe the data structure that results if each black node in a
red-black tree absorbs its red children, incorporating their children
with its own.

18.2    Basic operations on B-trees

This section presents the details of the operations B-TREE-SEARCH,
B-TREE-CREATE, and B-TREE-INSERT. These procedures observe two
conventions:

- The root of the B-tree is always in main memory, so that no procedure
  ever needs to perform a DISK-READ on the root. If any changes to the
  root node occur, however, then DISK-WRITE must be called on the root.
- Any nodes that are passed as parameters must already have had a
  DISK-READ operation performed on them.

The procedures are all “one-pass” algorithms that proceed downward from
the root of the tree, without having to back up.

Searching a B-tree

Searching a B-tree is much like searching a binary search tree, except
that instead of making a binary, or “two-way,” branching decision at
each node, the search makes a multiway branching decision according to
the number of the node’s children. More precisely, at each internal node
x, the search makes an (x.n + 1)-way branching decision.

The procedure B-TREE-SEARCH generalizes the TREE-SEARCH procedure
defined for binary search trees on page 316. It takes as input a pointer
to the root node x of a subtree and a key k to be searched for in that
subtree. The top-level call is thus of the form B-TREE-SEARCH(T.root,
k). If k is in the B-tree, then B-TREE-SEARCH returns the ordered pair
(y, i) consisting of a node y and an index i such that y.key_(i) = k.
Otherwise, the procedure returns NIL.

B-TREE-SEARCH(x, k)

  --- ----------------------------------
  1   i = 1
  2   while i ≤ x.n and k > x.key_(i)
  3   i = i + 1
  4   if i ≤ x.n and k == x.key_(i)
  5   return (x, i)
  6   elseif x.leaf
  7   returnNIL
  8   else DISK-READ(x.c_(i))
  9   return B-TREE-SEARCH(x.c_(i), k)
  --- ----------------------------------

Using a linear-search procedure, lines 1–3 of B-TREE-SEARCH find the
smallest index i such that k ≤ x.key_(i), or else they set i to x.n + 1.
Lines 4–5 check to see whether the search has discovered the key,
returning if it has. Otherwise, if x is a leaf, then line 7 terminates
the search unsuccessfully, and if x is an internal node, lines 8–9
recurse to search the appropriate subtree of x, after performing the
necessary DISK-READ on that child. Figure 18.1 illustrates the operation
of B-TREE-SEARCH. The blue nodes are those examined during a search for
the key R.

As in the TREE-SEARCH procedure for binary search trees, the nodes
encountered during the recursion form a simple path downward from the
root of the tree. The B-TREE-SEARCH procedure therefore accesses O(h) =
O(log_(t) n) disk blocks, where h is the height of the B-tree and n is
the number of keys in the B-tree. Since x.n < 2t, the while loop of
lines 2–3 takes O(t) time within each node, and the total CPU time is
O(th) = O(t log_(t)n).

Creating an empty B-tree

To build a B-tree T, first use the B-TREE-CREATE procedure on the next
page to create an empty root node and then call the B-TREE-INSERT
procedure on page 508 to add new keys. Both of these procedures use an
auxiliary procedure ALLOCATE-NODE, whose pseudocode we omit and which
allocates one disk block to be used as a new node in O(1) time. A node
created by ALLOCATE-NODE requires no DISK-READ, since there is as yet no
useful information stored on the disk for that node. B-TREE-CREATE
requires O(1) disk operations and O(1) CPU time.

B-TREE-CREATE(T)

  --- ---------------------
  1   x = ALLOCATE-NODE()
  2   x.leaf = TRUE
  3   x.n = 0
  4   DISK-WRITE(x)
  5   T.root = x
  --- ---------------------

Inserting a key into a B-tree

Inserting a key into a B-tree is significantly more complicated than
inserting a key into a binary search tree. As with binary search trees,
you search for the leaf position at which to insert the new key. With a
B-tree, however, you cannot simply create a new leaf node and insert it,
as the resulting tree would fail to be a valid B-tree. Instead, you
insert the new key into an existing leaf node. Since you cannot insert a
key into a leaf node that is full, you need an operation that splits a
full node y (having 2t − 1 keys) around its median key y.key_(t) into
two nodes having only t − 1 keys each. The median key moves up into y’s
parent to identify the dividing point between the two new trees. But if
y’s parent is also full, you must split it before you can insert the new
key, and thus you could end up splitting full nodes all the way up the
tree.

To avoid having to go back up the tree, just split every full node you
encounter as you go down the tree. In this way, whenever you need to
split a full node, you are assured that its parent is not full.
Inserting a key into a B-tree then requires only a single pass down the
tree from the root to a leaf.

Splitting a node in a B-tree

The procedure B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD on the facing page takes as input a
nonfull internal node x (assumed to reside in main memory) and an index
i such that x.c_(i) (also assumed to reside in main memory) is a full
child of x. The procedure splits this child in two and adjusts x so that
it has an additional child. To split a full root, you first need to make
the root a child of a new empty root node, so that you can use
B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD. The tree thus grows in height by 1: splitting is the
only means by which the tree grows taller.

B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD(x, i)

  ----- ------------------------------ --------------------------------------
    1   y = x.c_(i)                    // full node to split
    2   z = ALLOCATE-NODE()            // z will take half of y
    3   z.leaf = y.leaf                
    4   z.n = t − 1                    
    5   for j = 1 to t − 1             // z gets y’s greatest keys …
    6   z.key_(j) = y.key_(j+t)        
    7   if not y.leaf                  
    8   for j = 1 to t                 // … and its corresponding children
    9   z.c_(j) = y.c_(j+t)            
  10    y.n = t − 1                    // y keeps t − 1 keys
  11    for j = x.n + 1 downto i + 1   // shift x’s children to the right …
  12    x.c_(j+1) = x.c_(j)            
  13    x.c_(i+1) = z                  // … to make room for z as a child
  14    for j = x.ndownto i            // shift the corresponding keys in x
  15    x.key_(j+1) = x.key_(j)        
  16    x.key_(i) = y.key_(t)          // insert y’s median key
  17    x.n = x.n + 1                  // x has gained a child
  18    DISK-WRITE(y)                  
  19    DISK-WRITE(z)                  
  20    DISK-WRITE(x)                  
  ----- ------------------------------ --------------------------------------

Figure 18.5 illustrates how a node splits. B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD splits the
full node y = x.c_(i) about its median key (S in the figure), which
moves up into y’s parent node x. Those keys in y that are greater than
the median key move into a new node z, which becomes a new child of x.

B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD works by straightforward cutting and pasting. Node x
is the parent of the node y being split, which is x’s ith child (set in
line 1). Node y originally has 2t children and 2t − 1 keys, but
splitting reduces y to t children and t − 1 keys. The t largest children
and t − 1 keys of node y move over to node z, which becomes a new child
of x, positioned just after y in x’s table of children. The median key
of y moves up to become the key in node x that separates the pointers to
nodes y and z.

Lines 2–9 create node z and give it the largest t − 1 keys and, if y and
z are internal nodes, the corresponding t children of y. Line 10 adjusts
the key count for y. Then, lines 11–17 shift keys and child pointers in
x to the right in order to make room for x’s new child, insert z as a
new child of x, move the median key from y up to x in order to separate
y from z, and adjust x’s key count. Lines 18–20 write out all modified
disk blocks. The CPU time used by B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD is Θ(t), due to the
for loops in lines 5–6 and 8–9. (The for loops in lines 11–12 and 14–15
also run for O(t) iterations.) The procedure performs O(1) disk
operations.

[art]

Figure 18.5 Splitting a node with t = 4. Node y = x.c_(i) splits into
two nodes, y and z, and the median key S of y moves up into y’s parent.

Inserting a key into a B-tree in a single pass down the tree

Inserting a key k into a B-tree T of height h requires just a single
pass down the tree and O(h) disk accesses. The CPU time required is
O(th) = O(t log_(t) n). The B-TREE-INSERT procedure uses
B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD to guarantee that the recursion never descends to a
full node. If the root is full, B-TREE-INSERT splits it by calling the
procedure B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT on the facing page.

B-TREE-INSERT(T, k)

  --- ----------------------------------
  1   r = T.root
  2   if r.n == 2t − 1
  3   s = B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT(T)
  4   B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL(s, k)
  5   else B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL(r, k)
  --- ----------------------------------

B-TREE-INSERT works as follows. If the root is full, then line 3 calls
B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT in line 3 to split it. A new node s (with two
children) becomes the root and is returned by B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT.
Splitting the root, illustrated in Figure 18.6, is the only way to
increase the height of a B-tree. Unlike a binary search tree, a B-tree
increases in height at the top instead of at the bottom. Regardless of
whether the root split, B-TREE-INSERT finishes by calling
B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL to insert key k into the tree rooted at the
nonfull root node, which is either the new root (the call in line 4) or
the original root (the call in line 5).

[art]

Figure 18.6 Splitting the root with t = 4. Root node r splits in two,
and a new root node s is created. The new root contains the median key
of r and has the two halves of r as children. The B-tree grows in height
by one when the root is split. A B-tree’s height increases only when the
root splits.

B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT(T)

  --- --------------------------
  1   s = ALLOCATE-NODE()
  2   s.leaf = FALSE
  3   s.n = 0
  4   s.c₁ = T.root
  5   T.root = s
  6   B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD(s, 1)
  7   return s
  --- --------------------------

The auxiliary procedure B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL on page 511 inserts key k
into node x, which is assumed to be nonfull when the procedure is
called. B-TREEINSERT-NONFULL recurses as necessary down the tree, at all
times guaranteeing that the node to which it recurses is not full by
calling B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD as necessary. The operation of B-TREE-INSERT
and the recursive operation of B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL guarantee that this
assumption is true.

Figure 18.7 illustrates the various cases of how B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL
inserts a key into a B-tree. Lines 3–8 handle the case in which x is a
leaf node by inserting key k into x, shifting to the right all keys in x
that are greater than k. If x is not a leaf node, then k should go into
the appropriate leaf node in the subtree rooted at internal node x.
Lines 9–11 determine the child x.c_(i) to which the recursion descends.
Line 13 detects whether the recursion would descend to a full child, in
which case line 14 calls B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD to split that child into two
nonfull children, and lines 15–16 determine which of the two children is
the correct one to descend to. (Note that DISK-READ(x.c_(i)) is not
needed after line 16 increments i, since the recursion descends in this
case to a child that was just created by B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD.) The net
effect of lines 13–16 is thus to guarantee that the procedure never
recurses to a full node. Line 17 then recurses to insert k into the
appropriate subtree.

[art]

Figure 18.7 Inserting keys into a B-tree. The minimum degree t for this
B-tree is 3, so that a node can hold at most 5 keys. Blue nodes are
modified by the insertion process. (a) The initial tree for this
example. (b) The result of inserting B into the initial tree. This case
is a simple insertion into a leaf node. (c) The result of inserting Q
into the previous tree. The node RST U V splits into two nodes
containing RS and U V, the key T moves up to the root, and Q is inserted
in the leftmost of the two halves (the RS node). (d) The result of
inserting L into the previous tree. The root splits right away, since it
is full, and the B-tree grows in height by one. Then L is inserted into
the leaf containing JK. (e) The result of inserting F into the previous
tree. The node ABCDE splits before F is inserted into the rightmost of
the two halves (the DE node).

B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL(x, k)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | i = x.n                       |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | if x.leaf                     | // inserting into a leaf?     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | while i ≥ 1 and k < x.key_(i) | // shift keys in x to make    |
|     |                               | room for k                    |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | x.key_(i+1) = x.key_(i)       |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | i = i − 1                     |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   6 | x.key_(i+1) = k               | // insert key k in x          |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   7 | x.n = x.n + 1                 | // now x has 1 more key       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   8 | DISK-WRITE(x)                 |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | else while i ≥ 1 and k <      | // find the child where k     |
|     | x.key_(i)                     | belongs                       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10  | i = i − 1                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11  | i = i + 1                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12  | DISK-READ(x.c_(i))                                            |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 13  | if x.c_(i).n == 2t − 1        | // split the child if it’s    |
|     |                               | full                          |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 14  | B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD(x, i)                                      |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 15  | if k > x.key_(i)              | // does k go into x.c_(i) or  |
|     |                               | x.c_(i+1)?                    |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 16  | i = i + 1                     |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 17  | B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL(x.c_(i), k)                             |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

For a B-tree of height h, B-TREE-INSERT performs O(h) disk accesses,
since only O(1) DISK-READ and DISK-WRITE operations occur at each level
of the tree. The total CPU time used is O(t) in each level of the tree,
or O(th) = O(t log_(t) n) overall. Since B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL is
tail-recursive, you can instead implement it with a while loop, thereby
demonstrating that the number of blocks that need to be in main memory
at any time is O(1).

Exercises

18.2-1

Show the results of inserting the keys

F, S, Q, K, C, L, H, T, V, W, M, R, N, P, A, B, X, Y, D, Z, E

in order into an empty B-tree with minimum degree 2. Draw only the
configurations of the tree just before some node must split, and also
draw the final configuration.

18.2-2

Explain under what circumstances, if any, redundant DISK-READ or
DISK-WRITE operations occur during the course of executing a call to
B-TREE-INSERT. (A redundant DISK-READ is a DISK-READ for a block that is
already in memory. A redundant DISK-WRITE writes to disk a block of
information that is identical to what is already stored there.)

18.2-3

Professor Bunyan asserts that the B-TREE-INSERT procedure always results
in a B-tree with the minimum possible height. Show that the professor is
mistaken by proving that with t = 2 and the set of keys {1, 2, … , 15},
there is no insertion sequence that results in a B-tree with the minimum
possible height.

★ 18.2-4

If you insert the keys {1, 2, … , n} into an empty B-tree with minimum
degree 2, how many nodes does the final B-tree have?

18.2-5

Since leaf nodes require no pointers to children, they could conceivably
use a different (larger) t value than internal nodes for the same disk
block size. Show how to modify the procedures for creating and inserting
into a B-tree to handle this variation.

18.2-6

Suppose that you implement B-TREE-SEARCH to use binary search rather
than linear search within each node. Show that this change makes the
required CPU time O(lg n), independent of how t might be chosen as a
function of n.

18.2-7

Suppose that disk hardware allows you to choose the size of a disk block
arbitrarily, but that the time it takes to read the disk block is a+bt,
where a and b are specified constants and t is the minimum degree for a
B-tree using blocks of the selected size. Describe how to choose t so as
to minimize (approximately) the B-tree search time. Suggest an optimal
value of t for the case in which a = 5 milliseconds and b = 10
microseconds.

18.3    Deleting a key from a B-tree

Deletion from a B-tree is analogous to insertion but a little more
complicated, because you can delete a key from any node—not just a
leaf—and when you delete a key from an internal node, you must rearrange
the node’s children. As in insertion, you must guard against deletion
producing a tree whose structure violates the B-tree properties. Just as
a node should not get too big due to insertion, a node must not get too
small during deletion (except that the root is allowed to have fewer
than the minimum number t − 1 of keys). And just as a simple insertion
algorithm might have to back up if a node on the path to where the key
is to be inserted is full, a simple approach to deletion might have to
back up if a node (other than the root) along the path to where the key
is to be deleted has the minimum number of keys.

The procedure B-TREE-DELETE deletes the key k from the subtree rooted at
x. Unlike the procedures TREE-DELETE on page 325 and RB-DELETE on page
348, which are given the node to delete—presumably as the result of a
prior search—B-TREE-DELETE combines the search for key k with the
deletion process. Why do we combine search and deletion in
B-TREE-DELETE? Just as B-TREE-INSERT prevents any node from becoming
overfull (having more than 2t − 1 keys) while making a single pass down
the tree, B-TREE-DELETE prevents any node from becoming underfull
(having fewer than t − 1 keys) while also making a single pass down the
tree, searching for and ultimately deleting the key.

To prevent any node from becoming underfull, the design of B-TREE-DELETE
guarantees that whenever it calls itself recursively on a node x, the
number of keys in x is at least the minimum degree t at the time of the
call. (Although the root may have fewer than t keys and a recursive call
may be made from the root, no recursive call is made on the root.) This
condition requires one more key than the minimum required by the usual
B-tree conditions, and so a key might have to be moved from x into one
of its child nodes (still leaving x with at least the minimum t − 1
keys) before a recursive call is made on that child, thus allowing
deletion to occur in one downward pass without having to traverse back
up the tree.

We describe how the procedure B-TREE-DELETE(T, k) deletes a key k from a
B-tree T instead of presenting detailed pseudocode. We examine three
cases, illustrated in Figure 18.8. The cases are for when the search
arrives at a leaf, at an internal node containing key k, and at an
internal node not containing key k. As mentioned above, in all three
cases node x has at least t keys (with the possible exception of when x
is the root). Cases 2 and 3—when x is an internal node—guarantee this
property as the recursion descends through the B-tree.

[art]

[art]

Figure 18.8 Deleting keys from a B-tree. The minimum degree for this
B-tree is t = 3, so that, other than the root, every node must have at
least 2 keys. Blue nodes are those that are modified by the deletion
process. (a) The B-tree of Figure 18.7(e). (b) Deletion of F, which is
case 1: simple deletion from a leaf when all nodes visited during the
search (other than the root) have at least t = 3 keys. (c) Deletion of
M, which is case 2a: the predecessor L of M moves up to take M’s
position. (d) Deletion of G, which is case 2c: push G down to make node
DEGJK and then delete G from this leaf (case 1). (e) Deletion of D,
which is case 3b: since the recursion cannot descend to node CL because
it has only 2 keys, push P down and merge it with CL and TX to form CLP
TX. Then delete D from a leaf (case 1). (e⁰) After (e), delete the empty
root. The tree shrinks in height by 1. (f) Deletion of B, which is case
3a: C moves to fill B’s position and E moves to fill C’s position.

Case 1: The search arrives at a leaf node x. If x contains key k, then
delete k from x. If x does not contain key k, then k was not in the
B-tree and nothing else needs to be done.

Case 2: The search arrives at an internal node x that contains key k.
Let k = x.key_(i). One of the following three cases applies, depending
on the number of keys in x.c_(i) (the child of x that precedes k) and
x.c_(i+1) (the child of x that follows k).

Case 2a: x.c_(i) has at least t keys. Find the predecessor k′ of k in
the subtree rooted at x.c_(i). Recursively delete k′ from x.c_(i), and
replace k by k′ in x. (Key k′ can be found and deleted in a single
downward pass.)

Case 2b: x.c_(i) has t − 1 keys and x.c_(i+1)has at least t keys. This
case is symmetric to case 2a. Find the successor k′ of k in the subtree
rooted at x.c_(i+1). Recursively delete k′ from x.c_(i+1), and replace k
by k′ in x. (Again, finding and deleting k′ can be done in a single
downward pass.)

Case 2c: Both x.c_(i) and x.c_(i+1)have t − 1 keys. Merge k and all of
x.c_(i+1) into x.c_(i), so that x loses both k and the pointer to
x.c_(i+1), and x.c_(i) now contains 2t − 1 keys. Then free x.c_(i+1) and
recursively delete k from x.c_(i).

Case 3: The search arrives at an internal node x that does not contain
key k. Continue searching down the tree while ensuring that each node
visited has at least t keys. To do so, determine the root x.c_(i) of the
appropriate subtree that must contain k, if k is in the tree at all. If
x.c_(i) has only t − 1 keys, execute case 3a or 3b as necessary to
guarantee descending to a node containing at least t keys. Then finish
by recursing on the appropriate child of x.

Case 3a: x.c_(i) has only t − 1 keys but has an immediate sibling with
at least t keys. Give x.c_(i) an extra key by moving a key from x down
into x.c_(i), moving a key from x.c_(i)’s immediate left or right
sibling up into x, and moving the appropriate child pointer from the
sibling into x.c_(i).

Case 3b: x.c_(i) and each of x.c_(i)’s immediate siblings have t − 1
keys. (It is possible for x.c_(i) to have either one or two siblings.)
Merge x.c_(i) with one sibling, which involves moving a key from x down
into the new merged node to become the median key for that node.

In cases 2c and 3b, if node x is the root, it could end up having no
keys. When this situation occurs, then x is deleted, and x’s only child
x.c₁ becomes the new root of the tree. This action decreases the height
of the tree by one and preserves the property that the root of the tree
contains at least one key (unless the tree is empty).

Since most of the keys in a B-tree are in the leaves, deletion
operations often end up deleting keys from leaves. The B-TREE-DELETE
procedure then acts in one downward pass through the tree, without
having to back up. When deleting a key in an internal node x, however,
the procedure might make a downward pass through the tree to find the
key’s predecessor or successor and then return to node x to replace the
key with its predecessor or successor (cases 2a and 2b). Returning to
node x does not require a traversal through all the levels between x and
the node containing the predecessor or successor, however, since the
procedure can just keep a pointer to x and the key position within x and
put the predecessor or successor key directly there.

Although this procedure seems complicated, it involves only O(h) disk
operations for a B-tree of height h, since only O(1) calls to DISK-READ
and DISK-WRITE are made between recursive invocations of the procedure.
The CPU time required is O(th) = O(t log_(t)n).

Exercises

18.3-1

Show the results of deleting C, P, and V, in order, from the tree of
Figure 18.8(f).

18.3-2

Write pseudocode for B-TREE-DELETE.

Problems

18-1     Stacks on secondary storage

Consider implementing a stack in a computer that has a relatively small
amount of fast primary memory and a relatively large amount of slower
disk storage. The operations PUSH and POP work on single-word values.
The stack can grow to be much larger than can fit in memory, and thus
most of it must be stored on disk.

A simple, but inefficient, stack implementation keeps the entire stack
on disk. Maintain in memory a stack pointer, which is the disk address
of the top element on the stack. Indexing block numbers and word offsets
within blocks from 0, if the pointer has value p, the top element is the
(p mod m)th word on block ⌊p/m⌋ of the disk, where m is the number of
words per block.

To implement the PUSH operation, increment the stack pointer, read the
appropriate block into memory from disk, copy the element to be pushed
to the appropriate word on the block, and write the block back to disk.
A POP operation is similar. Read in the appropriate block from disk,
save the top of the stack, decrement the stack pointer, and return the
saved value. You need not write back the block, since it was not
modified, and the word in the block that contained the popped value is
ignored.

As in the analyses of B-tree operations, two costs matter: the total
number of disk accesses and the total CPU time. A disk access also
incurs a cost in CPU time. In particular, any disk access to a block of
m words incurs charges of one disk access and Θ(m) CPU time.

a. Asymptotically, what is the worst-case number of disk accesses for n
stack operations using this simple implementation? What is the CPU time
for n stack operations? Express your answer in terms of m and n for this
and subsequent parts.

Now consider a stack implementation in which you keep one block of the
stack in memory. (You also maintain a small amount of memory to record
which block is currently in memory.) You can perform a stack operation
only if the relevant disk block resides in memory. If necessary, you can
write the block currently in memory to the disk and read the new block
from the disk into memory. If the relevant disk block is already in
memory, then no disk accesses are required.

b. What is the worst-case number of disk accesses required for n PUSH
operations? What is the CPU time?

c. What is the worst-case number of disk accesses required for n stack
operations? What is the CPU time?

Suppose that you now implement the stack by keeping two blocks in memory
(in addition to a small number of words for bookkeeping).

d. Describe how to manage the stack blocks so that the amortized number
of disk accesses for any stack operation is O(1/m) and the amortized CPU
time for any stack operation is O(1).

18-2     Joining and splitting 2-3-4 trees

The join operation takes two dynamic sets S′ and S″ and an element x
such that x′.key < x.key < x″.key for any x′ ∈ S′ and x″ ∈ S″. It
returns a set S = S′ ∪ {x} ∪ S″. The split operation is like an
“inverse” join: given a dynamic set S and an element x ∈ S, it creates a
set S′ that consists of all elements in S − {x} whose keys are less than
x.key and another set S″ that consists of all elements in S − {x} whose
keys are greater than x.key. This problem investigates how to implement
these operations on 2-3-4 trees (B-trees with t = 2). Assume for
convenience that elements consist only of keys and that all key values
are distinct.

a. Show how to maintain, for every node x of a 2-3-4 tree, the height of
the subtree rooted at x as an attribute x.height. Make sure that your
implementation does not affect the asymptotic running times of
searching, insertion, and deletion.

b. Show how to implement the join operation. Given two 2-3-4 trees T′
and T″ and a key k, the join operation should run in O(1 + |h′ − h″|)
time, where h′ and h″ are the heights of T′ and T″, respectively.

c. Consider the simple path p from the root of a 2-3-4 tree T to a given
key k, the set S′ of keys in T that are less than k, and the set S″ of
keys in T that are greater than k. Show that p breaks S′ into a set of
trees [art] and a set of keys [art] such that [art] for i = 1, 2, … , m
and any keys [art] and [art]. What is the relationship between the
heights of [art] and [art]? Describe how p breaks S″ into sets of trees
and keys.

d. Show how to implement the split operation on T. Use the join
operation to assemble the keys in S′ into a single 2-3-4 tree T′ and the
keys in S″ into a single 2-3-4 tree T″. The running time of the split
operation should be O(lg n), where n is the number of keys in T. (Hint:
The costs for joining should telescope.)

Chapter notes

Knuth [261], Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5], and Sedgewick and Wayne
[402] give further discussions of balanced-tree schemes and B-trees.
Comer [99] provides a comprehensive survey of B-trees. Guibas and
Sedgewick [202] discuss the relationships among various kinds of
balanced-tree schemes, including red-black trees and 2-3-4 trees.

In 1970, J. E. Hopcroft invented 2-3 trees, a precursor to B-trees and
2-3-4 trees, in which every internal node has either two or three
children. Bayer and McCreight [39] introduced B-trees in 1972 with no
explanation of their choice of name.

Bender, Demaine, and Farach-Colton [47] studied how to make B-trees
perform well in the presence of memory-hierarchy effects. Their
cache-oblivious algorithms work efficiently without explicitly knowing
the data transfer sizes within the memory hierarchy.

¹ When specifying disk capacities, one terabyte is one trillion bytes,
rather than 2₄₀ bytes.

² SSDs also exhibit greater latency than main memory and access data in
blocks.

³ Another common variant on a B-tree, known as a B^(*)-tree, requires
each internal node to be at least 2/3 full, rather than at least half
full, as a B-tree requires.

19        Data Structures for Disjoint Sets

Some applications involve grouping n distinct elements into a collection
of disjoint sets—sets with no elements in common. These applications
often need to perform two operations in particular: finding the unique
set that contains a given element and uniting two sets. This chapter
explores methods for maintaining a data structure that supports these
operations.

Section 19.1 describes the operations supported by a disjoint-set data
structure and presents a simple application. Section 19.2 looks at a
simple linked-list implementation for disjoint sets. Section 19.3
presents a more efficient representation using rooted trees. The running
time using the tree representation is theoretically superlinear, but for
all practical purposes it is linear. Section 19.4 defines and discusses
a very quickly growing function and its very slowly growing inverse,
which appears in the running time of operations on the tree-based
implementation, and then, by a complex amortized analysis, proves an
upper bound on the running time that is just barely superlinear.

19.1    Disjoint-set operations

A disjoint-set data structure maintains a collection S = {S₁, S₂, … ,
S_(k)} of disjoint dynamic sets. To identify each set, choose a
representative, which is some member of the set. In some applications,
it doesn’t matter which member is used as the representative; it matters
only that if you ask for the representative of a dynamic set twice
without modifying the set between the requests, you get the same answer
both times. Other applications may require a prespecified rule for
choosing the representative, such as choosing the smallest member in the
set (for a set whose elements can be ordered).

As in the other dynamic-set implementations we have studied, each
element of a set is represented by an object. Letting x denote an
object, we’ll see how to support the following operations:

MAKE-SET(x), where x does not already belong to some other set, creates
a new set whose only member (and thus representative) is x.

UNION(x, y) unites two disjoint, dynamic sets that contain x and y, say
S_(x) and S_(y), into a new set that is the union of these two sets. The
representative of the resulting set is any member of S_(x) ∪ S_(y),
although many implementations of UNION specifically choose the
representative of either S_(x) or S_(y) as the new representative. Since
the sets in the collection must at all times be disjoint, the UNION
operation destroys sets S_(x) and S_(y), removing them from the
collection S. In practice, implementations often absorb the elements of
one of the sets into the other set.

FIND-SET(x) returns a pointer to the representative of the unique set
containing x.

Throughout this chapter, we’ll analyze the running times of disjoint-set
data structures in terms of two parameters: n, the number of MAKE-SET
operations, and m, the total number of MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET
operations. Because the total number of operations m includes the n
MAKE-SET operations, m ≥ n. The first n operations are always MAKE-SET
operations, so that after the first n operations, the collection
consists of n singleton sets. Since the sets are disjoint at all times,
each UNION operation reduces the number of sets by 1. After n − 1 UNION
operations, therefore, only one set remains, and so at most n − 1 UNION
operations can occur.

An application of disjoint-set data structures

One of the many applications of disjoint-set data structures arises in
determining the connected components of an undirected graph (see Section
B.4). Figure 19.1(a), for example, shows a graph with four connected
components.

The procedure CONNECTED-COMPONENTS on the following page uses the
disjoint-set operations to compute the connected components of a graph.
Once the CONNECTED-COMPONENTS procedure has preprocessed the graph, the
procedure SAME-COMPONENT answers queries about whether two vertices
belong to the same connected component. In pseudocode, we denote the set
of vertices of a graph G by G.V and the set of edges by G.E.

The procedure CONNECTED-COMPONENTS initially places each vertex v in its
own set. Then, for each edge (u, v), it unites the sets containing u and
v. By Exercise 19.1-2, after all the edges are processed, two vertices
belong to the same connected component if and only if the objects
corresponding to the vertices belong to the same set. Thus
CONNECTED-COMPONENTS computes sets in such a way that the procedure
SAME-COMPONENT can determine whether two vertices are in the same
connected component. Figure 19.1(b) illustrates how CONNECTED-COMPONENTS
computes the disjoint sets.

[art]

Figure 19.1 (a) A graph with four connected components: {a, b, c, d},
{e, f, g}, {h, i}, and {j }. (b) The collection of disjoint sets after
processing each edge.

CONNECTED-COMPONENTS(G)

+------------+-------------------------------+
| 1          | for each vertex v ∈ G.V       |
+------------+-------------------------------+
| 2          | MAKE-SET(v)                   |
+------------+-------------------------------+
| 3          | for each edge (u, v) ∈ G.E    |
+------------+-------------------------------+
| 4          | if FIND-SET(u) ≠ FIND-SET(v)  |
+------------+-------------------------------+
| 5          | UNION(u, v)                   |
+------------+-------------------------------+
| SAME-COMPONENT(u, v)                       |
+------------+-------------------------------+
| 1          | if FIND-SET(u) == FIND-SET(v) |
+------------+-------------------------------+
| 2          | return TRUE                   |
+------------+-------------------------------+
| 3          | else returnFALSE              |
+------------+-------------------------------+

In an actual implementation of this connected-components algorithm, the
representations of the graph and the disjoint-set data structure would
need to reference each other. That is, an object representing a vertex
would contain a pointer to the corresponding disjoint-set object, and
vice versa. Since these programming details depend on the implementation
language, we do not address them further here.

When the edges of the graph are static—not changing over
time—depth-first search can compute the connected components faster (see
Exercise 20.3-12 on page 572). Sometimes, however, the edges are added
dynamically, with the connected components updated as each edge is
added. In this case, the implementation given here can be more efficient
than running a new depth-first search for each new edge.

Exercises

19.1-1

The CONNECTED-COMPONENTS procedure is run on the undirected graph G =
(V, E), where V = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k}, and the edges of E
are processed in the order (d, i), (f, k), (g, i), (b, g), (a, h), (i,
j), (d, k), (b, j), (d, f), (g, j), (a, e). List the vertices in each
connected component after each iteration of lines 3–5.

19.1-2

Show that after all edges are processed by CONNECTED-COMPONENTS, two
vertices belong to the same connected component if and only if they
belong to the same set.

19.1-3

During the execution of CONNECTED-COMPONENTS on an undirected graph G =
(V, E) with k connected components, how many times is FIND-SET called?
How many times is UNION called? Express your answers in terms of |V |,
|E|, and k.

19.2    Linked-list representation of disjoint sets

Figure 19.2(a) shows a simple way to implement a disjoint-set data
structure: each set is represented by its own linked list. The object
for each set has attributes head, pointing to the first object in the
list, and tail, pointing to the last object. Each object in the list
contains a set member, a pointer to the next object in the list, and a
pointer back to the set object. Within each linked list, the objects may
appear in any order. The representative is the set member in the first
object in the list.

With this linked-list representation, both MAKE-SET and FIND-SET require
only O(1) time. To carry out MAKE-SET(x), create a new linked list whose
only object is x. For FIND-SET(x), just follow the pointer from x back
to its set object and then return the member in the object that head
points to. For example, in Figure 19.2(a), the call FIND-SET(g) returns
f.

[art]

Figure 19.2 (a) Linked-list representations of two sets. Set S₁ contains
members d, f, and g, with representative f, and set S₂ contains members
b, c, e, and h, with representative c. Each object in the list contains
a set member, a pointer to the next object in the list, and a pointer
back to the set object. Each set object has pointers head and tail to
the first and last objects, respectively. (b) The result of UNION(g, e),
which appends the linked list containing e to the linked list containing
g. The representative of the resulting set is f. The set object for e’s
list, S₂, is destroyed.

A simple implementation of union

The simplest implementation of the UNION operation using the linked-list
set representation takes significantly more time than MAKE-SET or
FIND-SET. As Figure 19.2(b) shows, the operation UNION(x, y) appends y’s
list onto the end of x’s list. The representative of x’s list becomes
the representative of the resulting set. To quickly find where to append
y’s list, use the tail pointer for x’s list. Because all members of y’s
list join x’s list, the UNION operation destroys the set object for y’s
list. The UNION operation is where this implementation pays the price
for FIND-SET taking constant time: UNION must also update the pointer to
the set object for each object originally on y’s list, which takes time
linear in the length of y’s list. In Figure 19.2, for example, the
operation UNION(g, e) causes pointers to be updated in the objects for
b, c, e, and h.

In fact, we can construct a sequence of m operations on n objects that
requires Θ(n²) time. Starting with objects x₁, x₂, … , x_(n), execute
the sequence of n MAKE-SET operations followed by n − 1 UNION operations
shown in Figure 19.3, so that m = 2n−1. The n MAKE-SET operations take
Θ(n) time. Because the ith UNION operation updates i objects, the total
number of objects updated by all n−1 UNION operations forms an
arithmetic series:

[art]

Figure 19.3 A sequence of 2n − 1 operations on n objects that takes
Θ(n²) time, or Θ(n) time per operation on average, using the linked-list
set representation and the simple implementation of UNION.

[art]

The total number of operations is 2n−1, and so each operation on average
requires Θ(n) time. That is, the amortized time of an operation is Θ(n).

A weighted-union heuristic

In the worst case, the above implementation of UNION requires an average
of Θ(n) time per call, because it might be appending a longer list onto
a shorter list, and the procedure must update the pointer to the set
object for each member of the longer list. Suppose instead that each
list also includes the length of the list (which can be maintained
straightforwardly with constant overhead) and that the UNION procedure
always appends the shorter list onto the longer, breaking ties
arbitrarily. With this simple weighted-union heuristic, a single UNION
operation can still take Ω(n) time if both sets have Ω(n) members. As
the following theorem shows, however, a sequence of m MAKE-SET, UNION,
and FIND-SET operations, n of which are MAKE-SET operations, takes O(m +
n lg n) time.

Theorem 19.1

Using the linked-list representation of disjoint sets and the
weighted-union heuristic, a sequence of m MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET
operations, n of which are MAKE-SET operations, takes O(m + n lg n)
time.

Proof   Because each UNION operation unites two disjoint sets, at most n
− 1 UNION operations occur over all. We now bound the total time taken
by these UNION operations. We start by determining, for each object, an
upper bound on the number of times the object’s pointer back to its set
object is updated. Consider a particular object x. Each time x’s pointer
is updated, x must have started in the smaller set. The first time x’s
pointer is updated, therefore, the resulting set must have at least 2
members. Similarly, the next time x’s pointer is updated, the resulting
set must have had at least 4 members. Continuing on, for any k ≤ n,
after x’s pointer has been updated ⌈lg k⌉ times, the resulting set must
have at least k members. Since the largest set has at most n members,
each object’s pointer is updated at most ⌈lg n⌉ times over all the UNION
operations. Thus the total time spent updating object pointers over all
UNION operations is O(n lg n). We must also account for updating the
tail pointers and the list lengths, which take only Θ(1) time per UNION
operation. The total time spent in all UNION operations is thus O(n lg
n).

The time for the entire sequence of m operations follows. Each MAKE-SET
and FIND-SET operation takes O(1) time, and there are O(m) of them. The
total time for the entire sequence is thus O(m + n lg n).

▪

Exercises

19.2-1

Write pseudocode for MAKE-SET, FIND-SET, and UNION using the linked-list
representation and the weighted-union heuristic. Make sure to specify
the attributes that you assume for set objects and list objects.

19.2-2

Show the data structure that results and the answers returned by the
FIND-SET operations in the following program. Use the linked-list
representation with the weighted-union heuristic. Assume that if the
sets containing x_(i) and x_(j) have the same size, then the operation
UNION(x_(i), x_(j)) appends x_(j)’s list onto x_(i)’s list.

  ----- -----------------------
    1   for i = 1 to 16
    2   MAKE-SET(x_(i))
    3   for i = 1 to 15 by 2
    4   UNION(x_(i), x_(i+1))
    5   for i = 1 to 13 by 4
    6   UNION(x_(i), x_(i+2))
    7   UNION(x₁, x₅)
    8   UNION(x₁₁, x₁₃)
    9   UNION(x₁, x₁₀)
  10    FIND-SET(x₂)
  11    FIND-SET(x₉)
  ----- -----------------------

19.2-3

Adapt the aggregate proof of Theorem 19.1 to obtain amortized time
bounds of O(1) for MAKE-SET and FIND-SET and O(lg n) for UNION using the
linked-list representation and the weighted-union heuristic.

19.2-4

Give a tight asymptotic bound on the running time of the sequence of
operations in Figure 19.3 assuming the linked-list representation and
the weighted-union heuristic.

19.2-5

Professor Gompers suspects that it might be possible to keep just one
pointer in each set object, rather than two (head and tail), while
keeping the number of pointers in each list element at two. Show that
the professor’s suspicion is well founded by describing how to represent
each set by a linked list such that each operation has the same running
time as the operations described in this section. Describe also how the
operations work. Your scheme should allow for the weighted-union
heuristic, with the same effect as described in this section. (Hint: Use
the tail of a linked list as its set’s representative.)

19.2-6

Suggest a simple change to the UNION procedure for the linked-list
representation that removes the need to keep the tail pointer to the
last object in each list. Regardless of whether the weighted-union
heuristic is used, your change should not change the asymptotic running
time of the UNION procedure. (Hint: Rather than appending one list to
another, splice them together.)

19.3    Disjoint-set forests

A faster implementation of disjoint sets represents sets by rooted
trees, with each node containing one member and each tree representing
one set. In a disjoint-set forest, illustrated in Figure 19.4(a), each
member points only to its parent. The root of each tree contains the
representative and is its own parent. As we’ll see, although the
straightforward algorithms that use this representation are no faster
than ones that use the linked-list representation, two heuristics—“union
by rank” and “path compression”—yield an asymptotically optimal
disjoint-set data structure.

The three disjoint-set operations have simple implementations. A
MAKE-SET operation simply creates a tree with just one node. A FIND-SET
operation follows parent pointers until it reaches the root of the tree.
The nodes visited on this simple path toward the root constitute the
find path. A UNION operation, shown in Figure 19.4(b), simply causes the
root of one tree to point to the root of the other.

[art]

Figure 19.4 A disjoint-set forest. (a) Trees representing the two sets
of Figure 19.2. The tree on the left represents the set {b, c, e, h},
with c as the representative, and the tree on the right represents the
set {d, f, g}, with f as the representative. (b) The result of UNION (e,
g).

Heuristics to improve the running time

So far, disjoint-set forests have not improved on the linked-list
implementation. A sequence of n − 1 UNION operations could create a tree
that is just a linear chain of n nodes. By using two heuristics,
however, we can achieve a running time that is almost linear in the
total number m of operations.

The first heuristic, union by rank, is similar to the weighted-union
heuristic we used with the linked-list representation. The common-sense
approach is to make the root of the tree with fewer nodes point to the
root of the tree with more nodes. Rather than explicitly keeping track
of the size of the subtree rooted at each node, however, we’ll adopt an
approach that eases the analysis. For each node, maintain a rank, which
is an upper bound on the height of the node. Union by rank makes the
root with smaller rank point to the root with larger rank during a UNION
operation.

The second heuristic, path compression, is also quite simple and highly
effective. As shown in Figure 19.5, FIND-SET operations use it to make
each node on the find path point directly to the root. Path compression
does not change any ranks.

Pseudocode for disjoint-set forests

The union-by-rank heuristic requires its implementation to keep track of
ranks. With each node x, maintain the integer value x.rank, which is an
upper bound on the height of x (the number of edges in the longest
simple path from a descendant leaf to x). When MAKE-SET creates a
singleton set, the single node in the corresponding tree has an initial
rank of 0. Each FIND-SET operation leaves all ranks unchanged. The UNION
operation has two cases, depending on whether the roots of the trees
have equal rank. If the roots have unequal ranks, make the root with
higher rank the parent of the root with lower rank, but don’t change the
ranks themselves. If the roots have equal ranks, arbitrarily choose one
of the roots as the parent and increment its rank.

[art]

Figure 19.5 Path compression during the operation FIND-SET. Arrows and
self-loops at roots are omitted. (a) A tree representing a set prior to
executing FIND-SET(a). Triangles represent subtrees whose roots are the
nodes shown. Each node has a pointer to its parent. (b) The same set
after executing FIND-SET(a). Each node on the find path now points
directly to the root.

Let’s put this method into pseudocode, appearing on the next page. The
parent of node x is denoted by x.p. The LINK procedure, a subroutine
called by UNION, takes pointers to two roots as inputs. The FIND-SET
procedure with path compression, implemented recursively, turns out to
be quite simple.

The FIND-SET procedure is a two-pass method: as it recurses, it makes
one pass up the find path to find the root, and as the recursion
unwinds, it makes a second pass back down the find path to update each
node to point directly to the root. Each call of FIND-SET(x) returns x.p
in line 3. If x is the root, then FIND-SET skips line 2 and just returns
x.p, which is x. In this case the recursion bottoms out. Otherwise, line
2 executes, and the recursive call with parameter x.p returns a pointer
to the root. Line 2 updates node x to point directly to the root, and
line 3 returns this pointer.

MAKE-SET(x)

  --- ------------
  1   x.p = x
  2   x.rank = 0
  --- ------------

UNION(x, y)

  --- --------------------------------
  1   LINK(FIND-SET(x), FIND-SET(y))
  --- --------------------------------

LINK(x, y)

  --- ---------------------
  1   if x.rank > y.rank
  2   y.p = x
  3   else x.p = y
  4   if x.rank == y.rank
  5   y.rank = y.rank + 1
  --- ---------------------

FIND-SET(x)

  --- --------------------- --------------------------------
  1   if x ≠ x.p            // not the root?
  2   x.p = FIND-SET(x.p)   // the root becomes the parent
  3   return x.p            // return the root
  --- --------------------- --------------------------------

Effect of the heuristics on the running time

Separately, either union by rank or path compression improves the
running time of the operations on disjoint-set forests, and combining
the two heuristics yields an even greater improvement. Alone, union by
rank yields a running time of O(m lg n) for a sequence of m operations,
n of which are MAKE-SET (see Exercise 19.4-4), and this bound is tight
(see Exercise 19.3-3). Although we won’t prove it here, for a sequence
of n MAKE-SET operations (and hence at most n − 1 UNION operations) and
f FIND-SET operations, the worst-case running time using only the
path-compression heuristic is Θ(n + f · (1 + log_(2+f/n)n)).

Combining union by rank and path compression gives a worst-case running
time of O(m α(n)), where α(n) is a very slowly growing function, defined
in Section 19.4. In any conceivable application of a disjoint-set data
structure, α(n) ≤ 4, and thus, its running time is as good as linear in
m for all practical purposes. Mathematically speaking, however, it is
superlinear. Section 19.4 proves this O(mα(n)) upper bound.

Exercises

19.3-1

Redo Exercise 19.2-2 using a disjoint-set forest with union by rank and
path compression. Show the resulting forest with each node including its
x_(i) and rank.

19.3-2

Write a nonrecursive version of FIND-SET with path compression.

19.3-3

Give a sequence of m MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET operations, n of
which are MAKE-SET operations, that takes Ω(m lg n) time when using only
union by rank and not path compression.

19.3-4

Consider the operation PRINT-SET(x), which is given a node x and prints
all the members of x’s set, in any order. Show how to add just a single
attribute to each node in a disjoint-set forest so that PRINT-SET(x)
takes time linear in the number of members of x’s set and the asymptotic
running times of the other operations are unchanged. Assume that you can
print each member of the set in O(1) time.

★ 19.3-5

Show that any sequence of m MAKE-SET, FIND-SET, and LINK operations,
where all the LINK operations appear before any of the FIND-SET
operations, takes only O(m) time when using both path compression and
union by rank. You may assume that the arguments to LINK are roots
within the disjoint-set forest. What happens in the same situation when
using only path compression and not union by rank?

★ 19.4 Analysis of union by rank with path compression

As noted in Section 19.3, the combined union-by-rank and
path-compression heuristic runs in O(m α(n)) time for m disjoint-set
operations on n elements. In this section, we’ll explore the function α
to see just how slowly it grows. Then we’ll analyze the running time
using the potential method of amortized analysis.

A very quickly growing function and its very slowly growing inverse

For integers j, k ≥ 0, we define the function A_(k)(j) as

[art]

where the expression [art] uses the functional-iteration notation
defined in equation (3.30) on page 68. Specifically, equation (3.30)
gives [art] and [art] for i ≥ 1. We call the parameter k the level of
the function A.

The function A_(k)(j) strictly increases with both j and k. To see just
how quickly this function grows, we first obtain closed-form expressions
for A₁(j) and A₂(j).

Lemma 19.2

For any integer j ≥ 1, we have A₁(j) = 2j + 1.

Proof   We first use induction on i to show that [art]. For the base
case, [art]. For the inductive step, assume that [art]. Then [art].
Finally, we note that [art].

▪

Lemma 19.3

For any integer j ≥ 1, we have A₂ (j) = 2^(j+1)(j + 1) − 1.

Proof   We first use induction on i to show that [art]. For the base
case, we have [art]. For the inductive step, assume that [art]. Then
[art]. Finally, we note that [art].

Now we can see how quickly A_(k)(j) grows by simply examining A_(k)(1)
for levels k = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. From the definition of A₀(j) and the above
lemmas, we have A₀(1) = 1 + 1 = 2, A₁(1) = 2 · 1 + 1 = 3, and A₂(1) =
2¹⁺¹ · (1 + 1) − 1 = 7. We also have

  ------- --- ------------
  A₃(1)   =   [art]
          =   A₂(A₂(1))
          =   A₂(7)
          =   2⁸ · 8 − 1
          =   2¹¹ − 1
          =   2047
  ------- --- ------------

and

  ------- --- ------------------
  A₄(1)   =   [art]
          =   A₃(A₃(1))
          =   A₃(2047)
          =   [art]
          ≫   A₂(2047)
          =   2²⁰⁴⁸ · 2048 − 1
          =   2²⁰⁵⁹ − 1
          >   2²⁰⁵⁶
          =   (2⁴)⁵¹⁴
          =   16⁵¹⁴
          ≫   10⁸⁰,
  ------- --- ------------------

which is the estimated number of atoms in the observable universe. (The
symbol “≫” denotes the “much-greater-than” relation.)

We define the inverse of the function A_(k)(n), for integer n ≥ 0, by

[art]

In words, α(n) is the lowest level k for which A_(k)(1) is at least n.
From the above values of A_(k)(1), we see that

[art]

It is only for values of n so large that the term “astronomical”
understates them (greater than A₄(1), a huge number) that α(n) > 4, and
so α(n) ≤ 4 for all practical purposes.

Properties of ranks

In the remainder of this section, we prove an O(mα(n)) bound on the
running time of the disjoint-set operations with union by rank and path
compression. In order to prove this bound, we first prove some simple
properties of ranks.

Lemma 19.4

For all nodes x, we have x.rank ≤ x.p.rank, with strict inequality if x
≠ x.p (x is not a root). The value of x.rank is initially 0, increases
through time until x ≠ x.p, and from then on, x.rank does not change.
The value of x.p.rank monotonically increases over time.

Proof   The proof is a straightforward induction on the number of
operations, using the implementations of MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET
that appear on page 530, and is left as Exercise 19.4-1.

▪

Corollary 19.5

On the simple path from any node going up toward a root, node ranks
strictly increase.

▪

Lemma 19.6

Every node has rank at most n − 1.

Proof   Each node’s rank starts at 0, and it increases only upon LINK
operations. Because there are at most n − 1 UNION operations, there are
also at most n − 1 LINK operations. Because each LINK operation either
leaves all ranks alone or increases some node’s rank by 1, all ranks are
at most n − 1.

▪

Lemma 19.6 provides a weak bound on ranks. In fact, every node has rank
at most ⌊lg n⌋ (see Exercise 19.4-2). The looser bound of Lemma 19.6
suffices for our purposes, however.

Proving the time bound

In order to prove the O(mα(n)) time bound, we’ll use the potential
method of amortized analysis from Section 16.3. In performing the
amortized analysis, it will be convenient to assume that we invoke the
LINK operation rather than the UNION operation. That is, since the
parameters of the LINK procedure are pointers to two roots, we act as
though we perform the appropriate FIND-SET operations separately. The
following lemma shows that even if we count the extra FIND-SET
operations induced by UNION calls, the asymptotic running time remains
unchanged.

Lemma 19.7

Suppose that we convert a sequence S′ of m′ MAKE-SET, UNION, and
FIND-SET operations into a sequence S of m MAKE-SET, LINK, and FIND-SET
operations by turning each UNION into two FIND-SET operations followed
by one LINK. Then, if sequence S runs in O(mα(n)) time, sequence S′ runs
in O(m′ α(n)) time.

Proof   Since each UNION operation in sequence S′ is converted into
three operations in S, we have m′ ≤ m ≤ 3m′, so that m = Θ(m′), Thus, an
O(m α(n)) time bound for the converted sequence S implies an O(m′ α(n))
time bound for the original sequence S′.

▪

From now on, we assume that the initial sequence of m′ MAKE-SET, UNION,
and FIND-SET operations has been converted to a sequence of m MAKE-SET,
LINK, and FIND-SET operations. We now prove an O(m α(n)) time bound for
the converted sequence and appeal to Lemma 19.7 to prove the O(m′ α(n))
running time of the original sequence of m′ operations.

Potential function

The potential function we use assigns a potential ϕ_(q)(x) to each node
x in the disjoint-set forest after q operations. For the potential Φ_(q)
of the entire forest after q operations, sum the individual node
potentials: [art]. Because the forest is empty before the first
operation, the sum is taken over an empty set, and so Φ₀ = 0. No
potential Φ_(q) is ever negative.

The value of ϕ_(q)(x) depends on whether x is a tree root after the qth
operation. If it is, or if x.rank = 0, then ϕ_(q)(x) = α(n) · x.rank.

Now suppose that after the qth operation, x is not a root and that
x.rank ≥ 1. We need to define two auxiliary functions on x before we can
define ϕ_(q)(x). First we define

[art]

That is, level(x) is the greatest level k for which A_(k), applied to
x’s rank, is no greater than x’s parent’s rank.

We claim that

[art]

which we see as follows. We have

  ---------- --- ------------ -----------------------------------------
  x.p.rank   ≥   x.rank + 1   (by Lemma 19.4 because x is not a root)
             =   A₀(x.rank)   (by the definition (19.1) of A₀(j)),
  ---------- --- ------------ -----------------------------------------

which implies that level(x) ≥ 0, and

  ------------------ --- ------------- -------------------------------------------
  A_(α(n))(x.rank)   ≥   A_(α(n))(1)   (because A_(k)(j) is strictly increasing)
                     ≥   n             (by the definition (19.2) of α(n))
                     >   x.p.rank      (by Lemma 19.6),
  ------------------ --- ------------- -------------------------------------------

which implies that level(x) < α(n).

For a given nonroot node x, the value of level(x) monotonically
increases over time. Why? Because x is not a root, its rank does not
change. The rank of x.p monotonically increases over time, since if x.p
is not a root then its rank does not change, and if x.p is a root then
its rank can never decrease. Thus, the difference between x.rank and
x.p.rank monotonically increases over time. Therefore, the value of k
needed for A_(k)(x.rank) to overtake x.p.rank monotonically increases
over time as well.

The second auxiliary function applies when x.rank ≥ 1: iter(x) = max

[art]

That is, iter(x) is the largest number of times we can iteratively apply
A_(level(x)), applied initially to x’s rank, before exceeding x’s
parent’s rank.

We claim that when x.rank ≥ 1, we have

[art]

which we see as follows. We have

  ---------- --- ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  x.p.rank   ≥   A_(level(x))(x.rank)   (by the definition (19.3) of level(x))
             =   [art]                  (by the definition (3.30) of functional iteration),
  ---------- --- ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------

which implies that iter(x) ≥ 1. We also have

  ------- --- ------------------------ -----------------------------------------
  [art]   =   A_(level(x)+1)(x.rank)   (by the definition (19.1) of A_(k)(j))
          >   x.p.rank                 (by the definition (19.3) of level(x)),
  ------- --- ------------------------ -----------------------------------------

which implies that iter(x) ≤ x.rank. Note that because x.p.rank
monotonically increases over time, in order for iter(x) to decrease,
level(x) must increase. As long as level(x) remains unchanged, iter(x)
must either increase or remain unchanged.

With these auxiliary functions in place, we are ready to define the
potential of node x after q operations:

[art]

We next investigate some useful properties of node potentials.

Lemma 19.8

For every node x, and for all operation counts q, we have

0 ≤ ϕ_(q)(x) ≤ α(n) · x.rank.

Proof   If x is a root or x.rank = 0, then ϕ_(q)(x) = α(n) · x.rank by
definition. Now suppose that x is not a root and that x.rank ≥ 1. We can
obtain a lower bound on ϕ_(q)(x) by maximizing level(x) and iter(x). The
bounds (19.4) and (19.6) give α(n) − level(x) ≥ 1 and iter(x) ≤ x.rank.
Thus, we have

  ---------- --- --------------------------------------
  ϕ_(q)(x)   =   (α(n) − level(x)) · x.rank − iter(x)
             ≥   x.rank − x.rank
             =   0.
  ---------- --- --------------------------------------

Similarly, minimizing level(x) and iter(x) provides an upper bound on
ϕ_(q)(x). By the bound (19.4), level(x) ≥ 0, and by the bound (19.6),
iter(x) ≥ 1. Thus, we have

  ---------- --- -------------------------
  ϕ_(q)(x)   ≤   (α(n) − 0) · x.rank − 1
             =   α(n) · x.rank − 1
             <   α(n) · x.rank.
  ---------- --- -------------------------

▪

Corollary 19.9

If node x is not a root and x.rank > 0, then ϕ_(q)(x) < α(n) · x.rank.

Potential changes and amortized costs of operations

We are now ready to examine how the disjoint-set operations affect node
potentials. Once we understand how each operation can change the
potential, we can determine the amortized costs.

Lemma 19.10

Let x be a node that is not a root, and suppose that the qth operation
is either a LINK or a FIND-SET. Then after the qth operation, ϕ_(q)(x) ≤
ϕ_(q−1)(x). Moreover, if x.rank ≥ 1 and either level(x) or iter(x)
changes due to the qth operation, then ϕ_(q)(x) ≤ ϕ_(q−1)(x) − 1. That
is, x’s potential cannot increase, and if it has positive rank and
either level(x) or iter(x) changes, then x’s potential drops by at least
1.

Proof   Because x is not a root, the qth operation does not change
x.rank, and because n does not change after the initial n MAKE-SET
operations, α(n) remains unchanged as well. Hence, these components of
the formula for x’s potential remain the same after the qth operation.
If x.rank = 0, then ϕ_(q)(x) = ϕ_(q−1)(x) = 0.

Now assume that x.rank ≥ 1. Recall that level(x) monotonically increases
over time. If the qth operation leaves level(x) unchanged, then iter(x)
either increases or remains unchanged. If both level(x) and iter(x) are
unchanged, then ϕ_(q)(x) = ϕ_(q−1)(x). If level(x) is unchanged and
iter(x) increases, then it increases by at least 1, and so ϕ_(q)(x) ≤
ϕ_(q−1)(x) − 1.

Finally, if the qth operation increases level(x), it increases by at
least 1, so that the value of the term (α(n) − level(x)) · x.rank drops
by at least x.rank. Because level(x) increased, the value of iter(x)
might drop, but according to the bound (19.6), the drop is by at most
x.rank − 1. Thus, the increase in potential due to the change in iter(x)
is less than the decrease in potential due to the change in level(x),
yielding ϕ_(q)(x) ≤ ϕ_(q−1)(x) − 1.

▪

Our final three lemmas show that the amortized cost of each MAKE-SET,
LINK, and FIND-SET operation is O(α(n)). Recall from equation (16.2) on
page 456 that the amortized cost of each operation is its actual cost
plus the change in potential due to the operation.

Lemma 19.11

The amortized cost of each MAKE-SET operation is O(1).

Proof   Suppose that the qth operation is MAKE-SET(x). This operation
creates node x with rank 0, so that ϕ_(q)(x) = 0. No other ranks or
potentials change, and so Φ_(q) = Φ_(q−1). Noting that the actual cost
of the MAKE-SET operation is O(1) completes the proof.

▪

Lemma 19.12

The amortized cost of each LINK operation is O(α(n)).

Proof   Suppose that the qth operation is LINK(x, y). The actual cost of
the LINK operation is O(1). Without loss of generality, suppose that the
LINK makes y the parent of x.

To determine the change in potential due to the LINK, note that the only
nodes whose potentials may change are x, y, and the children of y just
prior to the operation. We’ll show that the only node whose potential
can increase due to the LINK is y, and that its increase is at most
α(n):

- By Lemma 19.10, any node that is y’s child just before the LINK cannot
  have its potential increase due to the LINK.

- From the definition (19.7) of ϕ_(q)(x), note that, since x was a root
  just before the qth operation, ϕ_(q−1)(x) = α(n) · x.rank at that
  time. If x.rank = 0, then ϕ_(q)(x) = ϕ_(q−1)(x) = 0. Otherwise,

    ---------- --- --------------- ---------------------
    ϕ_(q)(x)   <   α(n) · x.rank   (by Corollary 19.9)
               =   ϕ_(q−1)(x),     
    ---------- --- --------------- ---------------------

  and so x’s potential decreases.

- Because y is a root prior to the LINK, ϕ_(q−1)(y) = α(n) · y.rank.
  After the LINK operation, y remains a root, so that y’s potential
  still equals α(n) times its rank after the operation. The LINK
  operation either leaves y’s rank alone or increases y’s rank by 1.
  Therefore, either ϕ_(q)(y) = ϕ_(q−1)(y) or ϕ_(q)(y) = ϕ_(q−1)(y) +
  α(n).

The increase in potential due to the LINK operation, therefore, is at
most α(n). The amortized cost of the LINK operation is O(1) + α(n) =
O(α(n)).

▪

Lemma 19.13

The amortized cost of each FIND-SET operation is O(α(n)).

Proof   Suppose that the qth operation is a FIND-SET and that the find
path contains s nodes. The actual cost of the FIND-SET operation is
O(s). We will show that no node’s potential increases due to the
FIND-SET and that at least max {0, s − (α(n) + 2)} nodes on the find
path have their potential decrease by at least 1.

We first show that no node’s potential increases. Lemma 19.10 takes care
of all nodes other than the root. If x is the root, then its potential
is α(n) · x.rank, which does not change due to the FIND-SET operation.

Now we show that at least max {0, s − (α(n) + 2)} nodes have their
potential decrease by at least 1. Let x be a node on the find path such
that x.rank > 0 and x is followed somewhere on the find path by another
node y that is not a root, where level(y) = level(x) just before the
FIND-SET operation. (Node y need not immediately follow x on the find
path.) All but at most α(n) + 2 nodes on the find path satisfy these
constraints on x. Those that do not satisfy them are the first node on
the find path (if it has rank 0), the last node on the path (i.e., the
root), and the last node w on the path for which level(w) = k, for each
k = 0, 1, 2, … , α(n)−1.

Consider such a node x. It has positive rank and is followed somewhere
on the find path by nonroot node y such that level(y) = level(x) before
the path compression occurs. We claim that the path compression
decreases x’s potential by at least 1. To prove this claim, let k =
level(x) = level(y) and i = iter(x) before the path compression occurs.
Just prior to the path compression caused by the FIND-SET, we have

  ---------- --- --------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------
  x.p.rank   ≥   [art]           (by the definition (19.5) of iter(x)),
  y.p.rank   ≥   A_(k)(y.rank)   (by the definition (19.3) of level(y)),
  y.rank     ≥   x.p.rank        (by Corollary 19.5 and because y follows x on the find path).
  ---------- --- --------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------

Putting these inequalities together gives

  ---------- --- ----------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  y.p.rank   ≥   A_(k)(y.rank)     
             ≥   A_(k)(x.p.rank)   (because A_(k)(j) is strictly increasing)
             ≥   [art]             
             =   [art]             (by the definition (3.30) of functional iteration).
  ---------- --- ----------------- -----------------------------------------------------

Because path compression makes x and y have the same parent, after path
compression we have x.p.rank = y.p.rank. The parent of y might change
due to the path compression, but if it does, the rank of y’s new parent
compared with the rank of y’s parent before path compression is either
the same or greater. Since x.rank does not change, [art] after path
compression. By the definition (19.5) of the iter function, the value of
iter(x) increases from i to at least i + 1. By Lemma 19.10, ϕ_(q)(x) ≤
ϕ_(q−1)(x) − 1, so that x’s potential decreases by at least 1.

The amortized cost of the FIND-SET operation is the actual cost plus the
change in potential. The actual cost is O(s), and we have shown that the
total potential decreases by at least max {0, s − (α(n) + 2)}. The
amortized cost, therefore, is at most O(s) − (s − (α(n) + 2)) = O(s) −
s + O(α(n)) = O(α(n)), since we can scale up the units of potential to
dominate the constant hidden in O(s). (See Exercise 19.4-6.)

▪

Putting the preceding lemmas together yields the following theorem.

Theorem 19.14

A sequence of m MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET operations, n of which are
MAKE-SET operations, can be performed on a disjoint-set forest with
union by rank and path compression in O(m α(n)) time.

Proof   Immediate from Lemmas 19.7, 19.11, 19.12, and 19.13.

▪

Exercises

19.4-1

Prove Lemma 19.4.

19.4-2

Prove that every node has rank at most ⌊lg n⌋.

19.4-3

In light of Exercise 19.4-2, how many bits are necessary to store x.rank
for each node x?

19.4-4

Using Exercise 19.4-2, give a simple proof that operations on a
disjoint-set forest with union by rank but without path compression run
in O(m lg n) time.

19.4-5

Professor Dante reasons that because node ranks increase strictly along
a simple path to the root, node levels must monotonically increase along
the path. In other words, if x.rank > 0 and x.p is not a root, then
level(x) ≤ level(x.p). Is the professor correct?

19.4-6

The proof of Lemma 19.13 ends with scaling the units of potential to
dominate the constant hidden in the O(s) term. To be more precise in the
proof, you need to change the definition (19.7) of the potential
function to multiply each of the two cases by a constant, say c, that
dominates the constant in the O(s) term. How must the rest of the
analysis change to accommodate this updated potential function?

★ 19.4-7

Consider the function α′(n) = min {k : A_(k)(1) ≥ lg(n + 1)}. Show that
α′(n) ≤ 3 for all practical values of n and, using Exercise 19.4-2, show
how to modify the potential-function argument to prove that performing a
sequence of m MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET operations, n of which are
MAKE-SET operations, on a disjoint-set forest with union by rank and
path compression takes O(mα′(n)) time.

Problems

19-1     Offline minimum

In the offline minimum problem, you maintain a dynamic set T of elements
from the domain {1, 2, … , n} under the operations INSERT and
EXTRACT-MIN. The input is a sequence S of n INSERT and m EXTRACT-MIN
calls, where each key in {1, 2, … , n} is inserted exactly once. Your
goal is to determine which key is returned by each EXTRACT-MIN call.
Specifically, you must fill in an array extracted[1: m], where for i =
1, 2, … , m, extracted[i] is the key returned by the ith EXTRACT-MIN
call. The problem is “offline” in the sense that you are allowed to
process the entire sequence S before determining any of the returned
keys.

a. Consider the following instance of the offline minimum problem, in
which each operation INSERT(i) is represented by the value of i and each
EXTRACT-MIN is represented by the letter E:

4, 8, E, 3, E, 9, 2, 6, E, E, E, 1, 7, E, 5.

Fill in the correct values in the extracted array.

To develop an algorithm for this problem, break the sequence S into
homogeneous subsequences. That is, represent S by

I₁, E, I₂, E, I₃, … , I_(m), E, I_(m+1),

where each E represents a single EXTRACT-MIN call and each I_(j)
represents a (possibly empty) sequence of INSERT calls. For each
subsequence I_(j), initially place the keys inserted by these operations
into a set K_(j), which is empty if I_(j) is empty. Then execute the
OFFLINE-MINIMUM procedure.

OFFLINE-MINIMUM(m, n)

  --- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   for i = 1 to n
  2   determine j such that i ∈ K_(j)
  3   if j ≠ m + 1
  4   extracted[j] = i
  5   let l be the smallest value greater than j for which set K_(l) exists
  6   K_(l) = K_(j) ∪ K_(l), destroying K_(j)
  7   return extracted
  --- -----------------------------------------------------------------------

b. Argue that the array extracted returned by OFFLINE-MINIMUM is
correct.

c. Describe how to implement OFFLINE-MINIMUM efficiently with a
disjoint-set data structure. Give as tight a bound as you can on the
worst-case running time of your implementation.

19-2     Depth determination

In the depth-determination problem, you maintain a forest ℱ = {T_(i)} of
rooted trees under three operations:

MAKE-TREE(v) creates a tree whose only node is v.

FIND-DEPTH(v) returns the depth of node v within its tree.

GRAFT(r, v) makes node r, which is assumed to be the root of a tree,
become the child of node v, which is assumed to be in a different tree
from r but may or may not itself be a root.

a. Suppose that you use a tree representation similar to a disjoint-set
forest: v.p is the parent of node v, except that v.p = v if v is a root.
Suppose further that you implement GRAFT(r, v) by setting r.p = v and
FIND-DEPTH(v) by following the find path from v up to the root,
returning a count of all nodes other than v encountered. Show that the
worst-case running time of a sequence of m MAKE-TREE, FIND-DEPTH, and
GRAFT operations is Θ(m²).

By using the union-by-rank and path-compression heuristics, you can
reduce the worst-case running time. Use the disjoint-set forest S =
{S_(i)}, where each set S_(i) (which is itself a tree) corresponds to a
tree T_(i) in the forest ℱ. The tree structure within a set S_(i),
however, does not necessarily correspond to that of T_(i). In fact, the
implementation of S_(i) does not record the exact parent-child
relationships but nevertheless allows you to determine any node’s depth
in T_(i).

The key idea is to maintain in each node v a “pseudodistance” v.d, which
is defined so that the sum of the pseudodistances along the simple path
from v to the root of its set S_(i) equals the depth of v in T_(i). That
is, if the simple path from v to its root in S_(i) is v₀, v₁, … , v_(k),
where v₀ = v and v_(k) is S_(i)’s root, then the depth of v in T_(i) is
[art].

b. Give an implementation of MAKE-TREE.

c. Show how to modify FIND-SET to implement FIND-DEPTH. Your
implementation should perform path compression, and its running time
should be linear in the length of the find path. Make sure that your
implementation updates pseudodistances correctly.

d. Show how to implement GRAFT(r, v), which combines the sets containing
r and v, by modifying the UNION and LINK procedures. Make sure that your
implementation updates pseudodistances correctly. Note that the root of
a set S_(i) is not necessarily the root of the corresponding tree T_(i).

e. Give a tight bound on the worst-case running time of a sequence of m
MAKE-TREE, FIND-DEPTH, and GRAFT operations, n of which are MAKE-TREE
operations.

19-3     Tarjan’s offline lowest-common-ancestors algorithm

The lowest common ancestor of two nodes u and v in a rooted tree T is
the node w that is an ancestor of both u and v and that has the greatest
depth in T. In the offline lowest-common-ancestors problem, you are
given a rooted tree T and an arbitrary set P = {{u, v}} of unordered
pairs of nodes in T, and you wish to determine the lowest common
ancestor of each pair in P.

To solve the offline lowest-common-ancestors problem, the LCA procedure
on the following page performs a tree walk of T with the initial call
LCA(T.root). Assume that each node is colored WHITE prior to the walk.

a. Argue that line 10 executes exactly once for each pair {u, v} ∈ P.

b. Argue that at the time of the call LCA(u), the number of sets in the
disjoint-set data structure equals the depth of u in T.

LCA(u)

  ----- ---------------------------------------
    1   MAKE-SET(u)
    2   FIND-SET(u).ancestor = u
    3   for each child v of u in T
    4   LCA(v)
    5   UNION(u, v)
    6   FIND-SET(u).ancestor = u
    7   u.color = BLACK
    8   for each node v such that {u, v} ∈ P
    9   if v.color == BLACK
  10    print “The lowest common ancestor of”
        u “and” v “is” FIND-SET(v).ancestor
  ----- ---------------------------------------

c. Prove that LCA correctly prints the lowest common ancestor of u and v
for each pair {u, v} ∈ P.

d. Analyze the running time of LCA, assuming that you use the
implementation of the disjoint-set data structure in Section 19.3.

Chapter notes

Many of the important results for disjoint-set data structures are due
at least in part to R. E. Tarjan. Using aggregate analysis, Tarjan [427,
429] gave the first tight upper bound in terms of the very slowly
growing inverse [art] of Ackermann’s function. (The function A_(k)(j)
given in Section 19.4 is similar to Ackermann’s function, and the
function α(n) is similar to [art]. Both α(n) and [art] are at most 4 for
all conceivable values of m and n.) An upper bound of O(m lg* n) was
proven earlier by Hopcroft and Ullman [5, 227]. The treatment in Section
19.4 is adapted from a later analysis by Tarjan [431], which is based on
an analysis by Kozen [270]. Harfst and Reingold [209] give a
potential-based version of Tarjan’s earlier bound.

Tarjan and van Leeuwen [432] discuss variants on the path-compression
heuristic, including “one-pass methods,” which sometimes offer better
constant factors in their performance than do two-pass methods. As with
Tarjan’s earlier analyses of the basic path-compression heuristic, the
analyses by Tarjan and van Leeuwen are aggregate. Harfst and Reingold
[209] later showed how to make a small change to the potential function
to adapt their path-compression analysis to these one-pass variants.
Goel et al. [182] prove that linking disjoint-set trees randomly yields
the same asymptotic running time as union by rank. Gabow and Tarjan
[166] show that in certain applications, the disjoint-set operations can
be made to run in O(m) time.

Tarjan [428] showed that a lower bound of [art] time is required for
operations on any disjoint-set data structure satisfying certain
technical conditions. This lower bound was later generalized by Fredman
and Saks [155], who showed that in the worst case, [art] (lg n)-bit
words of memory must be accessed.

Part VI    Graph Algorithms

 

 

Introduction

Graph problems pervade computer science, and algorithms for working with
them are fundamental to the field. Hundreds of interesting computational
problems are couched in terms of graphs. This part touches on a few of
the more significant ones.

Chapter 20 shows how to represent a graph in a computer and then
discusses algorithms based on searching a graph using either
breadth-first search or depth-first search. The chapter gives two
applications of depth-first search: topologically sorting a directed
acyclic graph and decomposing a directed graph into its strongly
connected components.

Chapter 21 describes how to compute a minimum-weight spanning tree of a
graph: the least-weight way of connecting all of the vertices together
when each edge has an associated weight. The algorithms for computing
minimum spanning trees serve as good examples of greedy algorithms (see
Chapter 15).

Chapters 22 and 23 consider how to compute shortest paths between
vertices when each edge has an associated length or “weight.” Chapter 22
shows how to find shortest paths from a given source vertex to all other
vertices, and Chapter 23 examines methods to compute shortest paths
between every pair of vertices.

Chapter 24 shows how to compute a maximum flow of material in a flow
network, which is a directed graph having a specified source vertex of
material, a specified sink vertex, and specified capacities for the
amount of material that can traverse each directed edge. This general
problem arises in many forms, and a good algorithm for computing maximum
flows can help solve a variety of related problems efficiently.

Finally, Chapter 25 explores matchings in bipartite graphs: methods for
pairing up vertices that are partitioned into two sets by selecting
edges that go between the sets. Bipartite-matching problems model
several situations that arise in the real world. The chapter examines
how to find a matching of maximum cardinality; the “stable-marriage
problem,” which has the highly practical application of matching medical
residents to hospitals; and assignment problems, which maximize the
total weight of a bipartite matching.

When we characterize the running time of a graph algorithm on a given
graph G = (V, E), we usually measure the size of the input in terms of
the number of vertices |V| and the number of edges |E| of the graph.
That is, we denote the size of the input with two parameters, not just
one. We adopt a common notational convention for these parameters.
Inside asymptotic notation (such as O-notation or Θ-notation), and only
inside such notation, the symbol V denotes |V | and the symbol E denotes
|E|. For example, we might say, “the algorithm runs in O(VE) time,”
meaning that the algorithm runs in O(|V| |E|) time. This convention
makes the running-time formulas easier to read, without risk of
ambiguity.

Another convention we adopt appears in pseudocode. We denote the vertex
set of a graph G by G.V and its edge set by G.E. That is, the pseudocode
views vertex and edge sets as attributes of a graph.

20        Elementary Graph Algorithms

This chapter presents methods for representing a graph and for searching
a graph. Searching a graph means systematically following the edges of
the graph so as to visit the vertices of the graph. A graph-searching
algorithm can discover much about the structure of a graph. Many
algorithms begin by searching their input graph to obtain this
structural information. Several other graph algorithms elaborate on
basic graph searching. Techniques for searching a graph lie at the heart
of the field of graph algorithms.

Section 20.1 discusses the two most common computational representations
of graphs: as adjacency lists and as adjacency matrices. Section 20.2
presents a simple graph-searching algorithm called breadth-first search
and shows how to create a breadth-first tree. Section 20.3 presents
depth-first search and proves some standard results about the order in
which depth-first search visits vertices. Section 20.4 provides our
first real application of depth-first search: topologically sorting a
directed acyclic graph. A second application of depth-first search,
finding the strongly connected components of a directed graph, is the
topic of Section 20.5.

20.1    Representations of graphs

You can choose between two standard ways to represent a graph G = (V,
E): as a collection of adjacency lists or as an adjacency matrix. Either
way applies to both directed and undirected graphs. Because the
adjacency-list representation provides a compact way to represent sparse
graphs—those for which |E| is much less than |V|²—it is usually the
method of choice. Most of the graph algorithms presented in this book
assume that an input graph is represented in adjacency-list form. You
might prefer an adjacency-matrix representation, however, when the graph
is dense—|E| is close to |V|²—or when you need to be able to tell
quickly whether there is an edge connecting two given vertices. For
example, two of the all-pairs shortest-paths algorithms presented in
Chapter 23 assume that their input graphs are represented by adjacency
matrices.

[art]

Figure 20.1 Two representations of an undirected graph. (a) An
undirected graph G with 5 vertices and 7 edges. (b) An adjacency-list
representation of G. (c) The adjacency-matrix representation of G.

[art]

Figure 20.2 Two representations of a directed graph. (a) A directed
graph G with 6 vertices and 8 edges. (b) An adjacency-list
representation of G. (c) The adjacency-matrix representation of G.

The adjacency-list representation of a graph G = (V, E) consists of an
array Adj of |V| lists, one for each vertex in V. For each u ∈ V, the
adjacency list Adj[u] contains all the vertices v such that there is an
edge (u, v) ∈ E. That is, Adj[u] consists of all the vertices adjacent
to u in G. (Alternatively, it can contain pointers to these vertices.)
Since the adjacency lists represent the edges of a graph, our pseudocode
treats the array Adj as an attribute of the graph, just like the edge
set E. In pseudocode, therefore, you will see notation such as G.Adj[u].
Figure 20.1(b) is an adjacency-list representation of the undirected
graph in Figure 20.1(a). Similarly, Figure 20.2(b) is an adjacency-list
representation of the directed graph in Figure 20.2(a).

If G is a directed graph, the sum of the lengths of all the adjacency
lists is |E|, since an edge of the form (u, v) is represented by having
v appear in Adj[u]. If G is an undirected graph, the sum of the lengths
of all the adjacency lists is 2 |E|, since if (u, v) is an undirected
edge, then u appears in v’s adjacency list and vice versa. For both
directed and undirected graphs, the adjacency-list representation has
the desirable property that the amount of memory it requires is Θ(V +
E). Finding each edge in the graph also takes Θ(V + E) time, rather than
just Θ(E), since each of the |V| adjacency lists must be examined. Of
course, if |E| = Ω(V)—such as in a connected, undirected graph or a
strongly connected, directed graph—we can say that finding each edge
takes Θ(E) time.

Adjacency lists can also represent weighted graphs, that is, graphs for
which each edge has an associated weight given by a weight function w :
E → ℝ. For example, let G = (V, E) be a weighted graph with weight
function w. Then you can simply store the weight w(u, v) of the edge (u,
v) ∈ E with vertex v in u’s adjacency list. The adjacency-list
representation is quite robust in that you can modify it to support many
other graph variants.

A potential disadvantage of the adjacency-list representation is that it
provides no quicker way to determine whether a given edge (u, v) is
present in the graph than to search for v in the adjacency list Adj[u].
An adjacency-matrix representation of the graph remedies this
disadvantage, but at the cost of using asymptotically more memory. (See
Exercise 20.1-8 for suggestions of variations on adjacency lists that
permit faster edge lookup.)

The adjacency-matrix representation of a graph G = (V, E) assumes that
the vertices are numbered 1, 2, … , |V| in some arbitrary manner. Then
the adjacency-matrix representation of a graph G consists of a |V| × |V|
matrix A = (a_(ij)) such that

[art]

Figures 20.1(c) and 20.2(c) are the adjacency matrices of the undirected
and directed graphs in Figures 20.1(a) and 20.2(a), respectively. The
adjacency matrix of a graph requires Θ(V²) memory, independent of the
number of edges in the graph. Because finding each edge in the graph
requires examining the entire adjacency matrix, doing so takes Θ(V²)
time.

Observe the symmetry along the main diagonal of the adjacency matrix in
Figure 20.1(c). Since in an undirected graph, (u, v) and (v, u)
represent the same edge, the adjacency matrix A of an undirected graph
is its own transpose: A = A^(T). In some applications, it pays to store
only the entries on and above the diagonal of the adjacency matrix,
thereby cutting the memory needed to store the graph almost in half.

Like the adjacency-list representation of a graph, an adjacency matrix
can represent a weighted graph. For example, if G = (V, E) is a weighted
graph with edge-weight function w, you can store the weight w(u, v) of
the edge (u, v) ∈ E as the entry in row u and column v of the adjacency
matrix. If an edge does not exist, you can store a NIL value as its
corresponding matrix entry, though for many problems it is convenient to
use a value such as 0 or ∞.

Although the adjacency-list representation is asymptotically at least as
space-efficient as the adjacency-matrix representation, adjacency
matrices are simpler, and so you might prefer them when graphs are
reasonably small. Moreover, adjacency matrices carry a further advantage
for unweighted graphs: they require only one bit per entry.

Representing attributes

Most algorithms that operate on graphs need to maintain attributes for
vertices and/or edges. We indicate these attributes using our usual
notation, such as v.d for an attribute d of a vertex v. When we indicate
edges as pairs of vertices, we use the same style of notation. For
example, if edges have an attribute f, then we denote this attribute for
edge (u, v) by (u, v).f. For the purpose of presenting and understanding
algorithms, our attribute notation suffices.

Implementing vertex and edge attributes in real programs can be another
story entirely. There is no one best way to store and access vertex and
edge attributes. For a given situation, your decision will likely depend
on the programming language you are using, the algorithm you are
implementing, and how the rest of your program uses the graph. If you
represent a graph using adjacency lists, one design choice is to
represent vertex attributes in additional arrays, such as an array d[1 :
|V|] that parallels the Adj array. If the vertices adjacent to u belong
to Adj[u], then the attribute u.d can actually be stored in the array
entry d[u]. Many other ways of implementing attributes are possible. For
example, in an object-oriented programming language, vertex attributes
might be represented as instance variables within a subclass of a Vertex
class.

Exercises

20.1-1

Given an adjacency-list representation of a directed graph, how long
does it take to compute the out-degree of every vertex? How long does it
take to compute the in-degrees?

20.1-2

Give an adjacency-list representation for a complete binary tree on 7
vertices. Give an equivalent adjacency-matrix representation. Assume
that the edges are undirected and that the vertices are numbered from 1
to 7 as in a binary heap.

20.1-3

The transpose of a directed graph G = (V, E) is the graph G^(T) = (V,
E^(T)), where E^(T) = {(v, u) ∈ V × V : (u, v) ∈ E}. That is, G^(T) is G
with all its edges reversed. Describe efficient algorithms for computing
G^(T) from G, for both the adjacency-list and adjacency-matrix
representations of G. Analyze the running times of your algorithms.

20.1-4

Given an adjacency-list representation of a multigraph G = (V, E),
describe an O(V + E)-time algorithm to compute the adjacency-list
representation of the “equivalent” undirected graph G′ = (V, E′), where
E′ consists of the edges in E with all multiple edges between two
vertices replaced by a single edge and with all self-loops removed.

20.1-5

The square of a directed graph G = (V, E) is the graph G² = (V, E²) such
that (u, v) ∈ E² if and only if G contains a path with at most two edges
between u and v. Describe efficient algorithms for computing G² from G
for both the adjacency-list and adjacency-matrix representations of G.
Analyze the running times of your algorithms.

20.1-6

Most graph algorithms that take an adjacency-matrix representation as
input require Ω(V²) time, but there are some exceptions. Show how to
determine whether a directed graph G contains a universal sink—a vertex
with in-degree |V| – 1 and out-degree 0—in O(V) time, given an adjacency
matrix for G.

20.1-7

The incidence matrix of a directed graph G = (V, E) with no self-loops
is a |V| × |E| matrix B = (b_(ij)) such that

[art]

Describe what the entries of the matrix product BB^(T) represent, where
B^(T) is the transpose of B.

20.1-8

Suppose that instead of a linked list, each array entry Adj[u] is a hash
table containing the vertices v for which (u, v) ∈ E, with collisions
resolved by chaining. Under the assumption of uniform independent
hashing, if all edge lookups are equally likely, what is the expected
time to determine whether an edge is in the graph? What disadvantages
does this scheme have? Suggest an alternate data structure for each edge
list that solves these problems. Does your alternative have
disadvantages compared with the hash table?

20.2    Breadth-first search

Breadth-first search is one of the simplest algorithms for searching a
graph and the archetype for many important graph algorithms. Prim’s
minimum-spanning-tree algorithm (Section 21.2) and Dijkstra’s
single-source shortest-paths algorithm (Section 22.3) use ideas similar
to those in breadth-first search.

Given a graph G = (V, E) and a distinguished source vertex s,
breadth-first search systematically explores the edges of G to
“discover” every vertex that is reachable from s. It computes the
distance from s to each reachable vertex, where the distance to a vertex
v equals the smallest number of edges needed to go from s to v.
Breadth-first search also produces a “breadth-first tree” with root s
that contains all reachable vertices. For any vertex v reachable from s,
the simple path in the breadth-first tree from s to v corresponds to a
shortest path from s to v in G, that is, a path containing the smallest
number of edges. The algorithm works on both directed and undirected
graphs.

Breadth-first search is so named because it expands the frontier between
discovered and undiscovered vertices uniformly across the breadth of the
frontier. You can think of it as discovering vertices in waves emanating
from the source vertex. That is, starting from s, the algorithm first
discovers all neighbors of s, which have distance 1. Then it discovers
all vertices with distance 2, then all vertices with distance 3, and so
on, until it has discovered every vertex reachable from s.

In order to keep track of the waves of vertices, breadth-first search
could maintain separate arrays or lists of the vertices at each distance
from the source vertex. Instead, it uses a single first-in, first-out
queue (see Section 10.1.3) containing some vertices at a distance k,
possibly followed by some vertices at distance k + 1. The queue,
therefore, contains portions of two consecutive waves at any time.

To keep track of progress, breadth-first search colors each vertex
white, gray, or black. All vertices start out white, and vertices not
reachable from the source vertex s stay white the entire time. A vertex
that is reachable from s is discovered the first time it is encountered
during the search, at which time it becomes gray, indicating that is now
on the frontier of the search: the boundary between discovered and
undiscovered vertices. The queue contains all the gray vertices.
Eventually, all the edges of a gray vertex will be explored, so that all
of its neighbors will be discovered. Once all of a vertex’s edges have
been explored, the vertex is behind the frontier of the search, and it
goes from gray to black.¹

Breadth-first search constructs a breadth-first tree, initially
containing only its root, which is the source vertex s. Whenever the
search discovers a white vertex v in the course of scanning the
adjacency list of a gray vertex u, the vertex v and the edge (u, v) are
added to the tree. We say that u is the predecessor or parent of v in
the breadth-first tree. Since every vertex reachable from s is
discovered at most once, each vertex reachable from s has exactly one
parent. (There is one exception: because s is the root of the
breadth-first tree, it has no parent.) Ancestor and descendant
relationships in the breadth-first tree are defined relative to the root
s as usual: if u is on the simple path in the tree from the root s to
vertex v, then u is an ancestor of v and v is a descendant of u.

The breadth-first-search procedure BFS on the following page assumes
that the graph G = (V, E) is represented using adjacency lists. It
denotes the queue by Q, and it attaches three additional attributes to
each vertex v in the graph:

- v.color is the color of v: WHITE, GRAY, or BLACK.
- v.d holds the distance from the source vertex s to v, as computed by
  the algorithm.
- v.π is v’s predecessor in the breadth-first tree. If v has no
  predecessor because it is the source vertex or is undiscovered, then
  v.π NIL.

Figure 20.3 illustrates the progress of BFS on an undirected graph.

The procedure BFS works as follows. With the exception of the source
vertex s, lines 1–4 paint every vertex white, set u.d = ∞ for each
vertex u, and set the parent of every vertex to be NIL. Because the
source vertex s is always the first vertex discovered, lines 5–7 paint s
gray, set s.d to 0, and set the predecessor of s to NIL. Lines 8–9
create the queue Q, initially containing just the source vertex.

The while loop of lines 10–18 iterates as long as there remain gray
vertices, which are on the frontier: discovered vertices that have not
yet had their adjacency lists fully examined. This while loop maintains
the following invariant:

At the test in line 10, the queue Q consists of the set of gray
vertices.

Although we won’t use this loop invariant to prove correctness, it is
easy to see that it holds prior to the first iteration and that each
iteration of the loop maintains the invariant. Prior to the first
iteration, the only gray vertex, and the only vertex in Q, is the source
vertex s. Line 11 determines the gray vertex u at the head of the queue
Q and removes it from Q. The for loop of lines 12–17 considers each
vertex v in the adjacency list of u. If v is white, then it has not yet
been discovered, and the procedure discovers it by executing lines
14–17. These lines paint vertex v gray, set v’s distance v.d to u.d + 1,
record u as v’s parent v.π, and place v at the tail of the queue Q. Once
the procedure has examined all the vertices on u’s adjacency list, it
blackens u in line 18, indicating that u is now behind the frontier. The
loop invariant is maintained because whenever a vertex is painted gray
(in line 14) it is also enqueued (in line 17), and whenever a vertex is
dequeued (in line 11) it is also painted black (in line 18).

BFS(G, s)

  ----- ------------------------------- ---------------------------------
    1   for each vertex u ∈ G.V – {s}   
    2   u.color = WHITE                 
    3   u.d = ∞                         
    4   u.π NIL                         
    5   s.color = GRAY                  
    6   s.d = 0                         
    7   s.π NIL                         
    8   Q = Ø                           
    9   ENQUEUE(Q, s)                   
  10    while Q ≠ Ø                     
  11    u = DEQUEUE(Q)                  
  12    for each vertex v in G.Adj[u]   // search the neighbors of u
  13    if v.color == WHITE             // is v being discovered now?
  14    v.color = GRAY                  
  15    v.d = u.d + 1                   
  16    v.π = u                         
  17    ENQUEUEd(Q, v)                  // v is now on the frontier
  18    u.color = BLACK                 // u is now behind the frontier
  ----- ------------------------------- ---------------------------------

The results of breadth-first search may depend upon the order in which
the neighbors of a given vertex are visited in line 12: the
breadth-first tree may vary, but the distances d computed by the
algorithm do not. (See Exercise 20.2-5.)

A simple change allows the BFS procedure to terminate in many cases
before the queue Q becomes empty. Because each vertex is discovered at
most once and receives a finite d value only when it is discovered, the
algorithm can terminate once every vertex has a finite d value. If BFS
keeps count of how many vertices have been discovered, it can terminate
once either the queue Q is empty or all |V| vertices are discovered.

[art]

Figure 20.3 The operation of BFS on an undirected graph. Each part shows
the graph and the queue Q at the beginning of each iteration of the
while loop of lines 10–18. Vertex distances appear within each vertex
and below vertices in the queue. The tan region surrounds the frontier
of the search, consisting of the vertices in the queue. The light blue
region surrounds the vertices behind the frontier, which have been
dequeued. Each part highlights in orange the vertex dequeued and the
breadth-first tree edges added, if any, in the previous iteration. Blue
edges belong to the breadth-first tree constructed so far.

Analysis

Before proving the various properties of breadth-first search, let’s
take on the easier job of analyzing its running time on an input graph G
= (V, E). We use aggregate analysis, as we saw in Section 16.1. After
initialization, breadth-first search never whitens a vertex, and thus
the test in line 13 ensures that each vertex is enqueued at most once,
and hence dequeued at most once. The operations of enqueuing and
dequeuing take O(1) time, and so the total time devoted to queue
operations is O(V). Because the procedure scans the adjacency list of
each vertex only when the vertex is dequeued, it scans each adjacency
list at most once. Since the sum of the lengths of all |V| adjacency
lists is Θ(E), the total time spent in scanning adjacency lists is O(V +
E). The overhead for initialization is O(V), and thus the total running
time of the BFS procedure is O(V + E). Thus, breadth-first search runs
in time linear in the size of the adjacency-list representation of G.

Shortest paths

Now, let’s see why breadth-first search finds the shortest distance from
a given source vertex s to each vertex in a graph. Define the
shortest-path distance δ(s, v) from s to v as the minimum number of
edges in any path from vertex s to vertex v. If there is no path from s
to v, then δ(s, v) = ∞. We call a path of length δ(s, v) from s to v a
shortest path² from s to v. Before showing that breadth-first search
correctly computes shortest-path distances, we investigate an important
property of shortest-path distances.

Lemma 20.1

Let G = (V, E) be a directed or undirected graph, and let s ∈ V be an
arbitrary vertex. Then, for any edge (u, v) ∈ E,

δ(s, v) ≤ δ(s, u) + 1.

Proof   If u is reachable from s, then so is v. In this case, the
shortest path from s to v cannot be longer than the shortest path from s
to u followed by the edge (u, v), and thus the inequality holds. If u is
not reachable from s, then δ(s, u) = ∞, and again, the inequality holds.

▪

Our goal is to show that the BFS procedure properly computes v.d = δ(s,
v) for each vertex v ∈ V. We first show that v.d bounds δ(s, v) from
above.

Lemma 20.2

Let G = (V, E) be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS
is run on G from a given source vertex s ∈ V. Then, for each vertex v ∈
V, the value v.d computed by BFS satisfies v.d ≥ δ(s, v) at all times,
including at termination.

Proof   The lemma is true intuitively, because any finite value assigned
to v.d equals the number of edges on some path from s to v. The formal
proof is by induction on the number of ENQUEUE operations. The inductive
hypothesis is that v.d ≥ δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V.

The base case of the induction is the situation immediately after
enqueuing s in line 9 of BFS. The inductive hypothesis holds here,
because s.d = 0 = δ(s, s) and v.d = 1 ∞ δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V – {s}.

For the inductive step, consider a white vertex v that is discovered
during the search from a vertex u. The inductive hypothesis implies that
u.d ≥ δ(s, u). The assignment performed by line 15 and Lemma 20.1 give

  ----- --- -------------
  v.d   =   u.d + 1
        ≥   δ(s, u) + 1
        ≥   δ(s, v).
  ----- --- -------------

Vertex v is then enqueued, and it is never enqueued again because it is
also grayed and lines 14–17 execute only for white vertices. Thus, the
value of v.d never changes again, and the inductive hypothesis is
maintained.

▪

To prove that v.d = δ(s, v), we first show more precisely how the queue
Q operates during the course of BFS. The next lemma shows that at all
times, the d values of vertices in the queue either are all the same or
form a sequence 〈k, k, … , k, k + 1, k + 1, … , k + 1〉 for some
integer k ≥ 0.

Lemma 20.3

Suppose that during the execution of BFS on a graph G = (V, E), the
queue Q contains the vertices 〈v₁, v₂, … , v_(r)〉, where v₁ is the
head of Q and v_(r) is the tail. Then, v_(r).d ≤ v₁.d + 1 and v_(i).d ≤
v_(i+1).d for i = 1, 2, … , r – 1.

Proof   The proof is by induction on the number of queue operations.
Initially, when the queue contains only s, the lemma trivially holds.

For the inductive step, we must prove that the lemma holds after both
dequeuing and enqueuing a vertex. First, we examine dequeuing. When the
head v₁ of the queue is dequeued, v₂ becomes the new head. (If the queue
becomes empty, then the lemma holds vacuously.) By the inductive
hypothesis, v₁.d ≤ v₂.d. But then we have v_(r).d ≤ v₁.d+1 ≤ v₂.d + 1,
and the remaining inequalities are unaffected. Thus, the lemma follows
with v₂ as the new head.

Now, we examine enqueuing. When line 17 of BFS enqueues a vertex v onto
a queue containing vertices 〈v₁, v₂, … , v_(r)〉, the enqueued vertex
becomes v_(r+1). If the queue was empty before v was enqueued, then
after enqueuing v, we have r = 1 and the lemma trivially holds. Now
suppose that the queue was nonempty when v was enqueued. At that time,
the procedure has most recently removed vertex u, whose adjacency list
is currently being scanned, from the queue Q. Just before u was removed,
we had u = v₁ and the inductive hypothesis held, so that u.d ≤ v₂.d and
v_(r).d ≤ u.d + 1. After u is removed from the queue, the vertex that
had been v₂ becomes the new head v₁ of the queue, so that now u.d ≤
v₁.d. Thus, v_(r+1).d = v.d = u.d + 1 ≤ v₁.d + 1. Since v_(r).d ≤ u.d +
1, we have v_(r).d ≤ u.d + 1 = v.d = v_(r+1).d, and the remaining
inequalities are unaffected. Thus, the lemma follows when v is enqueued.

▪

The following corollary shows that the d values at the time that
vertices are enqueued monotonically increase over time.

Corollary 20.4

Suppose that vertices v_(i) and v_(j) are enqueued during the execution
of BFS, and that v_(i) is enqueued before v_(j). Then v_(i).d ≤ v_(j).d
at the time that v_(j) is enqueued.

Proof   Immediate from Lemma 20.3 and the property that each vertex
receives a finite d value at most once during the course of BFS.

▪

We can now prove that breadth-first search correctly finds shortest-path
distances.

Theorem 20.5 (Correctness of breadth-first search)

Let G = (V, E) be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS
is run on G from a given source vertex s ∈ V. Then, during its
execution, BFS discovers every vertex v ∈ V that is reachable from the
source s, and upon termination, v.d = δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V. Moreover,
for any vertex v ≠ s that is reachable from s, one of the shortest paths
from s to v is a shortest path from s to v.π followed by the edge (v.π,
v).

Proof   Assume for the purpose of contradiction that some vertex
receives a d value not equal to its shortest-path distance. Of all such
vertices, let v be a vertex that has the minimum δ(s, v). By Lemma 20.2,
we have v.d ≥ δ(s, v), and thus v.d > δ(s, v). We cannot have v = s,
because s.d = 0 and δ(s, s) = 0. Vertex v must be reachable from s, for
otherwise we would have δ(s, v) = ∞ ≥ v.d. Let u be the vertex
immediately preceding v on some shortest path from s to v (since v ≠ s,
vertex u must exist), so that δ(s, v) = δ(s, u)+1. Because δ(s, u) <
δ(s, v), and because of how we chose v, we have u.d = δ(s, u). Putting
these properties together gives

[art]

Now consider the time when BFS chooses to dequeue vertex u from Q in
line 11. At this time, vertex v is either white, gray, or black. We
shall show that each of these cases leads to a contradiction of
inequality (20.1). If v is white, then line 15 sets v.d = u.d + 1,
contradicting inequality (20.1). If v is black, then it was already
removed from the queue and, by Corollary 20.4, we have v.d ≤ u.d, again
contradicting inequality (20.1). If v is gray, then it was painted gray
upon dequeuing some vertex w, which was removed from Q earlier than u
and for which v.d = w.d + 1. By Corollary 20.4, however, w.d ≤ u.d, and
so v.d = w.d + 1 ≤ u.d + 1, once again contradicting inequality (20.1).

Thus we conclude that v.d = δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V. All vertices v
reachable from s must be discovered, for otherwise they would have ∞ =
v.d > δ(s, v). To conclude the proof of the theorem, observe from lines
15–16 that if v.π = u, then v.d = u.d + 1. Thus, to form a shortest path
from s to v, take a shortest path from s to v.π and then traverse the
edge (v.π v).

▪

Breadth-first trees

The blue edges in Figure 20.3 show the breadth-first tree built by the
BFS procedure as it searches the graph. The tree corresponds to the π
attributes. More formally, for a graph G = (V, E) with source s, we
define the predecessor subgraph of G as G_(π) = (V_(π), E_(π)), where

[art]

and

[art]

The predecessor subgraph G_(π) is a breadth-first tree if V_(π) consists
of the vertices reachable from s and, for all v ∈ V_(π), the subgraph
G_(π) contains a unique simple path from s to v that is also a shortest
path from s to v in G. A breadth-first tree is in fact a tree, since it
is connected and |E_(π)| = |V_(π)| − 1 (see Theorem B.2 on page 1169).
We call the edges in E_(π)tree edges.

The following lemma shows that the predecessor subgraph produced by the
BFS procedure is a breadth-first tree.

Lemma 20.6

When applied to a directed or undirected graph G = (V, E), procedure BFS
constructs π so that the predecessor subgraph G_(π) = (V_(π), E_(π)) is
a breadth-first tree.

Proof   Line 16 of BFS sets v.π = u if and only if (u, v) = E and δ(s,
v) < ∞—that is, if v is reachable from s—and thus V_(π) consists of the
vertices in V reachable from s. Since the predecessor subgraph G_(π)
forms a tree, by Theorem B.2, it contains a unique simple path from s to
each vertex in V_(π). Applying Theorem 20.5 inductively yields that
every such path is a shortest path in G.

The PRINT-PATH procedure prints out the vertices on a shortest path from
s to v, assuming that BFS has already computed a breadth-first tree.
This procedure runs in time linear in the number of vertices in the path
printed, since each recursive call is for a path one vertex shorter.

PRINT-PATH(G, s, v)

  ----- ----------------------------------------
    1   if v == s
    2   print s
    3   elseif v.π == NIL
    4   print “no path from” s “to” v “exists”
    5   else PRINT-PATH(G, s, v.π)
    6   print v
  ----- ----------------------------------------

Exercises

20.2-1

Show the d and π values that result from running breadth-first search on
the directed graph of Figure 20.2(a), using vertex 3 as the source.

20.2-2

Show the d and π values that result from running breadth-first search on
the undirected graph of Figure 20.3, using vertex u as the source.
Assume that neighbors of a vertex are visited in alphabetical order.

20.2-3

Show that using a single bit to store each vertex color suffices by
arguing that the BFS procedure produces the same result if line 18 is
removed. Then show how to obviate the need for vertex colors altogether.

20.2-4

What is the running time of BFS if we represent its input graph by an
adjacency matrix and modify the algorithm to handle this form of input?

20.2-5

Argue that in a breadth-first search, the value u.d assigned to a vertex
u is independent of the order in which the vertices appear in each
adjacency list. Using Figure 20.3 as an example, show that the
breadth-first tree computed by BFS can depend on the ordering within
adjacency lists.

20.2-6

Give an example of a directed graph G = (V, E), a source vertex s ∈ V,
and a set of tree edges E_(π) ⊆ E such that for each vertex v ∈ V, the
unique simple path in the graph (V, E_(π)) from s to v is a shortest
path in G, yet the set of edges E_(π) cannot be produced by running BFS
on G, no matter how the vertices are ordered in each adjacency list.

20.2-7

There are two types of professional wrestlers: “faces” (short for
“babyfaces,” i.e., “good guys”) and “heels” (“bad guys”). Between any
pair of professional wrestlers, there may or may not be a rivalry. You
are given the names of n professional wrestlers and a list of r pairs of
wrestlers for which there are rivalries. Give an O(n + r)-time algorithm
that determines whether it is possible to designate some of the
wrestlers as faces and the remainder as heels such that each rivalry is
between a face and a heel. If it is possible to perform such a
designation, your algorithm should produce it.

★ 20.2-8

The diameter of a tree T = (V, E) is defined as max {δ(u, v) : u, v ∈
V}, that is, the largest of all shortest-path distances in the tree.
Give an efficient algorithm to compute the diameter of a tree, and
analyze the running time of your algorithm.

20.3    Depth-first search

As its name implies, depth-first search searches “deeper” in the graph
whenever possible. Depth-first search explores edges out of the most
recently discovered vertex v that still has unexplored edges leaving it.
Once all of v’s edges have been explored, the search “backtracks” to
explore edges leaving the vertex from which v was discovered. This
process continues until all vertices that are reachable from the
original source vertex have been discovered. If any undiscovered
vertices remain, then depth-first search selects one of them as a new
source, repeating the search from that source. The algorithm repeats
this entire process until it has discovered every vertex.³

As in breadth-first search, whenever depth-first search discovers a
vertex v during a scan of the adjacency list of an already discovered
vertex u, it records this event by setting v’s predecessor attribute v.π
to u. Unlike breadth-first search, whose predecessor subgraph forms a
tree, depth-first search produces a predecessor subgraph that might
contain several trees, because the search may repeat from multiple
sources. Therefore, we define the predecessor subgraph of a depth-first
search slightly differently from that of a breadth-first search: it
always includes all vertices, and it accounts for multiple sources.
Specifically, for a depth-first search the predecessor subgraph is G_(π)
= (V, E_(π)), where

E_(π) = {(v.π, v) : v ∈ V and v.π ≠ NIL}.

The predecessor subgraph of a depth-first search forms a depth-first
forest comprising several depth-first trees. The edges in E_(π) are tree
edges.

Like breadth-first search, depth-first search colors vertices during the
search to indicate their state. Each vertex is initially white, is
grayed when it is discovered in the search, and is blackened when it is
finished, that is, when its adjacency list has been examined completely.
This technique guarantees that each vertex ends up in exactly one
depth-first tree, so that these trees are disjoint.

Besides creating a depth-first forest, depth-first search also
timestamps each vertex. Each vertex v has two timestamps: the first
timestamp v.d records when v is first discovered (and grayed), and the
second timestamp v.f records when the search finishes examining v’s
adjacency list (and blackens v). These timestamps provide important
information about the structure of the graph and are generally helpful
in reasoning about the behavior of depth-first search.

The procedure DFS on the facing page records when it discovers vertex u
in the attribute u.d and when it finishes vertex u in the attribute u.f.
These timestamps are integers between 1 and 2 |V|, since there is one
discovery event and one finishing event for each of the |V| vertices.
For every vertex u,

[art]

Vertex u is WHITE before time u.d, GRAY between time u.d and time u.f,
and BLACK thereafter. In the DFS procedure, the input graph G may be
undirected or directed. The variable time is a global variable used for
timestamping. Figure 20.4 illustrates the progress of DFS on the graph
shown in Figure 20.2 (but with vertices labeled by letters rather than
numbers).

DFS(G)

+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   1      | for each vertex u ∈ G.V     |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   2      | u.color = WHITE             |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   3      | u.π = NIL                   |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   4      | time = 0                    |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   5      | for each vertex u ∈ G.V     |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   6      | if u.color == WHITE         |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   7      | DFS-VISIT(G, u)             |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| DFS-VISIT(G, u)                        |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   1      | time = time + 1             | // white vertex u has just  |
|          |                             | been discovered             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   2      | u.d = time                  |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   3      | u.color = GRAY              |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   4      | for each vertex v in        | // explore each edge (u, v) |
|          | G.Adj[u]                    |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   5      | if v.color == WHITE         |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   6      | v.π = u                     |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   7      | DFS-VISIT(G, v)             |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   8      | time = time + 1             |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
|   9      | u.f = time                  |                             |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 10       | u.color = BLACK             | // blacken u; it is         |
|          |                             | finished                    |
+----------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+

The DFS procedure works as follows. Lines 1–3 paint all vertices white
and initialize their π attributes to NIL. Line 4 resets the global time
counter. Lines 5–7 check each vertex in V in turn and, when a white
vertex is found, visit it by calling DFS-VISIT. Upon every call of
DFS-VISIT(G, u) in line 7, vertex u becomes the root of a new tree in
the depth-first forest. When DFS returns, every vertex u has been
assigned a discovery time u.d and a finish time u.f.

In each call DFS-VISIT(G, u), vertex u is initially white. Lines 1–3
increment the global variable time, record the new value of time as the
discovery time u.d, and paint u gray. Lines 4–7 examine each vertex v
adjacent to u and recursively visit v if it is white. As line 4
considers each vertex v ∈ Adj[u], the depth-first search explores edge
(u, v). Finally, after every edge leaving u has been explored, lines
8–10 increment time, record the finish time in u.f, and paint u black.

The results of depth-first search may depend upon the order in which
line 5 of DFS examines the vertices and upon the order in which line 4
of DFS-VISIT visits the neighbors of a vertex. These different
visitation orders tend not to cause problems in practice, because many
applications of depth-first search can use the result from any
depth-first search.

[art]

Figure 20.4 The progress of the depth-first-search algorithm DFS on a
directed graph. Edges are classified as they are explored: tree edges
are labeled T, back edges B, forward edges F, and cross edges C.
Timestamps within vertices indicate discovery time/finish times. Tree
edges are highlighted in blue. Orange highlights indicate vertices whose
discovery or finish times change and edges that are explored in each
step.

What is the running time of DFS? The loops on lines 1–3 and lines 5–7 of
DFS take Θ(V) time, exclusive of the time to execute the calls to
DFS-VISIT. As we did for breadth-first search, we use aggregate
analysis. The procedure DFS-VISIT is called exactly once for each vertex
v ∈ V, since the vertex u on which DFS-VISIT is invoked must be white
and the first thing DFS-VISIT does is paint vertex u gray. During an
execution of DFS-VISIT(G, v), the loop in lines 4–7 executes |Adj[v]|
times. Since Σ_(v∈V) |Adj[v]| = Θ(E) and DFS-VISIT is called once per
vertex, the total cost of executing lines 4–7 of DFS-VISIT is Θ(V + E).
The running time of DFS is therefore Θ(V + E).

Properties of depth-first search

Depth-first search yields valuable information about the structure of a
graph. Perhaps the most basic property of depth-first search is that the
predecessor subgraph G_(π) does indeed form a forest of trees, since the
structure of the depth-first trees exactly mirrors the structure of
recursive calls of DFS-VISIT. That is, u = v.π if and only if
DFS-VISIT(G, v) was called during a search of u’s adjacency list.
Additionally, vertex v is a descendant of vertex u in the depth-first
forest if and only if v is discovered during the time in which u is
gray.

Another important property of depth-first search is that discovery and
finish times have parenthesis structure. If the DFS-VISIT procedure were
to print a left parenthesis “(u” when it discovers vertex u and to print
a right parenthesis “u)” when it finishes u, then the printed expression
would be well formed in the sense that the parentheses are properly
nested. For example, the depth-first search of Figure 20.5(a)
corresponds to the parenthesization shown in Figure 20.5(b). The
following theorem provides another way to characterize the parenthesis
structure.

Theorem 20.7 (Parenthesis theorem)

In any depth-first search of a (directed or undirected) graph G = (V,
E), for any two vertices u and v, exactly one of the following three
conditions holds:

- the intervals [u.d, u.f] and [v.d, v.f] are entirely disjoint, and
  neither u nor v is a descendant of the other in the depth-first
  forest,
- the interval [u.d, u.f] is contained entirely within the interval
  [v.d, v.f], and u is a descendant of v in a depth-first tree, or
- the interval [v.d, v.f] is contained entirely within the interval
  [u.d, u.f], and v is a descendant of u in a depth-first tree.

Proof   We begin with the case in which u.d < v.d. We consider two
subcases, according to whether v.d < u.f. The first subcase occurs when
v.d < u.f, so that v was discovered while u was still gray, which
implies that v is a descendant of u. Moreover, since v was discovered
after u, all of its outgoing edges are explored, and v is finished,
before the search returns to and finishes u. In this case, therefore,
the interval [v.d, v.f] is entirely contained within the interval [u.d,
u.f]. In the other subcase, u.f < v.d, and by inequality (20.4), u.d <
u.f < v.d < v.f, and thus the intervals [u.d, u.f] and [v.d, v.f] are
disjoint. Because the intervals are disjoint, neither vertex was
discovered while the other was gray, and so neither vertex is a
descendant of the other.

[art]

Figure 20.5 Properties of depth-first search. (a) The result of a
depth-first search of a directed graph. Vertices are timestamped and
edge types are indicated as in Figure 20.4. (b) Intervals for the
discovery time and finish time of each vertex correspond to the
parenthesization shown. Each rectangle spans the interval given by the
discovery and finish times of the corresponding vertex. Only tree edges
are shown. If two intervals overlap, then one is nested within the
other, and the vertex corresponding to the smaller interval is a
descendant of the vertex corresponding to the larger. (c) The graph of
part (a) redrawn with all tree and forward edges going down within a
depth-first tree and all back edges going up from a descendant to an
ancestor.

The case in which v.d < u.d is similar, with the roles of u and v
reversed in the above argument.

▪

Corollary 20.8 (Nesting of descendants’ intervals)

Vertex v is a proper descendant of vertex u in the depth-first forest
for a (directed or undirected) graph G if and only if u.d < v.d < v.f <
u.f.

Proof   Immediate from Theorem 20.7.

▪

The next theorem gives another important characterization of when one
vertex is a descendant of another in the depth-first forest.

Theorem 20.9 (White-path theorem)

In a depth-first forest of a (directed or undirected) graph G = (V, E),
vertex v is a descendant of vertex u if and only if at the time u.d that
the search discovers u, there is a path from u to v consisting entirely
of white vertices.

Proof   ⇒: If v = u, then the path from u to v contains just vertex u,
which is still white when u.d receives a value. Now, suppose that v is a
proper descendant of u in the depth-first forest. By Corollary 20.8, u.d
< v.d, and so v is white at time u.d. Since v can be any descendant of
u, all vertices on the unique simple path from u to v in the depth-first
forest are white at time u.d.

⇐: Suppose that there is a path of white vertices from u to v at time
u.d, but v does not become a descendant of u in the depth-first tree.
Without loss of generality, assume that every vertex other than v along
the path becomes a descendant of u. (Otherwise, let v be the closest
vertex to u along the path that doesn’t become a descendant of u.) Let w
be the predecessor of v in the path, so that w is a descendant of u (w
and u may in fact be the same vertex). By Corollary 20.8, w.f ≤ u.f.
Because v must be discovered after u is discovered, but before w is
finished, u.d < v.d < w.f ≤ u.f. Theorem 20.7 then implies that the
interval [v.d, v.f] is contained entirely within the interval [u.d,
u.f]. By Corollary 20.8, v must after all be a descendant of u.

▪

Classification of edges

You can obtain important information about a graph by classifying its
edges during a depth-first search. For example, Section 20.4 will show
that a directed graph is acyclic if and only if a depth-first search
yields no “back” edges (Lemma 20.11).

The depth-first forest G_(π) produced by a depth-first search on graph G
can contain four types of edges:

1.  Tree edges are edges in the depth-first forest G_(π). Edge (u, v) is
    a tree edge if v was first discovered by exploring edge (u, v).
2.  Back edges are those edges (u, v) connecting a vertex u to an
    ancestor v in a depth-first tree. We consider self-loops, which may
    occur in directed graphs, to be back edges.
3.  Forward edges are those nontree edges (u, v) connecting a vertex u
    to a proper descendant v in a depth-first tree.
4.  Cross edges are all other edges. They can go between vertices in the
    same depth-first tree, as long as one vertex is not an ancestor of
    the other, or they can go between vertices in different depth-first
    trees.

In Figures 20.4 and 20.5, edge labels indicate edge types. Figure
20.5(c) also shows how to redraw the graph of Figure 20.5(a) so that all
tree and forward edges head downward in a depth-first tree and all back
edges go up. You can redraw any graph in this fashion.

The DFS algorithm has enough information to classify some edges as it
encounters them. The key idea is that when an edge (u, v) is first
explored, the color of vertex v says something about the edge:

1.  WHITE indicates a tree edge,
2.  GRAY indicates a back edge, and
3.  BLACK indicates a forward or cross edge.

The first case is immediate from the specification of the algorithm. For
the second case, observe that the gray vertices always form a linear
chain of descendants corresponding to the stack of active DFS-VISIT
invocations. The number of gray vertices is 1 more than the depth in the
depth-first forest of the vertex most recently discovered. Depth-first
search always explores from the deepest gray vertex, so that an edge
that reaches another gray vertex has reached an ancestor. The third case
handles the remaining possibility. Exercise 20.3-5 asks you to show that
such an edge (u, v) is a forward edge if u.d < v.d and a cross edge if
u.d > v.d.

According to the following theorem, forward and cross edges never occur
in a depth-first search of an undirected graph.

Theorem 20.10

In a depth-first search of an undirected graph G, every edge of G is
either a tree edge or a back edge.

Proof   Let (u, v) be an arbitrary edge of G, and suppose without loss
of generality that u.d < v.d. Then, while u is gray, the search must
discover and finish v before it finishes u, since v is on u’s adjacency
list. If the first time that the search explores edge (u, v), it is in
the direction from u to v, then v is undiscovered (white) until that
time, for otherwise the search would have explored this edge already in
the direction from v to u. Thus, (u, v) becomes a tree edge. If the
search explores (u, v) first in the direction from v to u, then (u, v)
is a back edge, since there must be a path of tree edges from u to v.

▪

Since (u, v) and (v, u) are really the same edge in an undirected graph,
the proof of Theorem 20.10 says how to classify the edge. When searching
from a vertex, which must be gray, if the adjacent vertex is white, then
the edge is a tree edge. Otherwise, the edge is a back edge.

The next two sections apply the above theorems about depth-first search.

[art]

Figure 20.6 A directed graph for use in Exercises 20.3-2 and 20.5-2.

Exercises

20.3-1

Make a 3-by-3 chart with row and column labels WHITE, GRAY, and BLACK.
In each cell (i, j), indicate whether, at any point during a depth-first
search of a directed graph, there can be an edge from a vertex of color
i to a vertex of color j. For each possible edge, indicate what edge
types it can be. Make a second such chart for depth-first search of an
undirected graph.

20.3-2

Show how depth-first search works on the graph of Figure 20.6. Assume
that the for loop of lines 5–7 of the DFS procedure considers the
vertices in alphabetical order, and assume that each adjacency list is
ordered alphabetically. Show the discovery and finish times for each
vertex, and show the classification of each edge.

20.3-3

Show the parenthesis structure of the depth-first search of Figure 20.4.

20.3-4

Show that using a single bit to store each vertex color suffices by
arguing that the DFS procedure produces the same result if line 10 of
DFS-VISIT is removed.

20.3-5

Show that in a directed graph, edge (u, v) is

a. a tree edge or forward edge if and only if u.d < v.d < v.f < u.f,

b. a back edge if and only if v.d ≤ u.d < u.f ≤ v.f, and

c. a cross edge if and only if v.d < v.f < u.d < u.f.

20.3-6

Rewrite the procedure DFS, using a stack to eliminate recursion.

20.3-7

Give a counterexample to the conjecture that if a directed graph G
contains a path from u to v, and if u.d < v.d in a depth-first search of
G, then v is a descendant of u in the depth-first forest produced.

20.3-8

Give a counterexample to the conjecture that if a directed graph G
contains a path from u to v, then any depth-first search must result in
v.d ≤ u.f.

20.3-9

Modify the pseudocode for depth-first search so that it prints out every
edge in the directed graph G, together with its type. Show what
modifications, if any, you need to make if G is undirected.

20.3-10

Explain how a vertex u of a directed graph can end up in a depth-first
tree containing only u, even though u has both incoming and outgoing
edges in G.

20.3-11

Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph. Give an O(V + E)-time
algorithm to compute a path in G that traverses each edge in E exactly
once in each direction. Describe how you can find your way out of a maze
if you are given a large supply of pennies.

20.3-12

Show how to use a depth-first search of an undirected graph G to
identify the connected components of G, so that the depth-first forest
contains as many trees as G has connected components. More precisely,
show how to modify depth-first search so that it assigns to each vertex
v an integer label v.cc between 1 and k, where k is the number of
connected components of G, such that u.cc = v.cc if and only if u and v
belong to the same connected component.

★ 20.3-13

A directed graph G = (V, E) is singly connected if u ⇝ v implies that G
contains at most one simple path from u to v for all vertices u, v ∈ V.
Give an efficient algorithm to determine whether a directed graph is
singly connected.

20.4    Topological sort

This section shows how to use depth-first search to perform a
topological sort of a directed acyclic graph, or a “dag” as it is
sometimes called. A topological sort of a dag G = (V, E) is a linear
ordering of all its vertices such that if G contains an edge (u, v),
then u appears before v in the ordering. Topological sorting is defined
only on directed graphs that are acyclic; no linear ordering is possible
when a directed graph contains a cycle. Think of a topological sort of a
graph as an ordering of its vertices along a horizontal line so that all
directed edges go from left to right. Topological sorting is thus
different from the usual kind of “sorting” studied in Part II.

Many applications use directed acyclic graphs to indicate precedences
among events. Figure 20.7 gives an example that arises when Professor
Bumstead gets dressed in the morning. The professor must don certain
garments before others (e.g., socks before shoes). Other items may be
put on in any order (e.g., socks and pants). A directed edge (u, v) in
the dag of Figure 20.7(a) indicates that garment u must be donned before
garment v. A topological sort of this dag therefore gives a possible
order for getting dressed. Figure 20.7(b) shows the topologically sorted
dag as an ordering of vertices along a horizontal line such that all
directed edges go from left to right.

The procedure TOPOLOGICAL-SORT topologically sorts a dag. Figure 20.7(b)
shows how the topologically sorted vertices appear in reverse order of
their finish times.

TOPOLOGICAL-SORT(G)

  --- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   call DFS(G) to compute finish times v.f for each vertex v
  2   as each vertex is finished, insert it onto the front of a linked list
  3   return the linked list of vertices
  --- -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The TOPOLOGICAL-SORT procedure runs in Θ(V + E) time, since depth-first
search takes Θ(V + E) time and it takes O(1) time to insert each of the
|V| vertices onto the front of the linked list.

To prove the correctness of this remarkably simple and efficient
algorithm, we start with the following key lemma characterizing directed
acyclic graphs.

Lemma 20.11

A directed graph G is acyclic if and only if a depth-first search of G
yields no back edges.

[art]

Figure 20.7 (a) Professor Bumstead topologically sorts his clothing when
getting dressed. Each directed edge (u, v) means that garment u must be
put on before garment v. The discovery and finish times from a
depth-first search are shown next to each vertex. (b) The same graph
shown topologically sorted, with its vertices arranged from left to
right in order of decreasing finish time. All directed edges go from
left to right.

Proof   ⇒: Suppose that a depth-first search produces a back edge (u,
v). Then vertex v is an ancestor of vertex u in the depth-first forest.
Thus, G contains a path from v to u, and the back edge (u, v) completes
a cycle.

⇐: Suppose that G contains a cycle c. We show that a depth-first search
of G yields a back edge. Let v be the first vertex to be discovered in
c, and let (u, v) be the preceding edge in c. At time v.d, the vertices
of c form a path of white vertices from v to u. By the white-path
theorem, vertex u becomes a descendant of v in the depth-first forest.
Therefore, (u, v) is a back edge.

▪

Theorem 20.12

TOPOLOGICAL-SORT produces a topological sort of the directed acyclic
graph provided as its input.

Proof   Suppose that DFS is run on a given dag G = (V, E) to determine
finish times for its vertices. It suffices to show that for any pair of
distinct vertices u, v ∈ V, if G contains an edge from u to v, then v.f
< u.f. Consider any edge (u, v) explored by DFS(G). When this edge is
explored, v cannot be gray, since then v would be an ancestor of u and
(u, v) would be a back edge, contradicting Lemma 20.11. Therefore, v
must be either white or black. If v is white, it becomes a descendant of
u, and so v.f < u.f. If v is black, it has already been finished, so
that v.f has already been set. Because the search is still exploring
from u, it has yet to assign a timestamp to u.f, so that the timestamp
eventually assigned to u.f is greater than v.f. Thus, v.f < u.f for any
edge (u, v) in the dag, proving the theorem.

▪

[art]

Figure 20.8 A dag for topological sorting.

Exercises

20.4-1

Show the ordering of vertices produced by TOPOLOGICAL-SORT when it is
run on the dag of Figure 20.8. Assume that the for loop of lines 5–7 of
the DFS procedure considers the vertices in alphabetical order, and
assume that each adjacency list is ordered alphabetically.

20.4-2

Give a linear-time algorithm that, given a directed acyclic graph G =
(V, E) and two vertices a, b ∈ V, returns the number of simple paths
from a to b in G. For example, the directed acyclic graph of Figure 20.8
contains exactly four simple paths from vertex p to vertex v: 〈p, o,
v〉, 〈p, o, r, y, v〉, 〈p, o, s, r, y, v〉, and 〈p, s, r, y, v〉.
Your algorithm needs only to count the simple paths, not list them.

20.4-3

Give an algorithm that determines whether an undirected graph G = (V, E)
contains a simple cycle. Your algorithm should run in O(V) time,
independent of |E|.

20.4-4

Prove or disprove: If a directed graph G contains cycles, then the
vertex ordering produced by TOPOLOGICAL-SORT(G) minimizes the number of
“bad” edges that are inconsistent with the ordering produced.

20.4-5

Another way to topologically sort a directed acyclic graph G = (V, E) is
to repeatedly find a vertex of in-degree 0, output it, and remove it and
all of its outgoing edges from the graph. Explain how to implement this
idea so that it runs in time O(V + E). What happens to this algorithm if
G has cycles?

20.5    Strongly connected components

We now consider a classic application of depth-first search: decomposing
a directed graph into its strongly connected components. This section
shows how to do so using two depth-first searches. Many algorithms that
work with directed graphs begin with such a decomposition. After
decomposing the graph into strongly connected components, such
algorithms run separately on each one and then combine the solutions
according to the structure of connections among components.

Recall from Appendix B that a strongly connected component of a directed
graph G = (V, E) is a maximal set of vertices C ⊆ V such that for every
pair of vertices u, v ∈ C, both u ⇝ v and v ⇝ u, that is, vertices u and
v are reachable from each other. Figure 20.9 shows an example.

The algorithm for finding the strongly connected components of a
directed graph G = (V, E) uses the transpose of G, which we defined in
Exercise 20.1-3 to be the graph G^(T) = (V, E^(T)), where E^(T) = {(u,
v) : (v, u) ∈ E}. That is, E^(T) consists of the edges of G with their
directions reversed. Given an adjacency-list representation of G, the
time to create G^(T) is Θ(V + E). The graphs G and G^(T) have exactly
the same strongly connected components: u and v are reachable from each
other in G if and only if they are reachable from each other in G^(T).
Figure 20.9(b) shows the transpose of the graph in Figure 20.9(a), with
the strongly connected components shaded blue in both parts.

The linear-time (i.e., Θ(V + E)-time) procedure
STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS on the next page computes the strongly
connected components of a directed graph G = (V, E) using two
depth-first searches, one on G and one on G^(T).

The idea behind this algorithm comes from a key property of the
component graph G^(SCC) = (V^(SCC), E^(SCC)), defined as follows.
Suppose that G has strongly connected components C₁, C₂, … , C_(k). The
vertex set V^(SCC) is {v₁, v₂, … , v_(k)}, and it contains one vertex
v_(i) for each strongly connected component C_(i) of G. There is an edge
(v_(i), v_(j)) ∈ E^(SCC) if G contains a directed edge (x, y) for some x
∈ C_(i) and some y ∈ C_(j). Looked at another way, if we contract all
edges whose incident vertices are within the same strongly connected
component of G so that only a single vertex remains, the resulting graph
is G^(SCC). Figure 20.9(c) shows the component graph of the graph in
Figure 20.9(a).

[art]

Figure 20.9 (a) A directed graph G. Each region shaded light blue is a
strongly connected component of G. Each vertex is labeled with its
discovery and finish times in a depth-first search, and tree edges are
dark blue. (b) The graph G^(T), the transpose of G, with the depth-first
forest computed in line 3 of STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS shown and
tree edges shaded dark blue. Each strongly connected component
corresponds to one depth-first tree. Orange vertices b, c, g, and h are
the roots of the depth-first trees produced by the depth-first search of
G^(T). (c) The acyclic component graph G^(SCC) obtained by contracting
all edges within each strongly connected component of G so that only a
single vertex remains in each component.

STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS(G)

  --- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   call DFS(G) to compute finish times u.f for each vertex u
  2   create G^(T)
  3   call DFS(G^(T)), but in the main loop of DFS, consider the vertices in order of decreasing u.f (as computed in line 1)
  4   output the vertices of each tree in the depth-first forest formed in line 3 as a separate strongly connected component
  --- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The following lemma gives the key property that the component graph is
acyclic. We’ll see that the algorithm uses this property to visit the
vertices of the component graph in topologically sorted order, by
considering vertices in the second depth-first search in decreasing
order of the finish times that were computed in the first depth-first
search.

Lemma 20.13

Let C and C′ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph
G = (V, E), let u, v ∈ C, let u′, v′ ∈ C′, and suppose that G contains a
path u ⇝ u′. Then G cannot also contain a path v′ ⇝ v.

Proof   If G contains a path v′ ⇝ v, then it contains paths u ⇝ u′ ⇝ v′
and v′ ⇝ v ⇝ u. Thus, u and v′ are reachable from each other, thereby
contradicting the assumption that C and C′ are distinct strongly
connected components.

▪

Because the STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS procedure performs two
depth-first searches, there are two distinct sets of discovery and
finish times. In this section, discovery and finish times always refer
to those computed by the first call of DFS, in line 1.

The notation for discovery and finish times extends to sets of vertices.
For a subset U of vertices, d(U) and f(U) are the earliest discovery
time and latest finish time, respectively, of any vertex in U: d(U) =
min {u.d : u ∈ U} and f(U) = max {u.f : u ∈ U}.

The following lemma and its corollary give a key property relating
strongly connected components and finish times in the first depth-first
search.

Lemma 20.14

Let C and C′ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph
G = (V, E). Suppose that there is an edge (u, v) ∈ E, where u ∈ C′ and v
∈ C. Then f(C′) > f(C).

Proof   We consider two cases, depending on which strongly connected
component, C or C′, had the first discovered vertex during the first
depth-first search.

If d(C′) < d(C), let x be the first vertex discovered in C′. At time
x.d, all vertices in C and C′ are white. At that time, G contains a path
from x to each vertex in C′ consisting only of white vertices. Because
(u, v) ∈ E, for any vertex w ∈ C, there is also a path in G at time x.d
from x to w consisting only of white vertices: x ⇝ u → v ⇝ w. By the
white-path theorem, all vertices in C and C′ become descendants of x in
the depth-first tree. By Corollary 20.8, x has the latest finish time of
any of its descendants, and so x.f = f(C′) > f(C).

Otherwise, d(C′) > d(C). Let y be the first vertex discovered in C, so
that y.d = d(C). At time y.d, all vertices in C are white and G contains
a path from y to each vertex in C consisting only of white vertices. By
the white-path theorem, all vertices in C become descendants of y in the
depth-first tree, and by Corollary 20.8, y.f = f(C). Because d(C′) >
d(C) = y.d, all vertices in C′ are white at time y.d. Since there is an
edge (u, v) from C′ to C, Lemma 20.13 implies that there cannot be a
path from C to C′. Hence, no vertex in C′ is reachable from y. At time
y.f, therefore, all vertices in C′ are still white. Thus, for any vertex
w ∈ C′, we have w.f > y.f, which implies that f(C′) > f(C).

▪

Corollary 20.15

Let C and C′ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph
G = (V, E), and suppose that f(C) > f(C′). Then E^(T) contains no edge
(v, u) such that u = C′ and v ∈ C.

Proof   The contrapositive of Lemma 20.14 says that if f(C′) < f(C),
then there is no edge (u, v) ∈ E such that u ∈ C′ and v ∈ C. Because the
strongly connected components of G and G^(T) are the same, if there is
no such edge (u, v) ∈ E, then there is no edge (v, u) ∈ E^(T) such that
u ∈ C′ and v ∈ C.

▪

Corollary 20.15 provides the key to understanding why the strongly
connected components algorithm works. Let’s examine what happens during
the second depth-first search, which is on G^(T). The search starts from
the vertex x whose finish time from the first depth-first search is
maximum. This vertex belongs to some strongly connected component C, and
since x.f is maximum, f(C) is maximum over all strongly connected
components. When the search starts from x, it visits all vertices in C.
By Corollary 20.15, G^(T) contains no edges from C to any other strongly
connected component, and so the search from x never visits vertices in
any other component. Thus, the tree rooted at x contains exactly the
vertices of C. Having completed visiting all vertices in C, the second
depth-first search selects as a new root a vertex from some other
strongly connected component C′ whose finish time f(C′) is maximum over
all components other than C. Again, the search visits all vertices in
C′. But by Corollary 20.15, if any edges in G^(T) go from C′ to any
other component, they must go to C, which the second depth-first search
has already visited. In general, when the depth-first search of G^(T) in
line 3 visits any strongly connected component, any edges out of that
component must be to components that the search has already visited.
Each depth-first tree, therefore, corresponds to exactly one strongly
connected component. The following theorem formalizes this argument.

Theorem 20.16

The STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS procedure correctly computes the
strongly connected components of the directed graph G provided as its
input.

Proof   We argue by induction on the number of depth-first trees found
in the depth-first search of G^(T) in line 3 that the vertices of each
tree form a strongly connected component. The inductive hypothesis is
that the first k trees produced in line 3 are strongly connected
components. The basis for the induction, when k = 0, is trivial.

In the inductive step, we assume that each of the first k depth-first
trees produced in line 3 is a strongly connected component, and we
consider the (k + 1)st tree produced. Let the root of this tree be
vertex u, and let u be in strongly connected component C. Because of how
the depth-first search chooses roots in line 3, u.f = f(C) > f(C′) for
any strongly connected component C′ other than C that has yet to be
visited. By the inductive hypothesis, at the time that the search visits
u, all other vertices of C are white. By the white-path theorem,
therefore, all other vertices of C are descendants of u in its
depth-first tree. Moreover, by the inductive hypothesis and by Corollary
20.15, any edges in G^(T) that leave C must be to strongly connected
components that have already been visited. Thus, no vertex in any
strongly connected component other than C is a descendant of u during
the depth-first search of G^(T). The vertices of the depth-first tree in
G^(T) that is rooted at u form exactly one strongly connected component,
which completes the inductive step and the proof.

▪

Here is another way to look at how the second depth-first search
operates. Consider the component graph (G^(T))^(SCC) of G^(T). If you
map each strongly connected component visited in the second depth-first
search to a vertex of (G^(T))^(SCC), the second depth-first search
visits vertices of (G^(T))^(SCC) in the reverse of a topologically
sorted order. If you reverse the edges of (G^(T))^(SCC), you get the
graph ((G^(T))^(SCC))^(T). Because ((G^(T))^(SCC))^(T) = G^(SCC) (see
Exercise 20.5-4), the second depth-first search visits the vertices of
G^(SCC) in topologically sorted order.

Exercises

20.5-1

How can the number of strongly connected components of a graph change if
a new edge is added?

20.5-2

Show how the procedure STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS works on the graph
of Figure 20.6. Specifically, show the finish times computed in line 1
and the forest produced in line 3. Assume that the loop of lines 5–7 of
DFS considers vertices in alphabetical order and that the adjacency
lists are in alphabetical order.

20.5-3

Professor Bacon rewrites the algorithm for strongly connected components
to use the original (instead of the transpose) graph in the second
depth-first search and scan the vertices in order of increasing finish
times. Does this modified algorithm always produce correct results?

20.5-4

Prove that for any directed graph G, the transpose of the component
graph of G^(T) is the same as the component graph of G. That is,
((G^(T))^(SCC))^(T) = G^(SCC).

20.5-5

Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to compute the component graph of a
directed graph G = (V, E). Make sure that there is at most one edge
between two vertices in the component graph your algorithm produces.

20.5-6

Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm that, given a directed graph G = (V, E),
constructs another graph G′ = (V, E′) such that G and G′ have the same
strongly connected components, G′ has the same component graph as G, and
|E′| is as small as possible.

20.5-7

A directed graph G = (V, E) is semiconnected if, for all pairs of
vertices u, v ∈ V, we have u ⇝ v or v ⇝ u. Give an efficient algorithm
to determine whether G is semiconnected. Prove that your algorithm is
correct, and analyze its running time.

20.5-8

Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph, and let l : V → ℝ be a function that
assigns a real-valued label l to each vertex. For vertices s, t ∈ V,
define

[art]

Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to find vertices s and t such that Δl(s,
t) is maximum over all pairs of vertices. (Hint: Use Exercise 20.5-5.)

Problems

20-1     Classifying edges by breadth-first search

A depth-first forest classifies the edges of a graph into tree, back,
forward, and cross edges. A breadth-first tree can also be used to
classify the edges reachable from the source of the search into the same
four categories.

[art]

Figure 20.10 The articulation points, bridges, and biconnected
components of a connected, undirected graph for use in Problem 20-2. The
articulation points are the orange vertices, the bridges are the dark
blue edges, and the biconnected components are the edges in the light
blue regions, with a bcc numbering shown.

a. Prove that in a breadth-first search of an undirected graph, the
following properties hold:

1. There are no back edges and no forward edges.

2. If (u, v) is a tree edge, then v.d = u.d + 1.

3. If (u, v) is a cross edge, then v.d = u.d or v.d = u.d + 1.

b. Prove that in a breadth-first search of a directed graph, the
following properties hold:

1. There are no forward edges.

2. If (u, v) is a tree edge, then v.d = u.d + 1.

3. If (u, v) is a cross edge, then v.d ≤ u.d + 1.

4. If (u, v) is a back edge, then 0 ≤ v.d ≤ u.d.

20-2     Articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components

Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph. An articulation point
of G is a vertex whose removal disconnects G. A bridge of G is an edge
whose removal disconnects G. A biconnected component of G is a maximal
set of edges such that any two edges in the set lie on a common simple
cycle. Figure 20.10 illustrates these definitions. You can determine
articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components using
depth-first search. Let G_(π) = (V, E_(π)) be a depth-first tree of G.

a. Prove that the root of G_(π) is an articulation point of G if and
only if it has at least two children in G_(π).

b. Let v be a nonroot vertex of G_(π). Prove that v is an articulation
point of G if and only if v has a child s such that there is no back
edge from s or any descendant of s to a proper ancestor of v.

c. Let

[art]

Show how to compute v.low for all vertices v ∈ V in O(E) time.

d. Show how to compute all articulation points in O(E) time.

e. Prove that an edge of G is a bridge if and only if it does not lie on
any simple cycle of G.

f. Show how to compute all the bridges of G in O(E) time.

g. Prove that the biconnected components of G partition the nonbridge
edges of G.

h. Give an O(E)-time algorithm to label each edge e of G with a positive
integer e.bcc such that e.bcc = e′.bcc if and only if e and e′ belong to
the same biconnected component.

20-3     Euler tour

An Euler tour of a strongly connected, directed graph G = (V, E) is a
cycle that traverses each edge of G exactly once, although it may visit
a vertex more than once.

a. Show that G has an Euler tour if and only if in-degree(v) =
out-degree(v) for each vertex v ∈ V.

b. Describe an O(E)-time algorithm to find an Euler tour of G if one
exists. (Hint: Merge edge-disjoint cycles.)

20-4     Reachability

Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph in which each vertex u ∈ V is labeled
with a unique integer L(u) from the set {1, 2, … , |V|}. For each vertex
u ∈ V, let R(u) = {v ∈ V : u ⇝ v} be the set of vertices that are
reachable from u. Define min(u) to be the vertex in R(u) whose label is
minimum, that is, min(u) is the vertex v such that L(v) = min {L(w) : w
∈ R(u)}. Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm that computes min(u) for all
vertices u ∈ V.

20-5 Inserting and querying vertices in planar graphs

A planar graph is an undirected graph that can be drawn in the plane
with no edges crossing. Euler proved that every planar graph has |E| < 3
|V|.

Consider the following two operations on a planar graph G:

- INSERT(G, v, neighbors) inserts a new vertex v into G, where neighbors
  is an array (possibly empty) of vertices that have already been
  inserted into G and will become all the neighbors of v in G when v is
  inserted.
- NEWEST-NEIGHBOR(G, v) returns the neighbor of vertex v that was most
  recently inserted into G, or NIL if v has no neighbors.

Design a data structure that supports these two operations such that
NEWEST-NEIGHBOR takes O(1) worst-case time and INSERT takes O(1)
amortized time. Note that the length of the array neighbors given to
INSERT may vary. (Hint: Use a potential function for the amortized
analysis.)

Chapter notes

Even [137] and Tarjan [429] are excellent references for graph
algorithms.

Breadth-first search was discovered by Moore [334] in the context of
finding paths through mazes. Lee [280] independently discovered the same
algorithm in the context of routing wires on circuit boards.

Hopcroft and Tarjan [226] advocated the use of the adjacency-list
representation over the adjacency-matrix representation for sparse
graphs and were the first to recognize the algorithmic importance of
depth-first search. Depth-first search has been widely used since the
late 1950s, especially in artificial intelligence programs.

Tarjan [426] gave a linear-time algorithm for finding strongly connected
components. The algorithm for strongly connected components in Section
20.5 is adapted from Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [6], who credit it to S.
R. Kosaraju (unpublished) and Sharir [408]. Dijkstra [117, Chapter 25]
also developed an algorithm for strongly connected components that is
based on contracting cycles. Subsequently, Gabow [163] rediscovered this
algorithm. Knuth [259] was the first to give a linear-time algorithm for
topological sorting.

¹ We distinguish between gray and black vertices to help us understand
how breadth-first search operates. In fact, as Exercise 20.2-3 shows, we
get the same result even if we do not distinguish between gray and black
vertices.

² Chapters 22 and 23 generalize shortest paths to weighted graphs, in
which every edge has a real-valued weight and the weight of a path is
the sum of the weights of its constituent edges. The graphs considered
in the present chapter are unweighted or, equivalently, all edges have
unit weight.

³ It may seem arbitrary that breadth-first search is limited to only one
source whereas depth-first search may search from multiple sources.
Although conceptually, breadth-first search could proceed from multiple
sources and depth-first search could be limited to one source, our
approach reflects how the results of these searches are typically used.
Breadth-first search usually serves to find shortest-path distances and
the associated predecessor subgraph from a given source. Depth-first
search is often a subroutine in another algorithm, as we’ll see later in
this chapter.

21        Minimum Spanning Trees

Electronic circuit designs often need to make the pins of several
components electrically equivalent by wiring them together. To
interconnect a set of n pins, the designer can use an arrangement of n −
1 wires, each connecting two pins. Of all such arrangements, the one
that uses the least amount of wire is usually the most desirable.

To model this wiring problem, use a connected, undirected graph G = (V,
E), where V is the set of pins, E is the set of possible
interconnections between pairs of pins, and for each edge (u, v) ∈ E, a
weight w(u, v) specifies the cost (amount of wire needed) to connect u
and v. The goal is to find an acyclic subset T ⊆ E that connects all of
the vertices and whose total weight

[art]

is minimized. Since T is acyclic and connects all of the vertices, it
must form a tree, which we call a spanning tree since it “spans” the
graph G. We call the problem of determining the tree T the
minimum-spanning-tree problem.¹ Figure 21.1 shows an example of a
connected graph and a minimum spanning tree.

This chapter studies two ways to solve the minimum-spanning-tree
problem. Kruskal’s algorithm and Prim’s algorithm both run in O(E lg V)
time. Prim’s algorithm achieves this bound by using a binary heap as a
priority queue. By using Fibonacci heaps instead (see page 478), Prim’s
algorithm runs in O(E + V lg V) time. This bound is better than O(E lg
V) whenever |E| grows asymptotically faster than |V|.

[art]

Figure 21.1 A minimum spanning tree for a connected graph. The weights
on edges are shown, and the blue edges form a minimum spanning tree. The
total weight of the tree shown is 37. This minimum spanning tree is not
unique: removing the edge (b, c) and replacing it with the edge (a, h)
yields another spanning tree with weight 37.

The two algorithms are greedy algorithms, as described in Chapter 15.
Each step of a greedy algorithm must make one of several possible
choices. The greedy strategy advocates making the choice that is the
best at the moment. Such a strategy does not generally guarantee that it
always finds globally optimal solutions to problems. For the
minimum-spanning-tree problem, however, we can prove that certain greedy
strategies do yield a spanning tree with minimum weight. Although you
can read this chapter independently of Chapter 15, the greedy methods
presented here are a classic application of the theoretical notions
introduced there.

Section 21.1 introduces a “generic” minimum-spanning-tree method that
grows a spanning tree by adding one edge at a time. Section 21.2 gives
two algorithms that implement the generic method. The first algorithm,
due to Kruskal, is similar to the connected-components algorithm from
Section 19.1. The second, due to Prim, resembles Dijkstra’s
shortest-paths algorithm (Section 22.3).

Because a tree is a type of graph, in order to be precise we must define
a tree in terms of not just its edges, but its vertices as well. Because
this chapter focuses on trees in terms of their edges, we’ll implicitly
understand that the vertices of a tree T are those that some edge of T
is incident on.

21.1    Growing a minimum spanning tree

The input to the minumum-spanning-tree problem is a connected,
undirected graph G = (V, E) with a weight function w : E → ℝ. The goal
is to find a minimum spanning tree for G. The two algorithms considered
in this chapter use a greedy approach to the problem, although they
differ in how they apply this approach.

This greedy strategy is captured by the procedure GENERIC-MST on the
facing page, which grows the minimum spanning tree one edge at a time.
The generic method manages a set A of edges, maintaining the following
loop invariant:

Prior to each iteration, A is a subset of some minimum spanning tree.

GENERIC-MST(G, w)

  --- ----------------------------------------
  1   A = Ø
  2   while A does not form a spanning tree
  3   find an edge (u, v) that is safe for A
  4   A = A ∪ {(u, v)}
  5   return A
  --- ----------------------------------------

Each step determines an edge (u, v) that the procedure can add to A
without violating this invariant, in the sense that A ∪ {(u, v)} is also
a subset of a minimum spanning tree. We call such an edge a safe edge
for A, since it can be added safely to A while maintaining the
invariant.

This generic algorithm uses the loop invariant as follows:

Initialization: After line 1, the set A trivially satisfies the loop
invariant.

Maintenance: The loop in lines 2–4 maintains the invariant by adding
only safe edges.

Termination: All edges added to A belong to a minimum spanning tree, and
the loop must terminate by the time it has considered all edges.
Therefore, the set A returned in line 5 must be a minimum spanning tree.

The tricky part is, of course, finding a safe edge in line 3. One must
exist, since when line 3 is executed, the invariant dictates that there
is a spanning tree T such that A ⊆ T. Within the while loop body, A must
be a proper subset of T, and therefore there must be an edge (u, v) ∈ T
such that (u, v) ∉ A and (u, v) is safe for A.

The remainder of this section provides a rule (Theorem 21.1) for
recognizing safe edges. The next section describes two algorithms that
use this rule to find safe edges efficiently.

We first need some definitions. Acut (S, V – S) of an undirected graph G
= (V, E) is a partition of V. Figure 21.2 illustrates this notion. We
say that an edge (u, v) ∈ Ecrosses the cut (S, V – S) if one of its
endpoints belongs to S and the other belongs to V – S. A cut respects a
set A of edges if no edge in A crosses the cut. An edge is a light edge
crossing a cut if its weight is the minimum of any edge crossing the
cut. There can be more than one light edge crossing a cut in the case of
ties. More generally, we say that an edge is a light edge satisfying a
given property if its weight is the minimum of any edge satisfying the
property.

The following theorem gives the rule for recognizing safe edges.

Theorem 21.1

Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued
weight function w defined on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included
in some minimum spanning tree for G, let (S, V – S) be any cut of G that
respects A, and let (u, v) be a light edge crossing (S, V – S). Then,
edge (u, v) is safe for A.

[art]

Figure 21.2 A cut (S, V – S) of the graph from Figure 21.1. Orange
vertices belong to the set S, and tan vertices belong to V – S. The
edges crossing the cut are those connecting tan vertices with orange
vertices. The edge (d, c) is the unique light edge crossing the cut.
Blue edges form a subset A of the edges. The cut (S, V – S) respects A,
since no edge of A crosses the cut.

Proof   Let T be a minimum spanning tree that includes A, and assume
that T does not contain the light edge (u, v), since if it does, we are
done. We’ll construct another minimum spanning tree T′ that includes A ∪
{(u, v)} by using a cut-and-paste technique, thereby showing that (u, v)
is a safe edge for A.

The edge (u, v) forms a cycle with the edges on the simple path p from u
to v in T, as Figure 21.3 illustrates. Since u and v are on opposite
sides of the cut (S, V – S), at least one edge in T lies on the simple
path p and also crosses the cut. Let (x, y) be any such edge. The edge
(x, y) is not in A, because the cut respects A. Since (x, y) is on the
unique simple path from u to v in T, removing (x, y) breaks T into two
components. Adding (u, v) reconnects them to form a new spanning tree T′
= (T – {(x, y)}) ∪ {(u, v)}.

We next show that T′ is a minimum spanning tree. Since (u, v) is a light
edge crossing (S, V – S) and (x, y) also crosses this cut, w(u, v) ≤
w(x, y). Therefore,

  ------- --- --------------------------
  w(T′)   =   w(T) − w(x, y) + w(u, v)
          ≤   w(T).
  ------- --- --------------------------

But T is a minimum spanning tree, so that w(T) ≤ w(T′), and thus, T′
must be a minimum spanning tree as well.

It remains to show that (u, v) is actually a safe edge for A. We have A
⊆ T′, since A ⊆ T and (x, y) ∉ A, and thus, A ∪ {(u, v)} ⊆ T′.
Consequently, since T′ is a minimum spanning tree, (u, v) is safe for A.

▪

Theorem 21.1 provides insight into how the GENERIC-MST method works on a
connected graph G = (V, E). As the method proceeds, the set A is always
acyclic, since it is a subset of a minimum spanning tree and a tree may
not contain a cycle. At any point in the execution, the graph G_(A) =
(V, A) is a forest, and each of the connected components of G_(A) is a
tree. (Some of the trees may contain just one vertex, as is the case,
for example, when the method begins: A is empty and the forest contains
|V| trees, one for each vertex.) Moreover, any safe edge (u, v) for A
connects distinct components of G_(A), since A ∪ {(u, v)} must be
acyclic.

[art]

Figure 21.3 The proof of Theorem 21.1. Orange vertices belong to S, and
tan vertices belong to V – S. Only edges in the minimum spanning tree T
are shown, along with edge (u, v), which does not lie in T. The edges in
A are blue, and (u, v) is a light edge crossing the cut (S, V – S). The
edge (x, y) is an edge on the unique simple path p from u to v in T. To
form a minimum spanning tree T′ that contains (u, v), remove the edge
(x, y) from T and add the edge (u, v).

The while loop in lines 2–4 of GENERIC-MST executes |V| – 1 times
because it finds one of the |V| – 1 edges of a minimum spanning tree in
each iteration. Initially, when A = Ø, there are |V| trees in G_(A), and
each iteration reduces that number by 1. When the forest contains only a
single tree, the method terminates.

The two algorithms in Section 21.2 use the following corollary to
Theorem 21.1.

Corollary 21.2

Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued
weight function w defined on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included
in some minimum spanning tree for G, and let C = (V_(C), E_(C)) be a
connected component (tree) in the forest G_(A) = (V, A). If (u, v) is a
light edge connecting C to some other component in G_(A), then (u, v) is
safe for A.

Proof   The cut (V_(C), V – V_(C)) respects A, and (u, v) is a light
edge for this cut. Therefore, (u, v) is safe for A.

▪

Exercises

21.1-1

Let (u, v) be a minimum-weight edge in a connected graph G. Show that
(u, v) belongs to some minimum spanning tree of G.

21.1-2

Professor Sabatier conjectures the following converse of Theorem 21.1.
Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued
weight function w defined on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included
in some minimum spanning tree for G, let (S, V – S) be any cut of G that
respects A, and let (u, v) be a safe edge for A crossing (S, V – S).
Then, (u, v) is a light edge for the cut. Show that the professor’s
conjecture is incorrect by giving a counterexample.

21.1-3

Show that if an edge (u, v) is contained in some minimum spanning tree,
then it is a light edge crossing some cut of the graph.

21.1-4

Give a simple example of a connected graph such that the set of edges
{(u, v) : there exists a cut (S, V – S) such that (u, v) is a light edge
crossing (S, V – S)} does not form a minimum spanning tree.

21.1-5

Let e be a maximum-weight edge on some cycle of connected graph G = (V,
E). Prove that there is a minimum spanning tree of G′ = (V, E – {e})
that is also a minimum spanning tree of G. That is, there is a minimum
spanning tree of G that does not include e.

21.1-6

Show that a graph has a unique minimum spanning tree if, for every cut
of the graph, there is a unique light edge crossing the cut. Show that
the converse is not true by giving a counterexample.

21.1-7

Argue that if all edge weights of a graph are positive, then any subset
of edges that connects all vertices and has minimum total weight must be
a tree. Give an example to show that the same conclusion does not follow
if we allow some weights to be nonpositive.

21.1-8

Let T be a minimum spanning tree of a graph G, and let L be the sorted
list of the edge weights of T. Show that for any other minimum spanning
tree T′ of G, the list L is also the sorted list of edge weights of T′.

21.1-9

Let T be a minimum spanning tree of a graph G = (V, E), and let V′ be a
subset of V. Let T′ be the subgraph of T induced by V′, and let G′ be
the subgraph of G induced by V′. Show that if T′ is connected, then T′
is a minimum spanning tree of G′.

21.1-10

Given a graph G and a minimum spanning tree T, suppose that the weight
of one of the edges in T decreases. Show that T is still a minimum
spanning tree for G. More formally, let T be a minimum spanning tree for
G with edge weights given by weight function w. Choose one edge (x, y) ∈
T and a positive number k, and define the weight function w′ by

[art]

Show that T is a minimum spanning tree for G with edge weights given by
w′.

★ 21.1-11

Given a graph G and a minimum spanning tree T, suppose that the weight
of one of the edges not in T decreases. Give an algorithm for finding
the minimum spanning tree in the modified graph.

21.2    The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim

The two minimum-spanning-tree algorithms described in this section
elaborate on the generic method. They each use a specific rule to
determine a safe edge in line 3 of GENERIC-MST. In Kruskal’s algorithm,
the set A is a forest whose vertices are all those of the given graph.
The safe edge added to A is always a lowest-weight edge in the graph
that connects two distinct components. In Prim’s algorithm, the set A
forms a single tree. The safe edge added to A is always a lowest-weight
edge connecting the tree to a vertex not in the tree. Both algorithms
assume that the input graph is connected and represented by adjacency
lists.

[art]

Figure 21.4 The execution of Kruskal’s algorithm on the graph from
Figure 21.1. Blue edges belong to the forest A being grown. The
algorithm considers each edge in sorted order by weight. A red arrow
points to the edge under consideration at each step of the algorithm. If
the edge joins two distinct trees in the forest, it is added to the
forest, thereby merging the two trees.

Kruskal’s algorithm

Kruskal’s algorithm finds a safe edge to add to the growing forest by
finding, of all the edges that connect any two trees in the forest, an
edge (u, v) with the lowest weight. Let C₁ and C₂ denote the two trees
that are connected by (u, v). Since (u, v) must be a light edge
connecting C₁ to some other tree, Corollary 21.2 implies that (u, v) is
a safe edge for C₁. Kruskal’s algorithm qualifies as a greedy algorithm
because at each step it adds to the forest an edge with the lowest
possible weight.

[art]

Figure 21.4, continued Further steps in the execution of Kruskal’s
algorithm.

Like the algorithm to compute connected components from Section 19.1,
the procedure MST-KRUSKAL on the following page uses a disjoint-set data
structure to maintain several disjoint sets of elements. Each set
contains the vertices in one tree of the current forest. The operation
FIND-SET(u) returns a representative element from the set that contains
u. Thus, to determine whether two vertices u and v belong to the same
tree, just test whether FIND-SET(u) equals FIND-SET(v). To combine
trees, Kruskal’s algorithm calls the UNION procedure.

Figure 21.4 shows how Kruskal’s algorithm works. Lines 1–3 initialize
the set A to the empty set and create |V| trees, one containing each
vertex. The for loop in lines 6–9 examines edges in order of weight,
from lowest to highest. The loop checks, for each edge (u, v), whether
the endpoints u and v belong to the same tree. If they do, then the edge
(u, v) cannot be added to the forest without creating a cycle, and the
edge is ignored. Otherwise, the two vertices belong to different trees.
In this case, line 8 adds the edge (u, v) to A, and line 9 merges the
vertices in the two trees.

MST-KRUSKAL(G, w)

  ----- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    1   A = Ø
    2   for each vertex v ∈ G.V
    3   MAKE-SET(v)
    4   create a single list of the edges in G.E
    5   sort the list of edges into monotonically increasing order by weight w
    6   for each edge (u, v) taken from the sorted list in order
    7   if FIND-SET(u) ≠ FIND-SET(v)
    8   A = A ∪ {(u, v)}
    9   UNION(u, v)
  10    return A
  ----- ------------------------------------------------------------------------

The running time of Kruskal’s algorithm for a graph G = (V, E) depends
on the specific implementation of the disjoint-set data structure. Let’s
assume that it uses the disjoint-set-forest implementation of Section
19.3 with the union-by-rank and path-compression heuristics, since that
is the asymptotically fastest implementation known. Initializing the set
A in line 1 takes O(1) time, creating a single list of edges in line 4
takes O(V + E) time (which is O(E) because G is connected), and the time
to sort the edges in line 5 is O(E lg E). (We’ll account for the cost of
the |V| MAKE-SET operations in the for loop of lines 2–3 in a moment.)
The for loop of lines 6–9 performs O(E) FIND-SET and UNION operations on
the disjoint-set forest. Along with the |V| MAKE-SET operations, these
disjoint-set operations take a total of O((V + E) α(V)) time, where α is
the very slowly growing function defined in Section 19.4. Because we
assume that G is connected, we have |E| ≥ |V| – 1, and so the
disjoint-set operations take O(E α(V)) time. Moreover, since α(|V|) =
O(lg V) = O(lg E), the total running time of Kruskal’s algorithm is O(E
lg E). Observing that |E| < |V|², we have lg |E| = O(lg V), and so we
can restate the running time of Kruskal’s algorithm as O(E lg V).

Prim’s algorithm

Like Kruskal’s algorithm, Prim’s algorithm is a special case of the
generic minimum-spanning-tree method from Section 21.1. Prim’s algorithm
operates much like Dijkstra’s algorithm for finding shortest paths in a
graph, which we’ll see in Section 22.3. Prim’s algorithm has the
property that the edges in the set A always form a single tree. As
Figure 21.5 shows, the tree starts from an arbitrary root vertex r and
grows until it spans all the vertices in V. Each step adds to the tree A
a light edge that connects A to an isolated vertex—one on which no edge
of A is incident. By Corollary 21.2, this rule adds only edges that are
safe for A. Therefore, when the algorithm terminates, the edges in A
form a minimum spanning tree. This strategy qualifies as greedy since at
each step it adds to the tree an edge that contributes the minimum
amount possible to the tree’s weight.

[art]

Figure 21.5 The execution of Prim’s algorithm on the graph from Figure
21.1. The root vertex is a. Blue vertices and edges belong to the tree
being grown, and tan vertices have yet to be added to the tree. At each
step of the algorithm, the vertices in the tree determine a cut of the
graph, and a light edge crossing the cut is added to the tree. The edge
and vertex added to the tree are highlighted in orange. In the second
step (part (c)), for example, the algorithm has a choice of adding
either edge (b, c) or edge (a, h) to the tree since both are light edges
crossing the cut.

In the procedure MST-PRIM below, the connected graph G and the root r of
the minimum spanning tree to be grown are inputs to the algorithm. In
order to efficiently select a new edge to add into tree A, the algorithm
maintains a min-priority queue Q of all vertices that are not in the
tree, based on a key attribute. For each vertex v, the attribute v.key
is the minimum weight of any edge connecting v to a vertex in the tree,
where by convention, v.key = ∞ if there is no such edge. The attribute
v.π names the parent of v in the tree. The algorithm implicitly
maintains the set A from GENERIC-MST as

A = {(v, v.π) : v ∈ V – {r} – Q},

where we interpret the vertices in Q as forming a set. When the
algorithm terminates, the min-priority queue Q is empty, and thus the
minimum spanning tree A for G is

A = {(v, v.π) : v ∈ V – {r}}.

MST-PRIM(G, w, r)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | for each vertex u ∈ G.V                                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   2 | u.key = ∞                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   3 | u.π = NIL                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   4 | r.key = 0                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   5 | Q = Ø                                                         |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   6 | for each vertex u ∈ G.V                                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   7 | INSERT(Q, u)                                                  |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   8 | while Q ≠ Ø                                                   |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | u = EXTRACT-MIN(Q)            | // add u to the tree          |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10  | for each vertex v in G.Adj[u] | // update keys of u’s         |
|     |                               | non-tree neighbors            |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 11  | if v ∈ Q and w(u, v) < v.key                                  |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12  | v.π = u                                                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13  | v.key = w(u, v)                                               |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14  | DECREASE-KEY(Q, v, w(u, v))                                   |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

Figure 21.5 shows how Prim’s algorithm works. Lines 1–7 set the key of
each vertex to ∞ (except for the root r, whose key is set to 0 to make
it the first vertex processed), set the parent of each vertex to NIL,
and insert each vertex into the min-priority queue Q. The algorithm
maintains the following three-part loop invariant:

Prior to each iteration of the while loop of lines 8–14,

1.  A = {(v, v.π) : v ∈ V – {r} – Q}.
2.  The vertices already placed into the minimum spanning tree are those
    in V − Q.
3.  For all vertices v ∈ Q, if v.π ≠ NIL, then v.key < ∞ and v.key is
    the weight of a light edge (v, v.π) connecting v to some vertex
    already placed into the minimum spanning tree.

Line 9 identifies a vertex u ∈ Q incident on a light edge that crosses
the cut (V – Q, Q) (with the exception of the first iteration, in which
u = r due to lines 4–7). Removing u from the set Q adds it to the set V
– Q of vertices in the tree, thus adding the edge (u, u.π) to A. The for
loop of lines 10–14 updates the key and attributes of every vertex v
adjacent to u but not in the tree, thereby maintaining the third part of
the loop invariant. Whenever line 13 updates v.key, line 14 calls
DECREASE-KEY to inform the min-priority queue that v’s key has changed.

The running time of Prim’s algorithm depends on the specific
implementation of the min-priority queue Q. You can implement Q with a
binary min-heap (see Chapter 6), including a way to map between vertices
and their corresponding heap elements. The BUILD-MIN-HEAP procedure can
perform lines 5–7 in O(V) time. In fact, there is no need to call
BUILD-MIN-HEAP. You can just put the key of r at the root of the
min-heap, and because all other keys are ∞, they can go anywhere else in
the min-heap. The body of the while loop executes |V| times, and since
each EXTRACT-MIN operation takes O(lg V) time, the total time for all
calls to EXTRACT-MIN is O(V lg V). The for loop in lines 10–14 executes
O(E) times altogether, since the sum of the lengths of all adjacency
lists is 2 |E|. Within the for loop, the test for membership in Q in
line 11 can take constant time if you keep a bit for each vertex that
indicates whether it belongs to Q and update the bit when the vertex is
removed from Q. Each call to DECREASE-KEY in line 14 takes O(lg V) time.
Thus, the total time for Prim’s algorithm is O(V lg V + E lg V) = O(E lg
V), which is asymptotically the same as for our implementation of
Kruskal’s algorithm.

You can further improve the asymptotic running time of Prim’s algorithm
by implementing the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci heap (see page
478). If a Fibonacci heap holds |V| elements, an EXTRACT-MIN operation
takes O(lg V) amortized time and each INSERT and DECREASE-KEY operation
takes only O(1) amortized time. Therefore, by using a Fibonacci heap to
implement the min-priority queue Q, the running time of Prim’s algorithm
improves to O(E+V lg V).

Exercises

21.2-1

Kruskal’s algorithm can return different spanning trees for the same
input graph G, depending on how it breaks ties when the edges are
sorted. Show that for each minimum spanning tree T of G, there is a way
to sort the edges of G in Kruskal’s algorithm so that the algorithm
returns T.

21.2-2

Give a simple implementation of Prim’s algorithm that runs in O(V²) time
when the graph G = (V, E) is represented as an adjacency matrix.

21.2-3

For a sparse graph G = (V, E), where |E| = Θ(V), is the implementation
of Prim’s algorithm with a Fibonacci heap asymptotically faster than the
binary-heap implementation? What about for a dense graph, where |E| =
Θ(V²)? How must the sizes |E| and |V| be related for the Fibonacci-heap
implementation to be asymptotically faster than the binary-heap
implementation?

21.2-4

Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from
1 to |V|. How fast can you make Kruskal’s algorithm run? What if the
edge weights are integers in the range from 1 to W for some constant W?

21.2-5

Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from
1 to |V|. How fast can you make Prim’s algorithm run? What if the edge
weights are integers in the range from 1 to W for some constant W?

21.2-6

Professor Borden proposes a new divide-and-conquer algorithm for
computing minimum spanning trees, which goes as follows. Given a graph G
= (V, E), partition the set V of vertices into two sets V₁ and V₂ such
that |V₁| and |V₂| differ by at most 1. Let E₁ be the set of edges that
are incident only on vertices in V₁, and let E₂ be the set of edges that
are incident only on vertices in V₂. Recursively solve a
minimum-spanning-tree problem on each of the two subgraphs G₁ = (V₁, E₁)
and G₂ = (V₂, E₂). Finally, select the minimum-weight edge in E that
crosses the cut V₁, V₂), and use this edge to unite the resulting two
minimum spanning trees into a single spanning tree.

Either argue that the algorithm correctly computes a minimum spanning
tree of G, or provide an example for which the algorithm fails.

★ 21.2-7

Suppose that the edge weights in a graph are uniformly distributed over
the half-open interval [0, 1). Which algorithm, Kruskal’s or Prim’s, can
you make run faster?

★ 21.2-8

Suppose that a graph G has a minimum spanning tree already computed. How
quickly can you update the minimum spanning tree upon adding a new
vertex and incident edges to G?

Problems

21-1     Second-best minimum spanning tree

Let G = (V, E) be an undirected, connected graph whose weight function
is w : E → ℝ, and suppose that |E| ≥ |V| and all edge weights are
distinct.

We define a second-best minimum spanning tree as follows. Let T be the
set of all spanning trees of G, and let T be a minimum spanning tree of
G. Then a second-best minimum spanning tree is a spanning tree T′ such
that w(T′) = min {w(T″) : T″ ∈ T − {T}}.

a. Show that the minimum spanning tree is unique, but that the
second-best minimum spanning tree need not be unique.

b. Let T be the minimum spanning tree of G. Prove that G contains some
edge (u, v) ∈ T and some edge (x, y) ∉ T such that (T – {(u, v)}) ∪ {(x,
y)} is a second-best minimum spanning tree of G.

c. Now let T be any spanning tree of G and, for any two vertices u, v ∈
V, let max[u, v] denote an edge of maximum weight on the unique simple
path between u and v in T. Describe an O(V²)-time algorithm that, given
T, computes max[u, v] for all u, v ∈ V.

d. Give an efficient algorithm to compute the second-best minimum
spanning tree of G.

21-2     Minimum spanning tree in sparse graphs

For a very sparse connected graph G = (V, E), it is possible to further
improve upon the O(E + V lg V) running time of Prim’s algorithm with a
Fibonacci heap by preprocessing G to decrease the number of vertices
before running Prim’s algorithm. In particular, for each vertex u,
choose the minimum-weight edge (u, v) incident on u, and put (u, v) into
the minimum spanning tree under construction. Then, contract all chosen
edges (see Section B.4). Rather than contracting these edges one at a
time, first identify sets of vertices that are united into the same new
vertex. Then create the graph that would have resulted from contracting
these edges one at a time, but do so by “renaming” edges according to
the sets into which their endpoints were placed. Several edges from the
original graph might be renamed the same as each other. In such a case,
only one edge results, and its weight is the minimum of the weights of
the corresponding original edges.

Initially, set the minimum spanning tree T being constructed to be
empty, and for each edge (u, v) ∈ E, initialize the two attributes (u,
v).orig = (u, v) and (u, v).c = w(u, v). Use the orig attribute to
reference the edge from the initial graph that is associated with an
edge in the contracted graph. The c attribute holds the weight of an
edge, and as edges are contracted, it is updated according to the above
scheme for choosing edge weights. The procedure MST-REDUCE on the facing
page takes inputs G and T, and it returns a contracted graph G′ with
updated attributes orig′ and c′. The procedure also accumulates edges of
G into the minimum spanning tree T.

a. Let T be the set of edges returned by MST-REDUCE, and let A be the
minimum spanning tree of the graph G′ formed by the call MST-PRIM(G′,
c′, r), where c′ is the weight attribute on the edges of G′.E and r is
any vertex in G′:V. Prove that T ∪ {(x, y).orig′ : (x, y) ∈ A} is a
minimum spanning tree of G.

b. Argue that |G′.V| ≤ |V| /2.

c. Show how to implement MST-REDUCE so that it runs in O(E) time. (Hint:
Use simple data structures.)

d. Suppose that you run k phases of MST-REDUCE, using the output G′
produced by one phase as the input G to the next phase and accumulating
edges in T. Argue that the overall running time of the k phases is
O(kE).

e. Suppose that after running k phases of MST-REDUCE, as in part (d),
you run Prim’s algorithm by calling MST-PRIM(G′, c′, r), where G′, with
weight attribute c′, is returned by the last phase and r is any vertex
in G′.V. Show how to pick k so that the overall running time is O(E lg
lg V). Argue that your choice of k minimizes the overall asymptotic
running time.

f. For what values of |E| (in terms of |V|) does Prim’s algorithm with
preprocessing asymptotically beat Prim’s algorithm without
preprocessing?

MST-REDUCE(G, T)

  ----- -----------------------------------------------------
    1   for each vertex v ∈ G.V
    2   v.mark = FALSE
    3   MAKE-SET(v)
    4   for each vertex u ∈ G.V
    5   if u.mark == FALSE
    6   choose v ∈ G.Adj[u] such that (u, v).c is minimized
    7   UNION(u, v)
    8   T = T ∪ {(u, v).orig}
    9   u.mark = TRUE
  10    v.mark = TRUE
  11    G′.V = {FIND-SET(v) : v ∈ G.V}
  12    G′.E = Ø
  13    for each edge (x, y) ∈ G.E
  14    u = FIND-SET(x)
  15    v = FIND-SET(y)
  16    if u ≠ v
  17    if (u, v) ∉ G′.E
  18    G′.E = G′.E ∪ {(u, v)}
  19    (u, v).orig′ = (x, y).orig
  20    (u, v).c′ = (x, y).c
  21    elseif (x, y).c < (u, v).c′
  22    (u, v).orig′ = (x, y).orig
  23    (u, v).c′ = (x, y).c
  24    construct adjacency lists G′.Adj for G′
  25    return G′ and T
  ----- -----------------------------------------------------

21-3     Alternative minimum-spanning-tree algorithms

Consider the three algorithms MAYBE-MST-A, MAYBE-MST-B, and MAYBE-MST-C
on the next page. Each one takes a connected graph and a weight function
as input and returns a set of edges T. For each algorithm, either prove
that T is a minimum spanning tree or prove that T is not necessarily a
minimum spanning tree. Also describe the most efficient implementation
of each algorithm, regardless of whether it computes a minimum spanning
tree.

21-4     Bottleneck spanning tree

A bottleneck spanning tree T of an undirected graph G is a spanning tree
of G whose largest edge weight is minimum over all spanning trees of G.
The value of the bottleneck spanning tree is the weight of the
maximum-weight edge in T.

MAYBE-MST-A(G, w)

+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 1         | sort the edges into monotonically decreasing order of    |
|           | edge weights w                                           |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 2         | T = E                                                    |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 3         | for each edge e, taken in monotonically decreasing order |
|           | by weight                                                |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 4         | if T – {e} is a connected graph                          |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 5         | T = T – {e}                                              |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 6         | return T                                                 |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| MAYBE-MST-B(G, w)                                                    |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 1         | T = Ø                                                    |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 2         | for each edge e, taken in arbitrary order                |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 3         | if T ∪ {e} has no cycles                                 |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 4         | T = T ∪ {e}                                              |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 5         | return T                                                 |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| MAYBE-MST-C(G, w)                                                    |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 1         | T = Ø                                                    |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 2         | for each edge e, taken in arbitrary order                |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 3         | T = T ∪ {e}                                              |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 4         | if T has a cycle c                                       |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 5         | let e′ be a maximum-weight edge on c                     |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 6         | T = T – {e′}                                             |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 7         | return T                                                 |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+

a. Argue that a minimum spanning tree is a bottleneck spanning tree.

Part (a) shows that finding a bottleneck spanning tree is no harder than
finding a minimum spanning tree. In the remaining parts, you will show
how to find a bottleneck spanning tree in linear time.

b. Give a linear-time algorithm that, given a graph G and an integer b,
determines whether the value of the bottleneck spanning tree is at most
b.

c. Use your algorithm for part (b) as a subroutine in a linear-time
algorithm for the bottleneck-spanning-tree problem. (Hint: You might
want to use a subroutine that contracts sets of edges, as in the
MST-REDUCE procedure described in Problem 21-2.)

Chapter notes

Tarjan [429] surveys the minimum-spanning-tree problem and provides
excellent advanced material. Graham and Hell [198] compiled a history of
the minimum-spanning-tree problem.

Tarjan attributes the first minimum-spanning-tree algorithm to a 1926
paper by O. Borůvka. Borůvka’s algorithm consists of running O(lg V)
iterations of the procedure MST-REDUCE described in Problem 21-2.
Kruskal’s algorithm was reported by Kruskal [272] in 1956. The algorithm
commonly known as Prim’s algorithm was indeed invented by Prim [367],
but it was also invented earlier by V. Jarník in 1930.

When |E| = Ω(V lg V), Prim’s algorithm, implemented with a Fibonacci
heap, runs in O(E) time. For sparser graphs, using a combination of the
ideas from Prim’s algorithm, Kruskal’s algorithm, and Borůvka’s
algorithm, together with advanced data structures, Fredman and Tarjan
[156] give an algorithm that runs in O(E lg* V) time. Gabow, Galil,
Spencer, and Tarjan [165] improved this algorithm to run in O(E lg lg*
V) time. Chazelle [83] gives an algorithm that runs in O(E [art](E, V))
time, where [art](E, V) is the functional inverse of Ackermann’s
function. (See the chapter notes for Chapter 19 for a brief discussion
of Ackermann’s function and its inverse.) Unlike previous
minimum-spanning-tree algorithms, Chazelle’s algorithm does not follow
the greedy method. Pettie and Ramachandran [356] give an algorithm based
on precomputed “MST decision trees” that also runs in O(E [art](E, V))
time.

A related problem is spanning-tree verification: given a graph G = (V,
E) and a tree T ⊆ E, determine whether T is a minimum spanning tree of
G. King [254] gives a linear-time algorithm to verify a spanning tree,
building on earlier work of Komlós [269] and Dixon, Rauch, and Tarjan
[120].

The above algorithms are all deterministic and fall into the
comparison-based model described in Chapter 8. Karger, Klein, and Tarjan
[243] give a randomized minimum-spanning-tree algorithm that runs in
O(V + E) expected time. This algorithm uses recursion in a manner
similar to the linear-time selection algorithm in Section 9.3: a
recursive call on an auxiliary problem identifies a subset of the edges
E′ that cannot be in any minimum spanning tree. Another recursive call
on E – E′ then finds the minimum spanning tree. The algorithm also uses
ideas from Borůvka’s algorithm and King’s algorithm for spanning-tree
verification.

Fredman and Willard [158] showed how to find a minimum spanning tree in
O(V + E) time using a deterministic algorithm that is not comparison
based. Their algorithm assumes that the data are b-bit integers and that
the computer memory consists of addressable b-bit words.

¹ The phrase “minimum spanning tree” is a shortened form of the phrase
“minimum-weight spanning tree.” There is no point in minimizing the
number of edges in T, since all spanning trees have exactly |V| − 1
edges by Theorem B.2 on page 1169.

22        Single-Source Shortest Paths

Suppose that you need to drive from Oceanside, New York, to Oceanside,
California, by the shortest possible route. Your GPS contains
information about the entire road network of the United States,
including the road distance between each pair of adjacent intersections.
How can your GPS determine this shortest route?

One possible way is to enumerate all the routes from Oceanside, New
York, to Oceanside, California, add up the distances on each route, and
select the shortest. But even disallowing routes that contain cycles,
your GPS would need to examine an enormous number of possibilities, most
of which are simply not worth considering. For example, a route that
passes through Miami, Florida, is a poor choice, because Miami is
several hundred miles out of the way.

This chapter and Chapter 23 show how to solve such problems efficiently.
The input to a shortest-paths problem is a weighted, directed graph G =
(V, E), with a weight function w : E → ℝ mapping edges to real-valued
weights. The weight w(p) of path p = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉 is the sum of
the weights of its constituent edges:

[art]

We define the shortest-path weight δ(u, v) from u to v by

[art]

A shortest path from vertex u to vertex v is then defined as any path p
with weight w(p) = δ(u, v).

In the example of going from Oceanside, New York, to Oceanside,
California, your GPS models the road network as a graph: vertices
represent intersections, edges represent road segments between
intersections, and edge weights represent road distances. The goal is to
find a shortest path from a given intersection in Oceanside, New York
(say, Brower Avenue and Skillman Avenue) to a given intersection in
Oceanside, California (say, Topeka Street and South Horne Street).

Edge weights can represent metrics other than distances, such as time,
cost, penalties, loss, or any other quantity that accumulates linearly
along a path and that you want to minimize.

The breadth-first-search algorithm from Section 20.2 is a shortest-paths
algorithm that works on unweighted graphs, that is, graphs in which each
edge has unit weight. Because many of the concepts from breadth-first
search arise in the study of shortest paths in weighted graphs, you
might want to review Section 20.2 before proceeding.

Variants

This chapter focuses on the single-source shortest-paths problem: given
a graph G = (V, E), find a shortest path from a given source vertex s ∈
V to every vertex v ∈ V. The algorithm for the single-source problem can
solve many other problems, including the following variants.

Single-destination shortest-paths problem: Find a shortest path to a
given destination vertex t from each vertex v. By reversing the
direction of each edge in the graph, you can reduce this problem to a
single-source problem.

Single-pair shortest-path problem: Find a shortest path from u to v for
given vertices u and v. If you solve the single-source problem with
source vertex u, you solve this problem also. Moreover, all known
algorithms for this problem have the same worst-case asymptotic running
time as the best single-source algorithms.

All-pairs shortest-paths problem: Find a shortest path from u to v for
every pair of vertices u and v. Although you can solve this problem by
running a single-source algorithm once from each vertex, you often can
solve it faster. Additionally, its structure is interesting in its own
right. Chapter 23 addresses the all-pairs problem in detail.

Optimal substructure of a shortest path

Shortest-paths algorithms typically rely on the property that a shortest
path between two vertices contains other shortest paths within it. (The
Edmonds-Karp maximum-flow algorithm in Chapter 24 also relies on this
property.) Recall that optimal substructure is one of the key indicators
that dynamic programming (Chapter 14) and the greedy method (Chapter 15)
might apply. Dijkstra’s algorithm, which we shall see in Section 22.3,
is a greedy algorithm, and the Floyd-Warshall algorithm, which finds a
shortest path between every pair of vertices (see Section 23.2), is a
dynamic-programming algorithm. The following lemma states the
optimal-substructure property of shortest paths more precisely.

Lemma 22.1 (Subpaths of shortest paths are shortest paths)

Given a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with weight function w : E →
ℝ let p = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉 be a shortest path from vertex v₀ to
vertex v_(k) and, for any i and j such that 0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ k, let p_(ij) =
〈v_(i), v_(i+1), … , v_(j)〉 be the subpath of p from vertex v_(i) to
vertex v_(j). Then, p_(ij) is a shortest path from v_(i) to v_(j).

Proof   Decompose path p into [art], so that w(p) = w(p_(0i)) +
w(p_(ij)) + w(p_(jk)). Now, assume that there is a path [art] from v_(i)
to v_(j) with weight [art]. Then, [art] is a path from v₀ to v_(k) whose
weight [art] is less than w(p), which contradicts the assumption that p
is a shortest path from v₀ to v_(k).

▪

Negative-weight edges

Some instances of the single-source shortest-paths problem may include
edges whose weights are negative. If the graph G = (V, E) contains no
negative-weight cycles reachable from the source s, then for all v ∈ V,
the shortest-path weight δ(s, v) remains well defined, even if it has a
negative value. If the graph contains a negative-weight cycle reachable
from s, however, shortest-path weights are not well defined. No path
from s to a vertex on the cycle can be a shortest path—you can always
find a path with lower weight by following the proposed “shortest” path
and then traversing the negative-weight cycle. If there is a
negative-weight cycle on some path from s to v, we define δ(s, v) = −∞.

Figure 22.1 illustrates the effect of negative weights and
negative-weight cycles on shortest-path weights. Because there is only
one path from s to a (the path 〈s, a〉), we have δ(s, a) = w(s, a) = 3.
Similarly, there is only one path from s to b, and so δ(s, b) = w(s,
a) + w(a, b) = 3 + (−4) = −1. There are infinitely many paths from s to
c: 〈s, c〉, 〈s, c, d, c〉, 〈s, c, d, c, d, c〉, and so on. Because
the cycle 〈c, d, c〉 has weight 6 + (−3) = 3 > 0, the shortest path
from s to c is 〈s, c〉, with weight δ(s, c) = w(s, c) = 5, and the
shortest path from s to d is 〈s, c, d〉, with weight δ(s, d) = w(s,
c) + w(c, d) = 11. Analogously, there are infinitely many paths from s
to e: 〈s, e〉, 〈s, e, f, e〉, 〈s, e, f, e, f, e〉, and so on. Because
the cycle 〈e, f, e〉 has weight 3 + (−6) = −3 < 0, however, there is no
shortest path from s to e. By traversing the negative-weight cycle 〈e,
f, e〉 arbitrarily many times, you can find paths from s to e with
arbitrarily large negative weights, and so δ(s, e) = −∞. Similarly, δ(s,
f) = −∞. Because g is reachable from f, you can also find paths with
arbitrarily large negative weights from s to g, and so δ(s, g) = −∞.
Vertices h, i, and j also form a negative-weight cycle. They are not
reachable from s, however, and so δ(s, h) = δ(s, i) = δ(s, j) = ∞.

[art]

Figure 22.1 Negative edge weights in a directed graph. The shortest-path
weight from source s appears within each vertex. Because vertices e and
f form a negative-weight cycle reachable from s, they have shortest-path
weights of −∞. Because vertex g is reachable from a vertex whose
shortest-path weight is −∞, it, too, has a shortest-path weight of −∞.
Vertices such as h, i, and j are not reachable from s, and so their
shortest-path weights are ∞, even though they lie on a negative-weight
cycle.

Some shortest-paths algorithms, such as Dijkstra’s algorithm, assume
that all edge weights in the input graph are nonnegative, as in a road
network. Others, such as the Bellman-Ford algorithm, allow
negative-weight edges in the input graph and produce a correct answer as
long as no negative-weight cycles are reachable from the source.
Typically, if there is such a negative-weight cycle, the algorithm can
detect and report its existence.

Cycles

Can a shortest path contain a cycle? As we have just seen, it cannot
contain a negative-weight cycle. Nor can it contain a positive-weight
cycle, since removing the cycle from the path produces a path with the
same source and destination vertices and a lower path weight. That is,
if p = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉 is a path and c = 〈v_(i), v_(i+1), … ,
v_(j)〉 is a positive-weight cycle on this path (so that v_(i) = v_(j)
and w(c) > 0), then the path p′ = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(i), v_(j+1), v_(j+2),
… , v_(k)〉 has weight w(p′) = w(p) − w(c) < w(p), and so p cannot be a
shortest path from v₀ to v_(k).

That leaves only 0-weight cycles. You can remove a 0-weight cycle from
any path to produce another path whose weight is the same. Thus, if
there is a shortest path from a source vertex s to a destination vertex
v that contains a 0-weight cycle, then there is another shortest path
from s to v without this cycle. As long as a shortest path has 0-weight
cycles, you can repeatedly remove these cycles from the path until you
have a shortest path that is cycle-free. Therefore, without loss of
generality, assume that shortest paths have no cycles, that is, they are
simple paths. Since any acyclic path in a graph G = (V, E) contains at
most |V| distinct vertices, it also contains at most |V| − 1 edges.
Assume, therefore, that any shortest path contains at most |V| − 1
edges.

Representing shortest paths

It is usually not enough to compute only shortest-path weights. Most
applications of shortest paths need to know the vertices on shortest
paths as well. For example, if your GPS told you the distance to your
destination but not how to get there, it would not be terribly useful.
We represent shortest paths similarly to how we represented
breadth-first trees in Section 20.2. Given a graph G = (V, E), maintain
for each vertex v ∈ V a predecessor v.π that is either another vertex or
NIL. The shortest-paths algorithms in this chapter set the π attributes
so that the chain of predecessors originating at a vertex v runs
backward along a shortest path from s to v. Thus, given a vertex v for
which v.π ≠ NIL, the procedure PRINT-PATH(G, s, v) from Section 20.2
prints a shortest path from s to v.

In the midst of executing a shortest-paths algorithm, however, the π
values might not indicate shortest paths. The predecessor subgraph G_(π)
= (V_(π), E_(π)) induced by the π values is defined the same for
single-source shortest paths as for breadth-first search in equations
(20.2) and (20.3) on page 561:

V_(π) = {v ∈ V : v.π ≠ NIL} ∪ {s},

E_(π) = {(v.π, v) ∈ E : v ∈ V_(π) − {s}}.

We’ll prove that the π values produced by the algorithms in this chapter
have the property that at termination G_(π) is a “shortest-paths
tree”—informally, a rooted tree containing a shortest path from the
source s to every vertex that is reachable from s. A shortest-paths tree
is like the breadth-first tree from Section 20.2, but it contains
shortest paths from the source defined in terms of edge weights instead
of numbers of edges. To be precise, let G = (V, E) be a weighted,
directed graph with weight function w : E → ℝ, and assume that G
contains no negative-weight cycles reachable from the source vertex s ∈
V, so that shortest paths are well defined. Ashortest-paths tree rooted
at s is a directed subgraph G′ = (V′, E′), where V′ ⊆ V and E′ ⊆ E, such
that

1.  V′ is the set of vertices reachable from s in G,
2.  G′ forms a rooted tree with root s, and
3.  for all v ∈ V′, the unique simple path from s to v in G′ is a
    shortest path from s to v in G.

[art]

Figure 22.2 (a) A weighted, directed graph with shortest-path weights
from source s. (b) The blue edges form a shortest-paths tree rooted at
the source s. (c) Another shortest-paths tree with the same root.

Shortest paths are not necessarily unique, and neither are
shortest-paths trees. For example, Figure 22.2 shows a weighted,
directed graph and two shortest-paths trees with the same root.

Relaxation

The algorithms in this chapter use the technique of relaxation. For each
vertex v ∈ V, the single-source shortest paths algorithms maintain an
attribute v.d, which is an upper bound on the weight of a shortest path
from source s to v. We call v.d a shortest-path estimate. To initialize
the shortest-path estimates and predecessors, call the Θ(V)-time
procedure INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE. After initialization, we have v.π =
NIL for all v ∈ V, s.d = 0 and v.d = ∞ for v ∈ V − {s}.

INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s)

  --- -------------------------
  1   for each vertex v ∈ G.V
  2   v.d = ∞
  3   v.π = NIL
  4   s.d = 0
  --- -------------------------

The process of relaxing an edge (u, v) consists of testing whether going
through vertex u improves the shortest path to vertex v found so far
and, if so, updating v.d and v.π. A relaxation step might decrease the
value of the shortest-path estimate v.d and update v’s predecessor
attribute v.π. The RELAX procedure on the following page performs a
relaxation step on edge (u, v) in O(1) time. Figure 22.3 shows two
examples of relaxing an edge, one in which a shortest-path estimate
decreases and one in which no estimate changes.

[art]

Figure 22.3 Relaxing an edge (u, v) with weight w(u, v) = 2. The
shortest-path estimate of each vertex appears within the vertex. (a)
Because v.d > u.d + w(u, v) prior to relaxation, the value of v.d
decreases. (b) Since we have v.d ≤ u.d + w(u, v) before relaxing the
edge, the relaxation step leaves v.d unchanged.

RELAX(u, v, w)

  --- ------------------------
  1   if v.d > u.d + w(u, v)
  2   v.d = u.d + w(u, v)
  3   v.π = u
  --- ------------------------

Each algorithm in this chapter calls INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE and then
repeatedly relaxes edges.¹ Moreover, relaxation is the only means by
which shortest-path estimates and predecessors change. The algorithms in
this chapter differ in how many times they relax each edge and the order
in which they relax edges. Dijkstra’s algorithm and the shortest-paths
algorithm for directed acyclic graphs relax each edge exactly once. The
Bellman-Ford algorithm relaxes each edge |V| − 1 times.

Properties of shortest paths and relaxation

To prove the algorithms in this chapter correct, we’ll appeal to several
properties of shortest paths and relaxation. We state these properties
here, and Section 22.5 proves them formally. For your reference, each
property stated here includes the appropriate lemma or corollary number
from Section 22.5. The latter five of these properties, which refer to
shortest-path estimates or the predecessor subgraph, implicitly assume
that the graph is initialized with a call to INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G,
s) and that the only way that shortest-path estimates and the
predecessor subgraph change are by some sequence of relaxation steps.

Triangle inequality (Lemma 22.10)

For any edge (u, v) ∈ E, we have δ(s, v) ≤ δ(s, u) + w(u, v).

Upper-bound property (Lemma 22.11)

We always have v.d ≥ δ(s, v) for all vertices v ∈ V, and once v.d
achieves the value δ(s, v), it never changes.

No-path property (Corollary 22.12)

If there is no path from s to v, then we always have v.d = δ(s, v) = ∞.

Convergence property (Lemma 22.14)

If s ⇝ u → v is a shortest path in G for some u, v ∈ V, and if u.d =
δ(s, u) at any time prior to relaxing edge (u, v), then v.d = δ(s, v) at
all times afterward.

Path-relaxation property (Lemma 22.15)

If p = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉 is a shortest path from s = v₀ to v_(k),
and the edges of p are relaxed in the order (v₀, v₁), (v₁, v₂), … ,
(v_(k−1), v_(k)), then v_(k).d = δ(s, v_(k)). This property holds
regardless of any other relaxation steps that occur, even if they are
intermixed with relaxations of the edges of p.

Predecessor-subgraph property (Lemma 22.17)

Once v.d = δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V, the predecessor subgraph is a
shortest-paths tree rooted at s.

Chapter outline

Section 22.1 presents the Bellman-Ford algorithm, which solves the
single-source shortest-paths problem in the general case in which edges
can have negative weight. The Bellman-Ford algorithm is remarkably
simple, and it has the further benefit of detecting whether a
negative-weight cycle is reachable from the source. Section 22.2 gives a
linear-time algorithm for computing shortest paths from a single source
in a directed acyclic graph. Section 22.3 covers Dijkstra’s algorithm,
which has a lower running time than the Bellman-Ford algorithm but
requires the edge weights to be nonnegative. Section 22.4 shows how to
use the Bellman-Ford algorithm to solve a special case of linear
programming. Finally, Section 22.5 proves the properties of shortest
paths and relaxation stated above.

This chapter does arithmetic with infinities, and so we need some
conventions for when ∞ or −∞ appears in an arithmetic expression. We
assume that for any real number a ≠ −∞, we have a + ∞ = ∞ + a = ∞. Also,
to make our proofs hold in the presence of negative-weight cycles, we
assume that for any real number a ≠ ∞, we have a + (−∞) = (−∞) + a = −∞.

All algorithms in this chapter assume that the directed graph G is
stored in the adjacency-list representation. Additionally, stored with
each edge is its weight, so that as each algorithm traverses an
adjacency list, it can find edge weights in O(1) time per edge.

22.1    The Bellman-Ford algorithm

The Bellman-Ford algorithm solves the single-source shortest-paths
problem in the general case in which edge weights may be negative. Given
a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with source vertex s and weight
function w : E → ℝ, the Bellman-Ford algorithm returns a boolean value
indicating whether there is a negative-weight cycle that is reachable
from the source. If there is such a cycle, the algorithm indicates that
no solution exists. If there is no such cycle, the algorithm produces
the shortest paths and their weights.

The procedure BELLMAN-FORD relaxes edges, progressively decreasing an
estimate v.d on the weight of a shortest path from the source s to each
vertex v ∈ V until it achieves the actual shortest-path weight δ(s, v).
The algorithm returns TRUE if and only if the graph contains no
negative-weight cycles that are reachable from the source.

BELLMAN-FORD(G, w, s)

  --- --------------------------------
  1   INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s)
  2   for i = 1 to |G.V| − 1
  3   for each edge (u, v) ∈ G.E
  4   RELAX(u, v, w)
  5   for each edge (u, v) = G.E
  6   if v.d > u.d + w(u, v)
  7   return FALSE
  8   return TRUE
  --- --------------------------------

Figure 22.4 shows the execution of the Bellman-Ford algorithm on a graph
with 5 vertices. After initializing the d and π values of all vertices
in line 1, the algorithm makes |V| − 1 passes over the edges of the
graph. Each pass is one iteration of the for loop of lines 2–4 and
consists of relaxing each edge of the graph once. Figures 22.4(b)–(e)
show the state of the algorithm after each of the four passes over the
edges. After making |V| − 1 passes, lines 5–8 check for a
negative-weight cycle and return the appropriate boolean value. (We’ll
see a little later why this check works.)

[art]

Figure 22.4 The execution of the Bellman-Ford algorithm. The source is
vertex s. The d values appear within the vertices, and blue edges
indicate predecessor values: if edge (u, v) is blue, then v.π = u. In
this particular example, each pass relaxes the edges in the order (t,
x), (t, y), (t, z), (x, t), (y, x), (y, z), (z, x), (z, s), (s, t), (s,
y). (a) The situation just before the first pass over the edges. (b)–(e)
The situation after each successive pass over the edges. Vertices whose
shortest-path estimates and predecessors have changed due to a pass are
highlighted in orange. The d and π values in part (e) are the final
values. The Bellman-Ford algorithm returns TRUE in this example.

The Bellman-Ford algorithm runs in O(V² + VE) time when the graph is
represented by adjacency lists, since the initialization in line 1 takes
Θ(V) time, each of the |V| − 1 passes over the edges in lines 2–4 takes
Θ(V + E) time (examining |V| adjacency lists to find the |E| edges), and
the for loop of lines 5–7 takes O(V + E) time. Fewer than |V| − 1 passes
over the edges sometimes suffice (see Exercise 22.1-3), which is why we
say O(V²+VE) time, rather than Θ(V²+VE) time. In the frequent case where
|E| = Ω(V), we can express this running time as O(VE). Exercise 22.1-5
asks you to make the Bellman-Ford algorithm run in O(VE) time even when
|E| = o(V).

To prove the correctness of the Bellman-Ford algorithm, we start by
showing that if there are no negative-weight cycles, the algorithm
computes correct shortest-path weights for all vertices reachable from
the source.

Lemma 22.2

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s and
weight function w : E → ℝ, and assume that G contains no negative-weight
cycles that are reachable from s. Then, after the |V| − 1 iterations of
the for loop of lines 2–4 of BELLMAN-FORD, v.d = δ(s, v) for all
vertices v that are reachable from s.

Proof   We prove the lemma by appealing to the path-relaxation property.
Consider any vertex v that is reachable from s, and let p = 〈v₀, v₁, …
, v_(k)〉, where v₀ = s and v_(k) = v, be any shortest path from s to v.
Because shortest paths are simple, p has at most |V| − 1 edges, and so k
≤ |V| − 1. Each of the |V| − 1 iterations of the for loop of lines 2–4
relaxes all |E| edges. Among the edges relaxed in the ith iteration, for
i = 1, 2, … , k, is (v_(i−1), v_(i)). By the path-relaxation property,
therefore, v.d = v_(k).d = δ(s, v_(k)) = δ(s, v).

▪

Corollary 22.3

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s and
weight function w : E → ℝ. Then, for each vertex v ∈ V, there is a path
from s to v if and only if BELLMAN-FORD terminates with v.d < ∞ when it
is run on G.

Proof   The proof is left as Exercise 22.1-2.

▪

Theorem 22.4 (Correctness of the Bellman-Ford algorithm)

Let BELLMAN-FORD be run on a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with
source vertex s and weight function w : E → ℝ. If G contains no
negative-weight cycles that are reachable from s, then the algorithm
returns TRUE, v.d = δ(s, v) for all vertices v ∈ V, and the predecessor
subgraph G_(π) is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s. If G does contain a
negative-weight cycle reachable from s, then the algorithm returns
FALSE.

Proof   Suppose that graph G contains no negative-weight cycles that are
reachable from the source s. We first prove the claim that at
termination, v.d = δ(s, v) for all vertices v ∈ V. If vertex v is
reachable from s, then Lemma 22.2 proves this claim. If v is not
reachable from s, then the claim follows from the no-path property.
Thus, the claim is proven. The predecessor-subgraph property, along with
the claim, implies that G_(π) is a shortest-paths tree. Now we use the
claim to show that BELLMAN-FORD returns TRUE. At termination, for all
edges (u, v) ∈ E we have

  ----- --- ------------------------------------------------
  v.d   =   δ(s, v)
        ≤   δ(s, u) + w(u, v) (by the triangle inequality)
        =   u.d + w(u, v),
  ----- --- ------------------------------------------------

and so none of the tests in line 6 causes BELLMAN-FORD to return FALSE.
Therefore, it returns TRUE.

Now, suppose that graph G contains a negative-weight cycle reachable
from the source s. Let this cycle be c = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉, where v₀
= v_(k), in which case we have

[art]

Assume for the purpose of contradiction that the Bellman-Ford algorithm
returns TRUE. Thus, v_(i).d ≤ v_(i−1).d + w(v_(i−1), v_(i)) for i = 1,
2, … , k. Summing the inequalities around cycle c gives

[art]

Since v₀ = v_(k), each vertex in c appears exactly once in each of the
summations [art] and [art], and so

[art]

Moreover, by Corollary 22.3, v_(i).d is finite for i = 1, 2, … , k.
Thus,

[art]

which contradicts inequality (22.1). We conclude that the Bellman-Ford
algorithm returns TRUE if graph G contains no negative-weight cycles
reachable from the source, and FALSE otherwise.

▪

Exercises

22.1-1

Run the Bellman-Ford algorithm on the directed graph of Figure 22.4,
using vertex z as the source. In each pass, relax edges in the same
order as in the figure, and show the d and π values after each pass.
Now, change the weight of edge (z, x) to 4 and run the algorithm again,
using s as the source.

22.1-2

Prove Corollary 22.3.

22.1-3

Given a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with no negative-weight
cycles, let m be the maximum over all vertices v ∈ V of the minimum
number of edges in a shortest path from the source s to v. (Here, the
shortest path is by weight, not the number of edges.) Suggest a simple
change to the Bellman-Ford algorithm that allows it to terminate in m +
1 passes, even if m is not known in advance.

22.1-4

Modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm so that it sets v.d to −∞ for all
vertices v for which there is a negative-weight cycle on some path from
the source to v.

22.1-5

Suppose that the graph given as input to the Bellman-Ford algorithm is
represented with a list of |E| edges, where each edge indicates the
vertices it leaves and enters, along with its weight. Argue that the
Bellman-Ford algorithm runs in O(VE) time without the constraint that
|E| = Ω(V). Modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm so that it runs in O(VE)
time in all cases when the input graph is represented with adjacency
lists.

22.1-6

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
→ ℝ. Give an O(VE)-time algorithm to find, for all vertices v ∈ V, the
value δ*(v) = min {δ(u, v) : u ∈ V}.

22.1-7

Suppose that a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) contains a
negative-weight cycle. Give an efficient algorithm to list the vertices
of one such cycle. Prove that your algorithm is correct.

22.2    Single-source shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs

In this section, we introduce one further restriction on weighted,
directed graphs: they are acyclic. That is, we are concerned with
weighted dags. Shortest paths are always well defined in a dag, since
even if there are negative-weight edges, no negative-weight cycles can
exist. We’ll see that if the edges of a weighted dag G = (V, E) are
relaxed according to a topological sort of its vertices, it takes only
Θ(V + E) time to compute shortest paths from a single source.

The algorithm starts by topologically sorting the dag (see Section 20.4)
to impose a linear ordering on the vertices. If the dag contains a path
from vertex u to vertex v, then u precedes v in the topological sort.
The DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS procedure makes just one pass over the vertices
in the topologically sorted order. As it processes each vertex, it
relaxes each edge that leaves the vertex. Figure 22.5 shows the
execution of this algorithm.

DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS(G, w, s)

  --- --------------------------------------------------------------
  1   topologically sort the vertices of G
  2   INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s)
  3   for each vertex u ∈ G.V, taken in topologically sorted order
  4   for each vertex v in G.Adj[u]
  5   RELAX(u, v, w)
  --- --------------------------------------------------------------

Let’s analyze the running time of this algorithm. As shown in Section
20.4, the topological sort of line 1 takes Θ(V + E) time. The call of
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE in line 2 takes Θ(V) time. The for loop of
lines 3–5 makes one iteration per vertex. Altogether, the for loop of
lines 4–5 relaxes each edge exactly once. (We have used an aggregate
analysis here.) Because each iteration of the inner for loop takes Θ(1)
time, the total running time is Θ(V + E), which is linear in the size of
an adjacency-list representation of the graph.

The following theorem shows that the DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS procedure
correctly computes the shortest paths.

Theorem 22.5

If a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) has source vertex s and no
cycles, then at the termination of the DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS procedure, v.d
= δ(s, v) for all vertices v ∈ V, and the predecessor subgraph G_(π) is
a shortest-paths tree.

Proof   We first show that v.d = δ(s, v) for all vertices v ∈ V at
termination. If v is not reachable from s, then v.d = δ(s, v) = 1 by the
no-path property. Now, suppose that v is reachable from s, so that there
is a shortest path p = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉, where v₀ = s and v_(k) =
v. Because DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS processes the vertices in topologically
sorted order, it relaxes the edges on p in the order (v₀, v₁), (v₁, v₂),
… , (v_(k−1), v_(k)). The path-relaxation property implies that v_(i).d
= δ(s, v_(i)) at termination for i = 0, 1, … , k. Finally, by the
predecessor-subgraph property, G_(π) is a shortest-paths tree.

▪

A useful application of this algorithm arises in determining critical
paths in PERT chart² analysis. A job consists of several tasks. Each
task takes a certain amount of time, and some tasks must be completed
before others can be started. For example, if the job is to build a
house, then the foundation must be completed before starting to frame
the exterior walls, which must be completed before starting on the roof.
Some tasks require more than one other task to be completed before they
can be started: before the drywall can be installed over the wall
framing, both the electrical system and plumbing must be installed. A
dag models the tasks and dependencies. Edges represent tasks, with the
weight of an edge indicating the time required to perform the task.
Vertices represent “milestones,” which are achieved when all the tasks
represented by the edges entering the vertex have been completed. If
edge (u, v) enters vertex v and edge (v, x) leaves v, then task (u, v)
must be completed before task (v, x) is started. A path through this dag
represents a sequence of tasks that must be performed in a particular
order. A critical path is a longest path through the dag, corresponding
to the longest time to perform any sequence of tasks. Thus, the weight
of a critical path provides a lower bound on the total time to perform
all the tasks, even if as many tasks as possible are performed
simultaneously. You can find a critical path by either

- negating the edge weights and running DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS, or
- running DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS, but replacing “∞” by “−∞” in line 2 of
  INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE and “>” by “<” in the RELAX procedure.

[art]

Figure 22.5 The execution of the algorithm for shortest paths in a
directed acyclic graph. The vertices are topologically sorted from left
to right. The source vertex is s. The d values appear within the
vertices, and blue edges indicate the π values. (a) The situation before
the first iteration of the for loop of lines 3–5. (b)–(g) The situation
after each iteration of the for loop of lines 3–5. Blue vertices have
had their outgoing edges relaxed. The vertex highlighted in orange was
used as u in that iteration. Each edge highlighted in orange caused a d
value to change when it was relaxed in that iteration. The values shown
in part (g) are the final values.

Exercises

22.2-1

Show the result of running DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS on the directed acyclic
graph of Figure 22.5, using vertex r as the source.

22.2-2

Suppose that you change line 3 of DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS to read

  --- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  3   for the first |V| − 1 vertices, taken in topologically sorted order
  --- ---------------------------------------------------------------------

Show that the procedure remains correct.

22.2-3

An alternative way to represent a PERT chart looks more like the dag of
Figure 20.7 on page 574. Vertices represent tasks and edges represent
sequencing constraints, that is, edge (u, v) indicates that task u must
be performed before task v. Vertices, not edges, have weights. Modify
the DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS procedure so that it finds a longest path in a
directed acyclic graph with weighted vertices in linear time.

★ 22.2-4

Give an efficient algorithm to count the total number of paths in a
directed acyclic graph. The count should include all paths between all
pairs of vertices and all paths with 0 edges. Analyze your algorithm.

22.3    Dijkstra’s algorithm

Dijkstra’s algorithm solves the single-source shortest-paths problem on
a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E), but it requires nonnegative
weights on all edges: w(u, v) ≥ 0 for each edge (u, v) ∈ E. As we shall
see, with a good implementation, the running time of Dijkstra’s
algorithm is lower than that of the Bellman-Ford algorithm.

You can think of Dijkstra’s algorithm as generalizing breadth-first
search to weighted graphs. A wave emanates from the source, and the
first time that a wave arrives at a vertex, a new wave emanates from
that vertex. Whereas breadth-first search operates as if each wave takes
unit time to traverse an edge, in a weighted graph, the time for a wave
to traverse an edge is given by the edge’s weight. Because a shortest
path in a weighted graph might not have the fewest edges, a simple,
first-in, first-out queue won’t suffice for choosing the next vertex
from which to send out a wave.

Instead, Dijkstra’s algorithm maintains a set S of vertices whose final
shortest-path weights from the source s have already been determined.
The algorithm repeatedly selects the vertex u ∈ V – S with the minimum
shortest-path estimate, adds u into S, and relaxes all edges leaving u.
The procedure DIJKSTRA replaces the first-in, first-out queue of
breadth-first search by a min-priority queue Q of vertices, keyed by
their d values.

DIJKSTRA(G, w, s)

  ----- ------------------------------------
    1   INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s)
    2   S = Ø
    3   Q = Ø
    4   for each vertex u ∈ G.V
    5   INSERT(Q, u)
    6   while Q ≠ Ø
    7   u = EXTRACT-MIN(Q)
    8   S = S ∪ {u}
    9   for each vertex v in G.Adj[u]
  10    RELAX(u, v, w)
  11    if the call of RELAX decreased v.d
  12    DECREASE-KEY(Q, v, v.d)
  ----- ------------------------------------

Dijkstra’s algorithm relaxes edges as shown in Figure 22.6. Line 1
initializes the d and π values in the usual way, and line 2 initializes
the set S to the empty set. The algorithm maintains the invariant that Q
= V − S at the start of each iteration of the while loop of lines 6–12.
Lines 3–5 initialize the min-priority queue Q to contain all the
vertices in V. Since S = Ø at that time, the invariant is true upon
first reaching line 6. Each time through the while loop of lines 6–12,
line 7 extracts a vertex u from Q = V − S and line 8 adds it to set S,
thereby maintaining the invariant. (The first time through this loop, u
= s.) Vertex u, therefore, has the smallest shortest-path estimate of
any vertex in V − S. Then, lines 9–12 relax each edge (u, v) leaving u,
thus updating the estimate v.d and the predecessor v.π if the shortest
path to v found so far improves by going through u. Whenever a
relaxation step changes the d and π values, the call to DECREASE-KEY in
line 12 updates the min-priority queue. The algorithm never inserts
vertices into Q after the for loop of lines 4–5, and each vertex is
extracted from Q and added to S exactly once, so that the while loop of
lines 6–12 iterates exactly |V| times.

[art]

Figure 22.6 The execution of Dijkstra’s algorithm. The source s is the
leftmost vertex. The shortest-path estimates appear within the vertices,
and blue edges indicate predecessor values. Blue vertices belong to the
set S, and tan vertices are in the min-priority queue Q = V − S. (a) The
situation just before the first iteration of the while loop of lines
6–12. (b)–(f) The situation after each successive iteration of the while
loop. In each part, the vertex highlighted in orange was chosen as
vertex u in line 7, and each edge highlighted in orange caused a d value
and a predecessor to change when the edge was relaxed. The d values and
predecessors shown in part (f) are the final values.

Because Dijkstra’s algorithm always chooses the “lightest” or “closest”
vertex in V − S to add to set S, you can think of it as using a greedy
strategy. Chapter 15 explains greedy strategies in detail, but you need
not have read that chapter to understand Dijkstra’s algorithm. Greedy
strategies do not always yield optimal results in general, but as the
following theorem and its corollary show, Dijkstra’s algorithm does
indeed compute shortest paths. The key is to show that u.d = δ(s, u)
each time it adds a vertex u to set S.

[art]

Figure 22.7 The proof of Theorem 22.6. Vertex u is selected to be added
into set S in line 7 of DIJKSTRA. Vertex y is the first vertex on a
shortest path from the source s to vertex u that is not in set S, and x
∈ S is y’s predecessor on that shortest path. The subpath from y to u
may or may not re-enter set S.

Theorem 22.6 (Correctness of Dijkstra’s algorithm)

Dijkstra’s algorithm, run on a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with
nonnegative weight function w and source vertex s, terminates with u.d =
δ(s, u) for all vertices u ∈ V.

Proof   We will show that at the start of each iteration of the while
loop of lines 6–12, we have v.d = δ(s, v) for all v ∈ S. The algorithm
terminates when S = V, so that v.d = δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V.

The proof is by induction on the number of iterations of the while loop,
which equals |S| at the start of each iteration. There are two bases:
for |S| = 0, so that S = Ø and the claim is trivially true, and for |S|
= 1, so that S = {s} and s.d = δ(s, s) = 0.

For the inductive step, the inductive hypothesis is that v.d = δ(s, v)
for all v ∈ S. The algorithm extracts vertex u from V − S. Because the
algorithm adds u into S, we need to show that u.d = δ(s, u) at that
time. If there is no path from s to u, then we are done, by the no-path
property. If there is a path from s to u, then, as Figure 22.7 shows,
let y be the first vertex on a shortest path from s to u that is not in
S, and let x ∈ S be the predecessor of y on that shortest path. (We
could have y = u or x = s.) Because y appears no later than u on the
shortest path and all edge weights are nonnegative, we have δ(s, y) ≤
δ(s, u). Because the call of EXTRACT-MIN in line 7 returned u as having
the minimum d value in V − S, we also have u.d ≤ y.d, and the
upper-bound property gives δ(s, u) ≤ u.d.

Since x ∈ S, the inductive hypothesis implies that x.d = δ(s, x). During
the iteration of the while loop that added x into S, edge (x, y) was
relaxed. By the convergence property, y.d received the value of δ(s, y)
at that time. Thus, we have

δ(s, y) ≤ δ(s, u) ≤ u.d ≤ y.d and y.d = δ(s, y),

so that

δ(s, y) = δ(s, u) = u.d = y.d.

Hence, u.d = δ(s, u), and by the upper-bound property, this value never
changes again.

▪

Corollary 22.7

After Dijkstra’s algorithm is run on a weighted, directed graph G = (V,
E) with nonnegative weight function w and source vertex s, the
predecessor subgraph G_(π) is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s.

Proof   Immediate from Theorem 22.6 and the predecessor-subgraph
property.

▪

Analysis

How fast is Dijkstra’s algorithm? It maintains the min-priority queue Q
by calling three priority-queue operations: INSERT (in line 5),
EXTRACT-MIN (in line 7), and DECREASE-KEY (in line 12). The algorithm
calls both INSERT and EXTRACT-MIN once per vertex. Because each vertex u
∈ V is added to set S exactly once, each edge in the adjacency list
Adj[u] is examined in the for loop of lines 9–12 exactly once during the
course of the algorithm. Since the total number of edges in all the
adjacency lists is |E|, this for loop iterates a total of |E| times, and
thus the algorithm calls DECREASE-KEY at most |E| times overall.
(Observe once again that we are using aggregate analysis.)

Just as in Prim’s algorithm, the running time of Dijkstra’s algorithm
depends on the specific implementation of the min-priority queue Q. A
simple implementation takes advantage of the vertices being numbered 1
to |V|: simply store v.d in the vth entry of an array. Each INSERT and
DECREASE-KEY operation takes O(1) time, and each EXTRACT-MIN operation
takes O(V) time (since it has to search through the entire array), for a
total time of O(V² + E) = O(V²).

If the graph is sufficiently sparse—in particular, E = o(V²/lg V)—you
can improve the running time by implementing the min-priority queue with
a binary min-heap that includes a way to map between vertices and their
corresponding heap elements. Each EXTRACT-MIN operation then takes O(lg
V) time. As before, there are |V| such operations. The time to build the
binary min-heap is O(V). (As noted in Section 21.2, you don’t even need
to call BUILD-MIN-HEAP.) Each DECREASE-KEY operation takes O(lg V) time,
and there are still at most |E| such operations. The total running time
is therefore O((V + E) lg V), which is O(E lg V) in the typical case
that |E| = Ω(V). This running time improves upon the straightforward
O(V²)-time implementation if E = o(V²/lg V).

By implementing the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci heap (see page
478), you can improve the running time to O(V lg V + E). The amortized
cost of each of the |V| EXTRACT-MIN operations is O(lg V), and each
DECREASE-KEY call, of which there are at most |E|, takes only O(1)
amortized time. Historically, the development of Fibonacci heaps was
motivated by the observation that Dijkstra’s algorithm typically makes
many more DECREASE-KEY calls than EXTRACT-MIN calls, so that any method
of reducing the amortized time of each DECREASE-KEY operation to o(lg V)
without increasing the amortized time of EXTRACT-MIN would yield an
asymptotically faster implementation than with binary heaps.

Dijkstra’s algorithm resembles both breadth-first search (see Section
20.2) and Prim’s algorithm for computing minimum spanning trees (see
Section 21.2). It is like breadth-first search in that set S corresponds
to the set of black vertices in a breadth-first search. Just as vertices
in S have their final shortest-path weights, so do black vertices in a
breadth-first search have their correct breadth-first distances.
Dijkstra’s algorithm is like Prim’s algorithm in that both algorithms
use a min-priority queue to find the “lightest” vertex outside a given
set (the set S in Dijkstra’s algorithm and the tree being grown in
Prim’s algorithm), add this vertex into the set, and adjust the weights
of the remaining vertices outside the set accordingly.

Exercises

22.3-1

Run Dijkstra’s algorithm on the directed graph of Figure 22.2, first
using vertex s as the source and then using vertex z as the source. In
the style of Figure 22.6, show the d and π values and the vertices in
set S after each iteration of the while loop.

22.3-2

Give a simple example of a directed graph with negative-weight edges for
which Dijkstra’s algorithm produces an incorrect answer. Why doesn’t the
proof of Theorem 22.6 go through when negative-weight edges are allowed?

22.3-3

Suppose that you change line 6 of Dijkstra’s algorithm to read

  ------ ---------------
  6      while |Q| > 1
  ------ ---------------

This change causes the while loop to execute |V| − 1 times instead of
|V| times. Is this proposed algorithm correct?

22.3-4

Modify the DIJKSTRA procedure so that the priority queue Q is more like
the queue in the BFS procedure in that it contains only vertices that
have been reached from source s so far: Q ⊆ V − S and v ∈ Q implies v.d
≠ ∞.

22.3-5

Professor Gaedel has written a program that he claims implements
Dijkstra’s algorithm. The program produces v.d and v.π for each vertex v
∈ V. Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to check the output of the
professor’s program. It should determine whether the d and π attributes
match those of some shortest-paths tree. You may assume that all edge
weights are nonnegative.

22.3-6

Professor Newman thinks that he has worked out a simpler proof of
correctness for Dijkstra’s algorithm. He claims that Dijkstra’s
algorithm relaxes the edges of every shortest path in the graph in the
order in which they appear on the path, and therefore the
path-relaxation property applies to every vertex reachable from the
source. Show that the professor is mistaken by constructing a directed
graph for which Dijkstra’s algorithm relaxes the edges of a shortest
path out of order.

22.3-7

Consider a directed graph G = (V, E) on which each edge (u, v) ∈ E has
an associated value r(u, v), which is a real number in the range 0 ≤
r(u, v) ≤ 1 that represents the reliability of a communication channel
from vertex u to vertex v. Interpret r(u, v) as the probability that the
channel from u to v will not fail, and assume that these probabilities
are independent. Give an efficient algorithm to find the most reliable
path between two given vertices.

22.3-8

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with positive weight
function w : E → {1, 2, … , W} for some positive integer W, and assume
that no two vertices have the same shortest-path weights from source
vertex s. Now define an unweighted, directed graph G′ = (V ∪ V′, E′) by
replacing each edge (u, v) ∈ E with w(u, v) unit-weight edges in series.
How many vertices does G′ have? Now suppose that you run a breadth-first
search on G′. Show that the order in which the breadth-first search of
G′ colors vertices in V black is the same as the order in which
Dijkstra’s algorithm extracts the vertices of V from the priority queue
when it runs on G.

22.3-9

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with nonnegative weight
function w : E → {0, 1, … , W} for some nonnegative integer W. Modify
Dijkstra’s algorithm to compute the shortest paths from a given source
vertex s in O(W V + E) time.

22.3-10

Modify your algorithm from Exercise 22.3-9 to run in O((V + E) lg W)
time. (Hint: How many distinct shortest-path estimates can V − S contain
at any point in time?)

22.3-11

Suppose that you are given a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) in
which edges that leave the source vertex s may have negative weights,
all other edge weights are nonnegative, and there are no negative-weight
cycles. Argue that Dijkstra’s algorithm correctly finds shortest paths
from s in this graph.

22.3-12

Suppose that you have a weighted directed graph G = (V, E) in which all
edge weights are positive real values in the range [C, 2C] for some
positive constant C. Modify Dijkstra’s algorithm so that it runs in
O(V + E) time.

22.4    Difference constraints and shortest paths

Chapter 29 studies the general linear-programming problem, showing how
to optimize a linear function subject to a set of linear inequalities.
This section investigates a special case of linear programming that
reduces to finding shortest paths from a single source. The Bellman-Ford
algorithm then solves the resulting single-source shortest-paths
problem, thereby also solving the linear-programming problem.

Linear programming

In the general linear-programming problem, the input is an m × n matrix
A, an m-vector b, and an n-vector c. The goal is to find a vector x of n
elements that maximizes the objective function [art] subject to the m
constraints given by Ax ≤ b.

The most popular method for solving linear programs is the simplex
algorithm, which Section 29.1 discusses. Although the simplex algorithm
does not always run in time polynomial in the size of its input, there
are other linear-programming algorithms that do run in polynomial time.
We offer here two reasons to understand the setup of linear-programming
problems. First, if you know that you can cast a given problem as a
polynomial-sized linear-programming problem, then you immediately have a
polynomial-time algorithm to solve the problem. Second, faster
algorithms exist for many special cases of linear programming. For
example, the single-pair shortest-path problem (Exercise 22.4-4) and the
maximum-flow problem (Exercise 24.1-5) are special cases of linear
programming.

Sometimes the objective function does not matter: it’s enough just to
find any feasible solution, that is, any vector x that satisfies Ax ≤ b,
or to determine that no feasible solution exists. This section focuses
on one such feasibility problem.

Systems of difference constraints

In a system of difference constraints, each row of the
linear-programming matrix A contains one 1 and one −1, and all other
entries of A are 0. Thus, the constraints given by Ax ≤ b are a set of
mdifference constraints involving n unknowns, in which each constraint
is a simple linear inequality of the form

x_(j) − x_(i) ≤ b_(k),

where 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, i ≠ j, and 1 ≤ k ≤ m.

For example, consider the problem of finding a 5-vector x = (x_(i)) that
satisfies

[art]

This problem is equivalent to finding values for the unknowns x₁, x₂,
x₃, x₄, x₅, satisfying the following 8 difference constraints:

[art]

One solution to this problem is x = (−5, −3, 0, −1, −4), which you can
verify directly by checking each inequality. In fact, this problem has
more than one solution. Another is x′ = (0, 2, 5, 4, 1). These two
solutions are related: each component of x′ is 5 larger than the
corresponding component of x. This fact is not mere coincidence.

Lemma 22.8

Let x = (x₁, x₂, … , x_(n)) be a solution to a system Ax ≤ b of
difference constraints, and let d be any constant. Then x + d = (x₁ + d,
x₂ + d, … , x_(n) + d) is a solution to Ax ≤ b as well.

Proof   For each x_(i) and x_(j), we have (x_(j) + d) − (x_(i) + d) =
x_(j) − x_(i). Thus, if x satisfies Ax ≤ b, so does x + d.

▪

Systems of difference constraints occur in various applications. For
example, the unknowns x_(i) might be times at which events are to occur.
Each constraint states that at least a certain amount of time, or at
most a certain amount of time, must elapse between two events. Perhaps
the events are jobs to be performed during the assembly of a product. If
the manufacturer applies an adhesive that takes 2 hours to set at time
x₁ and has to wait until it sets to install a part at time x₂, then
there is a constraint that x₂ ≥ x₁ + 2 or, equivalently, that x₁ − x₂ ≤
−2. Alternatively, the manufacturer might require the part to be
installed after the adhesive has been applied but no later than the time
that the adhesive has set halfway. In this case, there is a pair of
constraints x₂ ≥ x₁ and x₂ ≤ x₁ + 1 or, equivalently, x₁ − x₂ ≤ 0 and x₂
− x₁ ≤ 1.

If all the constraints have nonnegative numbers on the right-hand
side—that is, if b_(i) ≥ 0 for i = 1, 2, … , m—then finding a feasible
solution is trivial: just set all the unknowns x_(i) equal to each
other. Then all the differences are 0, and every constraint is
satisfied. The problem of finding a feasible solution to a system of
difference constraints is interesting only if at least one constraint
has b_(i) < 0.

Constraint graphs

We can interpret systems of difference constraints from a
graph-theoretic point of view. For a system Ax ≤ b of difference
constraints, let’s view the m × n linear-programming matrix A as the
transpose of an incidence matrix (see Exercise 20.1-7) for a graph with
n vertices and m edges. Each vertex v_(i) in the graph, for i = 1, 2, …
, n, corresponds to one of the n unknown variables x_(i). Each directed
edge in the graph corresponds to one of the m inequalities involving two
unknowns.

More formally, given a system Ax ≤ b of difference constraints, the
corresponding constraint graph is a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E),
where

V = {v₀, v₁, … , v_(n)}

and

  ----- ----------------------------------------------------------
  E =   {(v_(i), v_(j)) : x_(j) − x_(i) ≤ b_(k) is a constraint}
           ∪ {(v₀, v₁), (v₀, v₂), (v₀, v₃), … , (v₀, v_(n))}.
  ----- ----------------------------------------------------------

The constraint graph includes the additional vertex v₀, as we shall see
shortly, to guarantee that the graph has some vertex that can reach all
other vertices. Thus, the vertex set V consists of a vertex v_(i) for
each unknown x_(i), plus an additional vertex v₀. The edge set E
contains an edge for each difference constraint, plus an edge (v₀,
v_(i)) for each unknown x_(i). If x_(j) − x_(i) ≤ b_(k) is a difference
constraint, then the weight of edge (v_(i), v_(j)) is w(v_(i), v_(j)) =
b_(k). The weight of each edge leaving v₀ is 0. Figure 22.8 shows the
constraint graph for the system (22.2)–(22.9) of difference constraints.

[art]

Figure 22.8 The constraint graph corresponding to the system
(22.2)–(22.9) of difference constraints. The value of δ(v₀, v_(i))
appears in each vertex v_(i). One feasible solution to the system is x =
(−5, −3, 0, −1, −4).

The following theorem shows how to solve a system of difference
constraints by finding shortest-path weights in the corresponding
constraint graph.

Theorem 22.9

Given a system Ax ≤ b of difference constraints, let G = (V, E) be the
corresponding constraint graph. If G contains no negative-weight cycles,
then

[art]

is a feasible solution for the system. If G contains a negative-weight
cycle, then there is no feasible solution for the system.

Proof   We first show that if the constraint graph contains no
negative-weight cycles, then equation (22.10) gives a feasible solution.
Consider any edge (v_(i), v_(j)) ∈ E. The triangle inequality implies
that δ(v₀, v_(j)) ≤ δ(v₀, v_(i)) + w(v_(i), v_(j)), which is equivalent
to δ(v₀, v_(j))−δ(v₀, v_(i)) ≤ w(v_(i), v_(j)). Thus, letting x_(i) =
δ(v₀, v_(i)) and x_(j) = δ(v₀, v_(j)) satisfies the difference
constraint x_(j) − x_(i) ≤ w(v_(i), v_(j)) that corresponds to edge
(v_(i), v_(j)).

Now we show that if the constraint graph contains a negative-weight
cycle, then the system of difference constraints has no feasible
solution. Without loss of generality, let the negative-weight cycle be c
= 〈v₁, v₂, … , v_(k)〉, where v₁ = v_(k). (The vertex v₀ cannot be on
cycle c, because it has no entering edges.) Cycle c corresponds to the
following difference constraints:

  ------------------- --- ----------------------
  x₂ − x₁             ≤   w(v₁, v₂),
  x₃ − x₂             ≤   w(v₂, v₃),
                      ⋮   
  x_(k−1) − x_(k−2)   ≤   w(v_(k−2), v_(k−1)),
  x_(k) − x_(k−1)     ≤   w(v_(k−1), v_(k)).
  ------------------- --- ----------------------

We’ll assume that x has a solution satisfying each of these k
inequalities and then derive a contradiction. The solution must also
satisfy the inequality that results from summing the k inequalities
together. In summing the left-hand sides, each unknown x_(i) is added in
once and subtracted out once (remember that v₁ = v_(k) implies x₁ =
x_(k)), so that the left-hand side sums to 0. The right-hand side sums
to the weight w(c) of the cycle, giving 0 ≤ w(c). But since c is a
negative-weight cycle, w(c) < 0, and we obtain the contradiction that 0
≤ w(c) < 0.

▪

Solving systems of difference constraints

Theorem 22.9 suggests how to use the Bellman-Ford algorithm to solve a
system of difference constraints. Because the constraint graph contains
edges from the source vertex v₀ to all other vertices, any
negative-weight cycle in the constraint graph is reachable from v₀. If
the Bellman-Ford algorithm returns TRUE, then the shortest-path weights
give a feasible solution to the system. In Figure 22.8, for example, the
shortest-path weights provide the feasible solution x = (−5, −3, 0, −1,
−4), and by Lemma 22.8, x = (d − 5, d − 3, d, d − 1, d − 4) is also a
feasible solution for any constant d. If the Bellman-Ford algorithm
returns FALSE, there is no feasible solution to the system of difference
constraints.

A system of difference constraints with m constraints on n unknowns
produces a graph with n + 1 vertices and n + m edges. Thus, the
Bellman-Ford algorithm provides a way to solve the system in O((n +
1)(n + m)) = O(n² + nm) time. Exercise 22.4-5 asks you to modify the
algorithm to run in O(nm) time, even if m is much less than n.

Exercises

22.4-1

Find a feasible solution or determine that no feasible solution exists
for the following system of difference constraints:

  --------- --- -----
  x₁ − x₂   ≤   1,
  x₁ − x₄   ≤   −4,
  x₂ − x₃   ≤   2,
  x₂ − x₅   ≤   7,
  x₂ − x₆   ≤   5,
  x₃ − x₆   ≤   10,
  x₄ − x₂   ≤   2,
  x₅ − x₁   ≤   −1,
  x₅ − x₄   ≤   3,
  x₆ − x₃   ≤   −8.
  --------- --- -----

22.4-2

Find a feasible solution or determine that no feasible solution exists
for the following system of difference constraints:

  --------- --- -----
  x₁ − x₂   ≤   4,
  x₁ − x₅   ≤   5,
  x₂ − x₄   ≤   −6,
  x₃ − x₂   ≤   1,
  x₄ − x₁   ≤   3,
  x₄ − x₃   ≤   5,
  x₄ − x₅   ≤   10,
  x₅ − x₃   ≤   −4,
  x₅ − x₄   ≤   −8.
  --------- --- -----

22.4-3

Can any shortest-path weight from the new vertex v₀ in a constraint
graph be positive? Explain.

22.4-4

Express the single-pair shortest-path problem as a linear program.

22.4-5

Show how to modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm slightly so that when
using it to solve a system of difference constraints with m inequalities
on n unknowns, the running time is O(nm).

22.4-6

Consider adding equality constraints of the form x_(i) = x_(j) + b_(k)
to a system of difference constraints. Show how to solve this variety of
constraint system.

22.4-7

Show how to solve a system of difference constraints by a
Bellman-Ford-like algorithm that runs on a constraint graph without the
extra vertex v₀.

★ 22.4-8

Let Ax ≤ b be a system of m difference constraints in n unknowns. Show
that the Bellman-Ford algorithm, when run on the corresponding
constraint graph, maximizes [art] subject to Ax ≤ b and x_(i) ≤ 0 for
all x_(i).

★ 22.4-9

Show that the Bellman-Ford algorithm, when run on the constraint graph
for a system Ax ≤ b of difference constraints, minimizes the quantity
(max {x_(i)}−min {x_(i)}) subject to Ax ≤ b. Explain how this fact might
come in handy if the algorithm is used to schedule construction jobs.

22.4-10

Suppose that every row in the matrix A of a linear program Ax ≤ b
corresponds to a difference constraint, a single-variable constraint of
the form x_(i) ≤ b_(k), or a single-variable constraint of the form
−x_(i) ≤ b_(k). Show how to adapt the Bellman-Ford algorithm to solve
this variety of constraint system.

22.4-11

Give an efficient algorithm to solve a system Ax ≤ b of difference
constraints when all of the elements of b are real-valued and all of the
unknowns x_(i) must be integers.

★ 22.4-12

Give an efficient algorithm to solve a system Ax ≤ b of difference
constraints when all of the elements of b are real-valued and a
specified subset of some, but not necessarily all, of the unknowns x_(i)
must be integers.

22.5    Proofs of shortest-paths properties

Throughout this chapter, our correctness arguments have relied on the
triangle inequality, upper-bound property, no-path property, convergence
property, path-relaxation property, and predecessor-subgraph property.
We stated these properties without proof on page 611. In this section,
we prove them.

The triangle inequality

In studying breadth-first search (Section 20.2), we proved as Lemma 20.1
a simple property of shortest distances in unweighted graphs. The
triangle inequality generalizes the property to weighted graphs.

Lemma 22.10 (Triangle inequality)

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
→ ℝ and source vertex s. Then, for all edges (u, v) ∈ E,

δ(s, v) ≤ δ(s, u) + w(u, v).

Proof   Suppose that p is a shortest path from source s to vertex v.
Then p has no more weight than any other path from s to v. Specifically,
path p has no more weight than the particular path that takes a shortest
path from source s to vertex u and then takes edge (u, v).

Exercise 22.5-3 asks you to handle the case in which there is no
shortest path from s to v.

▪

Effects of relaxation on shortest-path estimates

The next group of lemmas describes how shortest-path estimates are
affected by executing a sequence of relaxation steps on the edges of a
weighted, directed graph that has been initialized by
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.

Lemma 22.11 (Upper-bound property)

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
→ ℝ. Let s ∈ V be the source vertex, and let the graph be initialized by
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s). Then, v.d ≥ δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V, and
this invariant is maintained over any sequence of relaxation steps on
the edges of G. Moreover, once v.d achieves its lower bound δ(s, v), it
never changes.

Proof   We prove the invariant v.d ≥ δ(s, v) for all vertices v ∈ V by
induction over the number of relaxation steps.

For the base case, v.d ≥ δ(s, v) holds after initialization, since if
v.d = ∞, then v.d ≥ δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V − {s}, and since s.d = 0 ≥
δ(s, s). (Note that δ(s, s) = −∞ if s is on a negative-weight cycle and
that δ(s, s) = 0 otherwise.)

For the inductive step, consider the relaxation of an edge (u, v). By
the inductive hypothesis, x.d ≥ δ(s, x) for all x ∈ V prior to the
relaxation. The only d value that may change is v.d. If it changes, we
have

  ----- --- ------------------- -------------------------------
  v.d   =   u.d + w(u, v)       
        ≥   δ(s, u) + w(u, v)   (by the inductive hypothesis)
        ≥   δ(s, v)             (by the triangle inequality),
  ----- --- ------------------- -------------------------------

and so the invariant is maintained.

The value of v.d never changes once v.d = δ(s, v) because, having
achieved its lower bound, v.d cannot decrease since we have just shown
that v.d ≥ δ(s, v), and it cannot increase because relaxation steps do
not increase d values.

▪

Corollary 22.12 (No-path property)

Suppose that in a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with weight
function w : E → ℝ, no path connects a source vertex s ∈ V to a given
vertex v ∈ V. Then, after the graph is initialized by
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s), we have v.d = δ(s, v) = ∞, and this
equation is maintained as an invariant over any sequence of relaxation
steps on the edges of G.

Proof   By the upper-bound property, we always have ∞ = δ(s, v) ≤ v.d,
and thus v.d = ∞ = δ(s, v).

▪

Lemma 22.13

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
→ ℝ, and let (u, v) ∈ E. Then, immediately after edge (u, v) is relaxed
by a call of RELAX(u, v, w), we have v.d ≤ u.d + w(u, v).

Proof   If, just prior to relaxing edge (u, v), we have v.d > u.d + w(u,
v), then v.d = u.d + w(u, v) afterward. If, instead, v.d ≤ u.d + w(u, v)
just before the relaxation, then neither u.d nor v.d changes, and so v.d
≤ u.d + w(u, v) afterward.

▪

Lemma 22.14 (Convergence property)

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
→ ℝ, let s ∈ V be a source vertex, and let s ⇝ u → v be a shortest path
in G for some vertices u, v ∈ V. Suppose that G is initialized by
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s) and then a sequence of relaxation steps
that includes the call RELAX(u, v, w) is executed on the edges of G. If
u.d = δ(s, u) at any time prior to the call, then v.d = δ(s, v) at all
times after the call.

Proof   By the upper-bound property, if u.d = δ(s, u) at some point
prior to relaxing edge (u, v), then this equation holds thereafter. In
particular, after edge (u, v) is relaxed, we have

  ----- --- ------------------- ------------------------------
  v.d   ≤   u.d + w(u, v)       (by Lemma 22.13)
        =   δ(s, u) + w(u, v)   
        =   δ(s, u)             (by Lemma 22.1 on page 606).
  ----- --- ------------------- ------------------------------

The upper-bound property gives v.d ≥ δ(s, v), from which we conclude
that v.d = δ(s, v), and this equation is maintained thereafter.

▪

Lemma 22.15 (Path-relaxation property)

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
→ ℝ, and let s ∈ V be a source vertex. Consider any shortest path p =
〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉 from s = v₀ to v_(k). If G is initialized by
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s) and then a sequence of relaxation steps
occurs that includes, in order, relaxing the edges (v₀, v₁), (v₁, v₂), …
, (v_(k−1), v_(k)), then v_(k).d = δ(s, v_(k)) after these relaxations
and at all times afterward. This property holds no matter what other
edge relaxations occur, including relaxations that are intermixed with
relaxations of the edges of p.

Proof   We show by induction that after the ith edge of path p is
relaxed, we have v_(i).d = δ(s, v_(i)). For the base case, i = 0, and
before any edges of p have been relaxed, we have from the initialization
that v₀.d = s.d = 0 = δ(s, s). By the upper-bound property, the value of
s.d never changes after initialization.

For the inductive step, assume that v_(i−1).d = δ(s, v_(i−1)). What
happens when edge (v_(i−1), v_(i)) is relaxed? By the convergence
property, after this relaxation, we have v_(i).d = δ(s, v_(i)), and this
equation is maintained at all times thereafter.

▪

Relaxation and shortest-paths trees

We now show that once a sequence of relaxations has caused the
shortest-path estimates to converge to shortest-path weights, the
predecessor subgraph G_(π) induced by the resulting π values is a
shortest-paths tree for G. We start with the following lemma, which
shows that the predecessor subgraph always forms a rooted tree whose
root is the source.

Lemma 22.16

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
→ ℝ let s ∈ V be a source vertex, and assume that G contains no
negative-weight cycles that are reachable from s. Then, after the graph
is initialized by INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s), the predecessor
subgraph G_(π) forms a rooted tree with root s, and any sequence of
relaxation steps on edges of G maintains this property as an invariant.

Proof   Initially, the only vertex in G_(π) is the source vertex, and
the lemma is trivially true. Consider a predecessor subgraph G_(π) that
arises after a sequence of relaxation steps. We first prove that G_(π)
is acyclic. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that some relaxation
step creates a cycle in the graph G_(π). Let the cycle be c = 〈v₀, v₁,
… , v_(k)〉, where v_(k) = v₀. Then, v_(i).π = v_(i−1) for i = 1, 2, … ,
k and, without loss of generality, assume that relaxing edge (v_(k−1),
v_(k)) created the cycle in G_(π).

We claim that all vertices on cycle c are reachable from the source
vertex s. Why? Each vertex on c has a non-NIL predecessor, and so each
vertex on c was assigned a finite shortest-path estimate when it was
assigned its non-NIL π value. By the upper-bound property, each vertex
on cycle c has a finite shortest-path weight, which means that it is
reachable from s.

We’ll examine the shortest-path estimates on cycle c immediately before
the call RELAX(v_(k−1), v_(k), w) and show that c is a negative-weight
cycle, thereby contradicting the assumption that G contains no
negative-weight cycles that are reachable from the source. Just before
the call, we have v_(i).π = v_(i−1) for i = 1, 2, … , k − 1. Thus, for i
= 1, 2, … , k − 1, the last update to v_(i).d was by the assignment
v_(i).d = v_(i−1).d+w(v_(i−1), v_(i)). If v_(i−1).d changed since then,
it decreased. Therefore, just before the call RELAX(v_(k−1), v_(k), w),
we have

[art]

Because v_(k).π is changed by the call RELAX(v_(k−1), v_(k), w),
immediately beforehand we also have the strict inequality

v_(k).d > v_(k−1).d + wv_(k−1), v_(k)):

Summing this strict inequality with the k − 1 inequalities (22.11), we
obtain the sum of the shortest-path estimates around cycle c:

[art]

But

[art]

[art]

Figure 22.9 Showing that a simple path in G_(π) from source vertex s to
vertex v is unique. If G_(π) contains two paths p₁ (s ⇝ u ⇝ x → z ⇝ v)
and p₂ (s ⇝ u ⇝ y → z ⇝ v), where x ≠ y, then z.π = x and z.π = y, a
contradiction.

since each vertex in the cycle c appears exactly once in each summation.
This equation implies

[art]

Thus, the sum of weights around the cycle c is negative, which provides
the desired contradiction.

We have now proven that G_(π) is a directed, acyclic graph. To show that
it forms a rooted tree with root s, it suffices (see Exercise B.5-2 on
page 1175) to prove that for each vertex v ∈ V_(π), there is a unique
simple path from s to v in G_(π).

The vertices in V_(π) are those with non-NIL values, plus s. Exercise
22.5-6 asks you to prove that a path from s exists to each vertex in
V_(π).

To complete the proof of the lemma, we now show that for any vertex v ∈
V_(π), the graph G_(π) contains at most one simple path from s to v.
Suppose otherwise. That is, suppose that, as Figure 22.9 illustrates,
G_(π) contains two simple paths from s to some vertex v: p₁, which we
decompose into s ⇝ u ⇝ x → z ⇝ v, and p₂, which we decompose into s ⇝ u
⇝ y → z ⇝ v, where x ≠ y (though u could be s and z could be v). But
then, z.π = x and z.π = y, which implies the contradiction that x = y.
We conclude that G_(π) contains a unique simple path from s to v, and
thus G_(π) forms a rooted tree with root s.

▪

We can now show that if all vertices have been assigned their true
shortest-path weights after a sequence of relaxation steps, then the
predecessor subgraph G_(π) is a shortest-paths tree.

Lemma 22.17 (Predecessor-subgraph property)

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
→ ℝ, let s ∈ V be a source vertex, and assume that G contains no
negative-weight cycles that are reachable from s. Then, after a call to
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s) followed by any sequence of relaxation
steps on edges of G that produces v.d = δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V, the
predecessor subgraph G_(π) is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s.

Proof   We must prove that the three properties of shortest-paths trees
given on page 608 hold for G_(π). To show the first property, we must
show that V_(π) is the set of vertices reachable from s. By definition,
a shortest-path weight δ(s, v) is finite if and only if v is reachable
from s, and thus the vertices that are reachable from s are exactly
those with finite d values. But a vertex v ∈ V − {s} has been assigned a
finite value for v.d if and only if v.π ≠ NIL, since both assignments
occur in RELAX. Thus, the vertices in V_(π) are exactly those reachable
from s.

The second property, that G_(π) forms a rooted tree with root s, follows
directly from Lemma 22.16.

It remains, therefore, to prove the last property of shortest-paths
trees: for each vertex v ∈ V_(π), the unique simple path [art] in G_(π)
is a shortest path from s to v in G. Let p = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉,
where v₀ = s and v_(k) = v. Consider an edge (v_(i−1), v_(i)) in path p.
Because this edge belongs to G_(π), the last relaxation that changed
v_(i).d must have been of this edge. After that relaxation, we had
v_(i).d = v_(i−1).d + (v_(i−1), v_(i)). Subsequently, an edge entering
v_(i−1) could have been relaxed, causing v_(i−1).d to decrease further,
but without changing v_(i).d. Therefore, we have v_(i).d ≥ v_(i−1).d +
w(v_(i−1), v_(i)). Thus, for i = 1, 2, … , k, we have both v_(i).d =
δ(s, v_(i)) and v_(i).d ≥ v_(i−1).d + w(v_(i−1), v_(i)), which together
imply w(v_(i−1), v_(i)) ≤ δ(s, v_(i)) − δ(s, v_(i−1)). Summing the
weights along path p yields

[art]

Thus, we have w(p) ≤ δ(s, v_(k)). Since δ(s, v_(k)) is a lower bound on
the weight of any path from s to v_(k), we conclude that w(p) = δ(s,
v_(k)), and p is a shortest path from s to v = v_(k).

▪

Exercises

22.5-1

Give two shortest-paths trees for the directed graph of Figure 22.2 on
page 609 other than the two shown.

22.5-2

Give an example of a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with weight
function w : E → ℝ and source vertex s such that G satisfies the
following property: For every edge (u, v) ∈ E, there is a shortest-paths
tree rooted at s that contains (u, v) and another shortest-paths tree
rooted at s that does not contain (u, v).

22.5-3

Modify the proof of Lemma 22.10 to handle cases in which shortest-path
weights are ∞ or −∞.

22.5-4

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s, and
let G be initialized by INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s). Prove that if a
sequence of relaxation steps sets s.π to a non-NIL value, then G
contains a negative-weight cycle.

22.5-5

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with no negative-weight
edges. Let s ∈ V be the source vertex, and suppose that v.π is allowed
to be the predecessor of v on any shortest path to v from source s if v
∈ V − {s} is reachable from s, and NIL otherwise. Give an example of
such a graph G and an assignment of π values that produces a cycle in
G_(π). (By Lemma 22.16, such an assignment cannot be produced by a
sequence of relaxation steps.)

22.5-6

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
→ ℝ and no negative-weight cycles. Let s ∈ V be the source vertex, and
let G be initialized by INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s). Use induction to
prove that for every vertex v ∈ V_(π), there exists a path from s to v
in G_(π) and that this property is maintained as an invariant over any
sequence of relaxations.

22.5-7

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph that contains no
negative-weight cycles. Let s ∈ V be the source vertex, and let G be
initialized by INITIALIZESINGLE-SOURCE(G, s). Prove that there exists a
sequence of |V| − 1 relaxation steps that produces v.d = δ(s, v) for all
v ∈ V.

22.5-8

Let G be an arbitrary weighted, directed graph with a negative-weight
cycle reachable from the source vertex s. Show how to construct an
infinite sequence of relaxations of the edges of G such that every
relaxation causes a shortest-path estimate to change.

Problems

22-1     Yen’s improvement to Bellman-Ford

The Bellman-Ford algorithm does not specify the order in which to relax
edges in each pass. Consider the following method for deciding upon the
order. Before the first pass, assign an arbitrary linear order v₁, v₂, …
, v_(|V|) to the vertices of the input graph G = (V, E). Then partition
the edge set E into E_(f) ∪ E_(b), where E_(f) = {(v_(i), v_(j)) ∈ E : i
< j} and E_(b) = {(v_(i), v_(j)) ∈ E : i > j}. (Assume that G contains
no self-loops, so that every edge belongs to either E_(f) or E_(b).)
Define G_(f) = (V, E_(f)) and G_(b) = (V, E_(b)).

a. Prove that G_(f) is acyclic with topological sort 〈v₁, v₂, … ,
v_(|V|)〉 and that G_(b) is acyclic with topological sort 〈v_(|V|),
v_(|V|−1), … , v₁〉.

Suppose that each pass of the Bellman-Ford algorithm relaxes edges in
the following way. First, visit each vertex in the order v₁, v₂, … ,
v_(|V|), relaxing edges of E_(f) that leave the vertex. Then visit each
vertex in the order v_(|V|), v_(|V|−1), …, v₁, relaxing edges of E_(b)
that leave the vertex.

b. Prove that with this scheme, if G contains no negative-weight cycles
that are reachable from the source vertex s, then after only ⌈|V| / 2⌉
passes over the edges, v.d = δ(s, v) for all vertices v ∈ V.

c. Does this scheme improve the asymptotic running time of the
Bellman-Ford algorithm?

22-2     Nesting boxes

A d-dimensional box with dimensions (x₁, x₂, … , x_(d)) nests within
another box with dimensions (y₁, y₂, … , y_(d)) if there exists a
permutation π on {1, 2, … , d} such that x_(π(1)) < y₁, x_(π(2)) < y₂, …
, x_(π(d)) < y_(d).

a. Argue that the nesting relation is transitive.

b. Describe an efficient method to determine whether one d-dimensional
box nests inside another.

c. You are given a set of n d-dimensional boxes {B₁, B₂, … , B_(n)}.
Give an efficient algorithm to find the longest sequence [art] of boxes
such that [art] nests within [art] for j = 1, 2, … , k − 1. Express the
running time of your algorithm in terms of n and d.

22-3     Arbitrage

Arbitrage is the use of discrepancies in currency exchange rates to
transform one unit of a currency into more than one unit of the same
currency. For example, suppose that one U.S. dollar buys 64 Indian
rupees, one Indian rupee buys 1:8 Japanese yen, and one Japanese yen
buys 0:009 U.S. dollars. Then, by converting currencies, a trader can
start with 1 U.S. dollar and buy 64 × 1.8 × 0.009 = 1.0368 U.S. dollars,
thus turning a profit of 3.68%.

Suppose that you are given n currencies c₁, c₂, … , c_(n) and an n × n
table R of exchange rates, such that 1 unit of currency c_(i) buys R[i,
j] units of currency c_(j).

a. Give an efficient algorithm to determine whether there exists a
sequence of currencies [art] such that

R[i₁, i₂] · R[i₂, i₃] … R[i_(k−1), i_(k)] · R[i_(k), i₁] > 1.

Analyze the running time of your algorithm.

b. Give an efficient algorithm to print out such a sequence if one
exists. Analyze the running time of your algorithm.

22-4     Gabow’s scaling algorithm for single-source shortest paths

A scaling algorithm solves a problem by initially considering only the
highest-order bit of each relevant input value, such as an edge weight,
assuming that these values are nonnegative integers. The algorithm then
refines the initial solution by looking at the two highest-order bits.
It progressively looks at more and more high-order bits, refining the
solution each time, until it has examined all bits and computed the
correct solution.

This problem examines an algorithm for computing the shortest paths from
a single source by scaling edge weights. The input is a directed graph G
= (V, E) with nonnegative integer edge weights w. Let W = max {w(u, v) :
(u, v) = E} be the maximum weight of any edge. In this problem, you will
develop an algorithm that runs in O(E lg W) time. Assume that all
vertices are reachable from the source.

The scaling algorithm uncovers the bits in the binary representation of
the edge weights one at a time, from the most significant bit to the
least significant bit. Specifically, let k = ⌈lg(W + 1)⌉ be the number
of bits in the binary representation of W, and for i = 1, 2, … , k, let
w_(i)(u,v) = ⌊w(u,v)/2^(k–i)⌋. That is, w_(i) (u, v) is the
“scaled-down” version of w(u, v) given by the i most significant bits of
w(u, v). (Thus, w_(k)(u, v) = w(u, v) for all (u, v) ∈ E.) For example,
if k = 5 and w(u, v) = 25, which has the binary representation
〈11001〉, then w₃(u, v) = 〈110〉 = 6. Also with k = 5, if w(u, v) =
〈00100〉 = 4, then w₄(u, v) = 〈0010〉 = 2. Define δ_(i)(u, v) as the
shortest-path weight from vertex u to vertex v using weight function
w_(i), so that δ_(k)(u, v) = δ(u, v) for all u, v ∈ V. For a given
source vertex s, the scaling algorithm first computes the shortest-path
weights δ₁(s, v) for all v ∈ V, then computes δ₂(s, v) for all v ∈ V,
and so on, until it computes δ_(k)(s, v) for all v ∈ V. Assume
throughout that |E| ≥ |V| − 1. You will show how to compute δ_(i) from
δ_(i−1) in O(E) time, so that the entire algorithm takes O(kE) = O(E lg
W) time.

a. Suppose that for all vertices v ∈ V, we have δ(s, v) ≤ |E|. Show how
to compute δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V in O(E) time.

b. Show how to compute δ₁(s, v) for all v ∈ V in O(E) time.

Now focus on computing δ_(i) from δ_(i−1).

c. Prove that for i = 2, 3, … , k, either w_(i)(u, v) = 2w_(i−1)(u, v)
or w_(i)(u, v) = 2w_(i−1)(u, v) + 1. Then prove that

2δ_(i−1)(s, v) ≤ δ_(i)(s, v) ≤ 2δ_(i−1)(s, v) + |V| − 1

for all v ∈ V.

d. Define, for i = 2, 3, … , k and all (u, v) ∈ E,

ŵ_(i)(u, v) = w_(i)(u, v) + 2δ_(i−1)(s, u) − 2δ_(i−1)(s, v).

Prove that for i = 2, 3, … , k and all u, v ∈ V, the “reweighted” value
ŵ_(i)(u, v) of edge (u, v) is a nonnegative integer.

e. Now define [art] as the shortest-path weight from s to v using the
weight function ŵ_(i). Prove that for i = 2, 3, … , k and all v ∈ V,

[art]

and that [art].

f. Show how to compute δ_(i)(s, v) from δ_(i−1)(s, v) for all v ∈ V in
O(E) time. Conclude that you can compute δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V in O(E lg
W) time.

22-5     Karp’s minimum mean-weight cycle algorithm

Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph with weight function w : E → ℝ, and
let n = |V|. We define the mean weight of a cycle c = 〈e₁, e₂, … ,
e_(k)〉 of edges in E to be

[art]

Let μ* = min {μ(c) : c is a directed cycle in G}. We call a cycle c for
which μ(c) = μ* a minimum mean-weight cycle. This problem investigates
an efficient algorithm for computing μ*.

Assume without loss of generality that every vertex v ∈ V is reachable
from a source vertex s ∈ V. Let δ(s, v) be the weight of a shortest path
from s to v, and let δ_(k)(s, v) be the weight of a shortest path from s
to v consisting of exactly k edges. If there is no path from s to v with
exactly k edges, then δ_(k)(s, v) = ∞.

a. Show that if μ* = 0, then G contains no negative-weight cycles and
δ(s, v) = min {δ_(k)(s, v) : 0 ≤ k ≤ n − 1} for all vertices v ∈ V.

b. Show that if μ* = 0, then

[art]

for all vertices v ∈ V. (Hint: Use both properties from part (a).)

c. Let c be a 0-weight cycle, and let u and v be any two vertices on c.
Suppose that μ* = 0 and that the weight of the simple path from u to v
along the cycle is x. Prove that δ(s, v) = δ(s, u) + x. (Hint: The
weight of the simple path from v to u along the cycle is −x.)

d. Show that if μ* = 0, then on each minimum mean-weight cycle there
exists a vertex v such that

[art]

(Hint: Show how to extend a shortest path to any vertex on a minimum
mean-weight cycle along the cycle to make a shortest path to the next
vertex on the cycle.)

e. Show that if μ* = 0, then the minimum value of

[art]

taken over all vertices v ∈ V, equals 0.

f. Show that if you add a constant t to the weight of each edge of G,
then μ* increases by t. Use this fact to show that μ* equals the minimum
value of

[art]

taken over all vertices v ∈ V.

g. Give an O(VE)-time algorithm to compute μ*.

22-6     Bitonic shortest paths

A sequence is bitonic if it monotonically increases and then
monotonically decreases, or if by a circular shift it monotonically
increases and then monotonically decreases. For example the sequences
〈1, 4, 6, 8, 3, −2〉, 〈9, 2, −4, −10, −5〉, and 〈1, 2, 3, 4〉 are
bitonic, but 〈1, 3, 12, 4, 2, 10〉 is not bitonic. (See Problem 14-3 on
page 407 for the bitonic euclidean traveling-salesperson problem.)

Suppose that you are given a directed graph G = (V, E) with weight
function w : E → ℝ, where all edge weights are unique, and you wish to
find single-source shortest paths from a source vertex s. You are given
one additional piece of information: for each vertex v ∈ V, the weights
of the edges along any shortest path from s to v form a bitonic
sequence.

Give the most efficient algorithm you can to solve this problem, and
analyze its running time.

Chapter notes

The shortest-path problem has a long history that is nicely desribed in
an article by Schrijver [400]. He credits the general idea of repeatedly
executing edge relaxations to Ford [148]. Dijkstra’s algorithm [116]
appeared in 1959, but it contained no mention of a priority queue. The
Bellman-Ford algorithm is based on separate algorithms by Bellman [45]
and Ford [149]. The same algorithm is also attributed to Moore [334].
Bellman describes the relation of shortest paths to difference
constraints. Lawler [276] describes the linear-time algorithm for
shortest paths in a dag, which he considers part of the folklore.

When edge weights are relatively small nonnegative integers, more
efficient algorithms result from using min-priority queues that require
integer keys and rely on the sequence of values returned by the
EXTRACT-MIN calls in Dijkstra’s algorithm monotonically increasing over
time. Ahuja, Mehlhorn, Orlin, and Tarjan [8] give an algorithm that runs
in [art] time on graphs with nonnegative edge weights, where W is the
largest weight of any edge in the graph. The best bounds are by Thorup
[436], who gives an algorithm that runs in O(E lg lg V) time, and by
Raman [375], who gives an algorithm that runs in O(E + V min {(lg
V)^(1/3+ε), (lg W)^(1/4+ε)}) time. These two algorithms use an amount of
space that depends on the word size of the underlying machine. Although
the amount of space used can be unbounded in the size of the input, it
can be reduced to be linear in the size of the input using randomized
hashing.

For undirected graphs with integer weights, Thorup [435] gives an
algorithm that runs in O(V + E) time for single-source shortest paths.
In contrast to the algorithms mentioned in the previous paragraph, the
sequence of values returned by EXTRACT-MIN calls does not monotonically
increase over time, and so this algorithm is not an implementation of
Dijkstra’s algorithm. Pettie and Ramachandran [357] remove the
restriction of integer weights on undirected graphs. Their algorithm
entails a preprocessing phase, followed by queries for specific source
vertices. Preprocessing takes O(MST(V, E) + min {V lg V, V lg lg r})
time, where MST(V, E) is the time to compute a minimum spanning tree and
r is the ratio of the maximum edge weight to the minimum edge weight.
After preprocessing, each query takes [art] time, where [art] is the
inverse of Ackermann’s function. (See the chapter notes for Chapter 19
for a brief discussion of Ackermann’s function and its inverse.)

For graphs with negative edge weights, an algorithm due to Gabow and
Tarjan [167] runs in [art] time, and one by Goldberg [186] runs in [art]
time, where W = max {|w(u, v)| : (u, v) ∈ E}. There has also been some
progress based on methods that use continuous optimization and
electrical flows. Cohen et al. [98] give such an algorithm, which is
randomized and runs in Õ(E^(10/7) lg W) expected time (see Problem 3-6
on page 73 for the defintion of Õ-notation). There is also a
pseudopolyomial-time algorithm based on fast matrix multiplication.
Sankowski [394] and Yuster and Zwick [465] designed an algorithm for
shortest paths that runs in Õ(W V^(ω)) time, where two n × n matrices
can be multiplied in O(n^(ω)) time, giving a faster algorithm than the
previously mentioned algorithms for small values of W on dense graphs.

Cherkassky, Goldberg, and Radzik [89] conducted extensive experiments
comparing various shortest-path algorithms. Shortest-path algorithms are
widely used in real-time navigation and route-planning applications.
Typically based on Dijkstra’s algorithm, these algorithms use many
clever ideas to be able to compute shortest paths on networks with many
millions of vertices and edges in fractions of a second. Bast et al.
[36] survey many of these developments.

¹ It may seem strange that the term “relaxation” is used for an
operation that tightens an upper bound. The use of the term is
historical. The outcome of a relaxation step can be viewed as a
relaxation of the constraint v.d ≤ u.d + w(u, v), which, by the triangle
inequality (Lemma 22.10 on page 633), must be satisfied if u.d = δ(s, u)
and v.d = δ(s, v). That is, if v.d ≤ u.d + w(u, v), there is no
“pressure” to satisfy this constraint, so the constraint is “relaxed.”

² “PERT” is an acronym for “program evaluation and review technique.”

23        All-Pairs Shortest Paths

In this chapter, we turn to the problem of finding shortest paths
between all pairs of vertices in a graph. A classic application of this
problem occurs in computing a table of distances between all pairs of
cities for a road atlas. Classic perhaps, but not a true application of
finding shortest paths between all pairs of vertices. After all, a road
map modeled as a graph has one vertex for every road intersection and
one edge wherever a road connects intersections. A table of intercity
distances in an atlas might include distances for 100 cities, but the
United States has approximately 300,000 signal-controlled intersections¹
and many more uncontrolled intersections.

A legitimate application of all-pairs shortest paths is to determine the
diameter of a network: the longest of all shortest paths. If a directed
graph models a communication network, with the weight of an edge
indicating the time required for a message to traverse a communication
link, then the diameter gives the longest possible transit time for a
message in the network.

As in Chapter 22, the input is a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E)
with a weight function w : E → ℝ that maps edges to real-valued weights.
Now the goal is to find, for every pair of vertices u, v ∈ V, a shortest
(least-weight) path from u to v, where the weight of a path is the sum
of the weights of its constituent edges. For the all-pairs problem, the
output typically takes a tabular form in which the entry in u’s row and
v’s column is the weight of a shortest path from u to v.

You can solve an all-pairs shortest-paths problem by running a
single-source shortest-paths algorithm |V| times, once with each vertex
as the source. If all edge weights are nonnegative, you can use
Dijkstra’s algorithm. If you implement the min-priority queue with a
linear array, the running time is O(V³ + VE) which is O(V³). The binary
min-heap implementation of the min-priority queue yields a running time
of O(V(V + E) lg V). If |E| = Ω(V), the running time becomes O(VE lg V),
which is faster than O(V³) if the graph is sparse. Alternatively, you
can implement the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci heap, yielding a
running time of O(V² lg V + VE).

If the graph contains negative-weight edges, Dijkstra’s algorithm
doesn’t work, but you can run the slower Bellman-Ford algorithm once
from each vertex. The resulting running time is O(V²E), which on a dense
graph is O(V⁴). This chapter shows how to guarantee a much better
asymptotic running time. It also investigates the relation of the
all-pairs shortest-paths problem to matrix multiplication.

Unlike the single-source algorithms, which assume an adjacency-list
representation of the graph, most of the algorithms in this chapter
represent the graph by an adjacency matrix. (Johnson’s algorithm for
sparse graphs, in Section 23.3, uses adjacency lists.) For convenience,
we assume that the vertices are numbered 1, 2, … , |V|, so that the
input is an n × n matrix W = (w_(ij)) representing the edge weights of
an n-vertex directed graph G = (V, E), where

[art]

The graph may contain negative-weight edges, but we assume for the time
being that the input graph contains no negative-weight cycles.

The tabular output of each of the all-pairs shortest-paths algorithms
presented in this chapter is an n × n matrix. The (i, j) entry of the
output matrix contains δ(i, j), the shortest-path weight from vertex i
to vertex j, as in Chapter 22.

A full solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem includes not
only the shortest-path weights but also a predecessor matrix Π =
(π_(ij)), where π_(ij) is NIL if either i = j or there is no path from i
to j, and otherwise π_(ij) is the predecessor of j on some shortest path
from i. Just as the predecessor subgraph G_(π) from Chapter 22 is a
shortest-paths tree for a given source vertex, the subgraph induced by
the ith row of the Π matrix should be a shortest-paths tree with root i.
For each vertex i ∈ V, the predecessor subgraph of G for i is G_(π,i) =
(V_(π,i), E_(π,i)), where

  --------- --- ------------------------------------
  V_(π,i)   =   {j ∈ V : π_(ij) ≠ NIL} ∪ {i},
  E_(π,i)   =   {(π_(ij), j) : j ∈ V_(π,i) − {i}}.
  --------- --- ------------------------------------

If G_(π,i) is a shortest-paths tree, then PRINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PATH
on the following page, which is a modified version of the PRINT-PATH
procedure from Chapter 20, prints a shortest path from vertex i to
vertex j.

In order to highlight the essential features of the all-pairs algorithms
in this chapter, we won’t cover how to compute predecessor matrices and
their properties as extensively as we dealt with predecessor subgraphs
in Chapter 22. Some of the exercises cover the basics.

PRINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PATH(Π, i, j)

  --- --------------------------------------------------
  1   if i == j
  2   print i
  3   elseif π_(ij) == NIL
  4   print “no path from” i “to” j “exists”
  5   else PRINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PATH(Π, i, π_(ij))
  6   print j
  --- --------------------------------------------------

Chapter outline

Section 23.1 presents a dynamic-programming algorithm based on matrix
multiplication to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem. The
technique of “repeated squaring” yields a running time of Θ(V³ lg V).
Section 23.2 gives another dynamic-programming algorithm, the
Floyd-Warshall algorithm, which runs in Θ(V³) time. Section 23.2 also
covers the problem of finding the transitive closure of a directed
graph, which is related to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem.
Finally, Section 23.3 presents Johnson’s algorithm, which solves the
all-pairs shortest-paths problem in O(V² lg V + VE) time and is a good
choice for large, sparse graphs.

Before proceeding, we need to establish some conventions for
adjacency-matrix representations. First, we generally assume that the
input graph G = (V, E) has n vertices, so that n = |V|. Second, we use
the convention of denoting matrices by uppercase letters, such as W, L,
or D, and their individual elements by subscripted lowercase letters,
such as w_(ij), l_(ij), or d_(ij). Finally, some matrices have
parenthesized superscripts, as in [art] or [art], to indicate iterates.

23.1    Shortest paths and matrix multiplication

This section presents a dynamic-programming algorithm for the all-pairs
shortest-paths problem on a directed graph G = (V, E). Each major loop
of the dynamic program invokes an operation similar to matrix
multiplication, so that the algorithm looks like repeated matrix
multiplication. We’ll start by developing a Θ(V⁴)-time algorithm for the
all-pairs shortest-paths problem, and then we’ll improve its running
time to Θ(V³ lg V).

Before proceeding, let’s briefly recap the steps given in Chapter 14 for
developing a dynamic-programming algorithm:

1.  Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.
2.  Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.
3.  Compute the value of an optimal solution in a bottom-up fashion.

We reserve the fourth step—constructing an optimal solution from
computed information—for the exercises.

The structure of a shortest path

Let’s start by characterizing the structure of an optimal solution.
Lemma 22.1 tells us that all subpaths of a shortest path are shortest
paths. Consider a shortest path p from vertex i to vertex j, and suppose
that p contains at most r edges. Assuming that there are no
negative-weight cycles, r is finite. If i = j, then p has weight 0 and
no edges. If vertices i and j are distinct, then decompose path p into
[art], where path p′ now contains at most r − 1 edges. Lemma 22.1 says
that p′ is a shortest path from i to k, and so δ(i, j) = δ(i, k) +
w_(kj).

A recursive solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem

Now, let [art] be the minimum weight of any path from vertex i to vertex
j that contains at most r edges. When r = 0, there is a shortest path
from i to j with no edges if and only if i = j, yielding

[art]

For r ≥ 1, one way to achieve a minimum-weight path from i to j with at
most r edges is by taking a path containing at most r − 1 edges, so that
[art]. Another way is by taking a path of at most r − 1 edges from i to
some vertex k and then taking the edge (k, j), so that [art]. Therefore,
to examine paths from i to j consisting of at most r edges, try all
possible predecessors k of j, giving the recursive definition

[art]

The last equality follows from the observation that w_(jj) = 0 for all
j.

What are the actual shortest-path weights δ(i, j)? If the graph contains
no negative-weight cycles, then whenever δ(i, j) < ∞, there is a
shortest path from vertex i to vertex j that is simple. (A path p from i
to j that is not simple contains a cycle. Since each cycle’s weight is
nonnegative, removing all cycles from the path leaves a simple path with
weight no greater than p’s weight.) Because any simple path contains at
most n − 1 edges, a path from vertex i to vertex j with more than n − 1
edges cannot have lower weight than a shortest path from i to j. The
actual shortest-path weights are therefore given by

[art]

Computing the shortest-path weights bottom up

Taking as input the matrix W = (w_(ij)), let’s see how to compute a
series of matrices L⁽⁰⁾, L⁽¹⁾, … , L^((n−1)), where [art] for r = 0, 1,
… , n − 1. The initial matrix is L⁽⁰⁾ given by equation (23.2). The
final matrix L^((n−1)) contains the actual shortest-path weights.

The heart of the algorithm is the procedure EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS, which
implements equation (23.3) for all i and j. The four inputs are the
matrix L^((r−1)) computed so far; the edge-weight matrix W; the output
matrix L^((r)), which will hold the computed result and whose elements
are all initialized to ∞ before invoking the procedure; and the number n
of vertices. The superscripts r and r − 1 help to make the
correspondence of the pseudocode with equation (23.3) plain, but they
play no actual role in the pseudocode. The procedure extends the
shortest paths computed so far by one more edge, producing the matrix
L^((r)) of shortest-path weights from the matrix L^((r−1)) computed so
far. Its running time is Θ(n³) due to the three nested for loops.

EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS(L^((r−1)), W, L^((r)), n)

  --- --------------------------------------------------------------
  1   // Assume that the elements of L^((r)) are initialized to ∞.
  2   for i = 1 to n
  3   for j = 1 to n
  4   for k = 1 to n
  5   [art]
  --- --------------------------------------------------------------

Let’s now understand the relation of this computation to matrix
multiplication. Consider how to compute the matrix product C = A · B of
two n × n matrices A and B. The straightforward method used by
MATRIX-MULTIPLY on page 81 uses a triply nested loop to implement
equation (4.1), which we repeat here for convenience:

[art]

for i, j = 1, 2, … , n. Now make the substitutions

  ----------- ----- ----
  l^((r−1))    →    a,
  w            →    b,
  l^((r))      →    c,
  min          →    +,
  +            →    .
  ----------- ----- ----

in equation (23.3). You get equation (23.5)! Making these changes to
EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS, and also replacing ∞ (the identity for min) by 0
(the identity for +), yields the procedure MATRIX-MULTIPLY. We can see
that the procedure EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS(L^((r−1)), W, L^((r)), n)
computes the matrix “product” L^((r)) = L^((r−1)). W using this unusual
definition of matrix multiplication.²

Thus, we can solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem by repeatedly
multiplying matrices. Each step extends the shortest-path weights
computed so far by one more edge using EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS(L^((r−1)),
W, L^((r)), n) to perform the matrix multiplication. Starting with the
matrix L⁽⁰⁾, we produce the following sequence of n − 1 matrices
corresponding to powers of W:

  ----------- --- --------------- --- ----------
  L⁽¹⁾        =   L⁽⁰⁾ · W        =   W¹,
  L⁽²⁾        =   L⁽¹⁾ · W        =   W²,
  L⁽³⁾        =   L⁽²⁾ · W        =   W³,
                  ⋮                   
  L^((n−1))   =   L^((n−2)) · W   =   W^(n−1).
  ----------- --- --------------- --- ----------

At the end, the matrix L^((n−1)) = W^(n−1) contains the shortest-path
weights.

The procedure SLOW-APSP on the next page computes this sequence in Θ(n⁴)
time. The procedure takes the n × n matrices W and L⁽⁰⁾ as inputs, along
with n. Figure 23.1 illustrates its operation. The pseudocode uses two n
× n matrices L and M to store powers of W, computing M = L · W on each
iteration. Line 2 initializes L = L⁽⁰⁾. For each iteration r, line 4
initializes M = ∞, where ∞ in this context is a matrix of scalar ∞
values. The rth iteration starts with the invariant L = L^((r−1)) =
W^(r−1). Line 6 computes M = L · W = L^((r−1)) · W = W^(r−1) · W = W^(r)
= L^((r)) so that the invariant can be restored for the next iteration
by line 7, which sets L = M. At the end, the matrix L = L^((n−1)) =
W^(n−1) of shortest-path weights is returned. The assignments to n × n
matrices in lines 2, 4, and 7 implicitly run doubly nested loops that
take Θ(n²) time for each assignment. The n − 1 invocations of
EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS, each of which takes Θ(n³) time, dominate the
computation, yielding a total running time of Θ(n⁴).

[art]

Figure 23.1 A directed graph and the sequence of matrices L^((r))
computed by SLOW-APSP. You might want to verify that L⁽⁵⁾, defined as
L⁽⁴⁾ · W, equals L⁽⁴⁾, and thus L^((r)) = L⁽⁴⁾ for all r ≥ 4.

SLOW-APSP(W, L⁽⁰⁾, n)

  --- ---------------------------------------------------------
  1   let L = (l_(ij)) and M = (m_(ij)) be new n × n matrices
  2   L = L⁽⁰⁾
  3   for r = 1 to n − 1
  4   M = ∞       // initialize M
  5   // Compute the matrix “product” M = L · W.
  6   EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS(L, W, M, n)
  7   L = M
  8   return L
  --- ---------------------------------------------------------

Improving the running time

Bear in mind that the goal is not to compute all the L^((r)) matrices:
only the matrix L^((n−1)) matters. Recall that in the absence of
negative-weight cycles, equation (23.4) implies L^((r)) = L^((n−1)) for
all integers r ≥ n − 1. Just as traditional matrix multiplication is
associative, so is matrix multiplication defined by the
EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS procedure (see Exercise 23.1-4). In fact, we can
compute L^((n−1)) with only ⌈lg(n – 1)⌉ matrix products by using the
technique of repeated squaring:

[art]

Since 2^(⌈lg(n – 1)⌉) ≥ n – 1, the final product is [art].

The procedure FASTER-APSP implements this idea. It takes just the n × n
matrix W and the size n as inputs. Each iteration of the while loop of
lines 4–8 starts with the invariant L = W^(r), which it squares using
EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS to obtain the matrix M = L² = (W^(r))² = W^(2r).
At the end of each iteration, the value of r doubles, and L for the next
iteration becomes M, restoring the invariant. Upon exiting the loop when
r ≥ n − 1, the procedure returns L = W^(r) = L^((r)) = L^((n−1)) by
equation (23.4). As in SLOW-APSP, the assignments to n × n matrices in
lines 2, 5, and 8 implicitly run doubly nested loops, taking Θ(n²) time
for each assignment.

FASTER-APSP(W, n)

+---+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| 1 | let L and M be new n × n matrices                         |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| 2 | L = W                                                     |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| 3 | r = 1                                                     |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| 4 | while r < n − 1                                           |
+---+-------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 5 | M = ∞             | // initialize M                       |
+---+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| 6 | EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS(L, L, M, n)     | // compute M = L² |
+---+---------------------------------------+-------------------+
| 7 | r = 2r                                                    |
+---+-------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 8 | L = M             | // ready for the next iteration       |
+---+-------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 9 | return L                                                  |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------+

Because each of the ⌈lg(n – 1)⌉ matrix products takes Θ(n³) time,
FASTER-APSP runs in Θ(n³ lg n) time. The code is tight, containing no
elaborate data structures, and the constant hidden in the Θ-notation is
therefore small.

Exercises

23.1-1

Run SLOW-APSP on the weighted, directed graph of Figure 23.2, showing
the matrices that result for each iteration of the loop. Then do the
same for FASTER-APSP.

[art]

Figure 23.2 A weighted, directed graph for use in Exercises 23.1-1,
23.2-1, and 23.3-1.

23.1-2

Why is it convenient for both SLOW-APSP and FASTER-APSP that w_(ii) = 0
for i = 1, 2, … , n?

23.1-3

What does the matrix

[art]

used in the shortest-paths algorithms correspond to in regular matrix
multiplication?

23.1-4

Show that matrix multiplication defined by EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS is
associative.

23.1-5

Show how to express the single-source shortest-paths problem as a
product of matrices and a vector. Describe how evaluating this product
corresponds to a Bellman-Ford-like algorithm (see Section 22.1).

23.1-6

Argue that we don’t need the matrix M in SLOW-APSP because by
substituting L for M and leaving out the initialization of M, the code
still works correctly. (Hint: Relate line 5 of EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS to
RELAX on page 610.) Do we need the matrix M in FASTER-APSP?

23.1-7

Suppose that you also want to compute the vertices on shortest paths in
the algorithms of this section. Show how to compute the predecessor
matrix Π from the completed matrix L of shortest-path weights in O(n³)
time.

23.1-8

You can also compute the vertices on shortest paths along with computing
the shortest-path weights. Define [art] as the predecessor of vertex j
on any minimum-weight path from vertex i to vertex j that contains at
most r edges. Modify the EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS and SLOW-APSP procedures
to compute the matrices Π⁽¹⁾, Π⁽²⁾, … , Π^((n−1)) as they compute the
matrices L⁽¹⁾, L⁽²⁾, … , L^((n−1)).

23.1-9

Modify FASTER-APSP so that it can determine whether the graph contains a
negative-weight cycle.

23.1-10

Give an efficient algorithm to find the length (number of edges) of a
minimum-length negative-weight cycle in a graph.

23.2    The Floyd-Warshall algorithm

Having already seen one dynamic-programming solution to the all-pairs
shortest-paths problem, in this section we’ll see another: the
Floyd-Warshall algorithm, which runs in Θ(V³) time. As before,
negative-weight edges may be present, but not negative-weight cycles. As
in Section 23.1, we develop the algorithm by following the
dynamic-programming process. After studying the resulting algorithm, we
present a similar method for finding the transitive closure of a
directed graph.

The structure of a shortest path

In the Floyd-Warshall algorithm, we characterize the structure of a
shortest path differently from how we characterized it in Section 23.1.
The Floyd-Warshall algorithm considers the intermediate vertices of a
shortest path, where an intermediate vertex of a simple path p = 〈v₁,
v₂, … , v_(l)〉 is any vertex of p other than v₁ or v_(l), that is, any
vertex in the set {v₂, v₃, … , v_(l−1)}.

The Floyd-Warshall algorithm relies on the following observation.
Numbering the vertices of G by V = {1, 2, … , n}, take a subset {1, 2, …
, k} of vertices for some 1 ≤ k ≤ n. For any pair of vertices i, j ∈ V,
consider all paths from i to j whose intermediate vertices are all drawn
from {1, 2, … , k}, and let p be a minimum-weight path from among them.
(Path p is simple.) The Floyd-Warshall algorithm exploits a relationship
between path p and shortest paths from i to j with all intermediate
vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k − 1}. The details of the relationship
depend on whether k is an intermediate vertex of path p or not.

[art]

Figure 23.3 Optimal substructure used by the Floyd-Warshall algorithm.
Path p is a shortest path from vertex i to vertex j, and k is the
highest-numbered intermediate vertex of p. Path p₁, the portion of path
p from vertex i to vertex k, has all intermediate vertices in the set
{1, 2, … , k − 1}. The same holds for path p₂ from vertex k to vertex j.

- If k is not an intermediate vertex of path p, then all intermediate
  vertices of path p belong to the set {1, 2, … , k − 1}. Thus a
  shortest path from vertex i to vertex j with all intermediate vertices
  in the set {1, 2, … , k − 1} is also a shortest path from i to j with
  all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k}.
- If k is an intermediate vertex of path p, then decompose p into [art],
  as Figure 23.3 illustrates. By Lemma 22.1, p₁ is a shortest path from
  i to k with all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k}. In
  fact, we can make a slightly stronger statement. Because vertex k is
  not an intermediate vertex of path p₁, all intermediate vertices of p₁
  belong to the set {1, 2, … , k − 1}. Therefore p₁ is a shortest path
  from i to k with all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k −
  1}. Likewise, p₂ is a shortest path from vertex k to vertex j with all
  intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k − 1}.

A recursive solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem

The above observations suggest a recursive formulation of shortest-path
estimates that differs from the one in Section 23.1. Let [art] be the
weight of a shortest path from vertex i to vertex j for which all
intermediate vertices belong to the set {1, 2, … , k}. When k = 0, a
path from vertex i to vertex j with no intermediate vertex numbered
higher than 0 has no intermediate vertices at all. Such a path has at
most one edge, and hence [art]. Following the above discussion, define
[art] recursively by

[art]

Because for any path, all intermediate vertices belong to the set {1, 2,
… , n}, the matrix [art] gives the final answer: [art] for all i, j ∈ V.

Computing the shortest-path weights bottom up

Based on recurrence (23.6), the bottom-up procedure FLOYD-WARSHALL
computes the values [art] in order of increasing values of k. Its input
is an n × n matrix W defined as in equation (23.1). The procedure
returns the matrix D^((n)) of shortest-path weights. Figure 23.4 shows
the matrices D^((k)) computed by the Floyd-Warshall algorithm for the
graph in Figure 23.1.

FLOYD-WARSHALL(W, n)

  --- ---------------------------------
  1   D⁽⁰⁾ = W
  2   for k = 1 to n
  3   let [art] be a new n × n matrix
  4   for i = 1 to n
  5   for j = 1 to n
  6   [art]
  7   return D^((n))
  --- ---------------------------------

The running time of the Floyd-Warshall algorithm is determined by the
triply nested for loops of lines 2–6. Because each execution of line 6
takes O(1) time, the algorithm runs in Θ(n³) time. As in the final
algorithm in Section 23.1, the code is tight, with no elaborate data
structures, and so the constant hidden in the Θ-notation is small. Thus,
the Floyd-Warshall algorithm is quite practical for even moderate-sized
input graphs.

Constructing a shortest path

There are a variety of different methods for constructing shortest paths
in the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. One way is to compute the matrix D of
shortest-path weights and then construct the predecessor matrix Π from
the D matrix. Exercise 23.1-7 asks you to implement this method so that
it runs in O(n³) time. Given the predecessor matrix Π, the
PRINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PATH procedure prints the vertices on a given
shortest path.

Alternatively, the predecessor matrix … can be computed while the
algorithm computes the matrices D⁽⁰⁾, D⁽¹⁾, … , D^((n)). Specifically,
compute a sequence of matrices Π⁽⁰⁾, Π⁽¹⁾, … , Π^((n)), where Π =
Π^((n)) and [art] is the predecessor of vertex j on a shortest path from
vertex i with all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k}.

[art]

Figure 23.4 The sequence of matrices D^((k)) and Π^((k)) computed by the
Floyd-Warshall algorithm for the graph in Figure 23.1.

Here’s a recursive formulation of [art]. When k = 0, a shortest path
from i to j has no intermediate vertices at all, and so

[art]

For k ≥ 1, if the path has k as an intermediate vertex, so that it is i
⇝ k ⇝ j where k ≠ j, then choose as the predecessor of j on this path
the same vertex as the predecessor of j chosen on a shortest path from k
with all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k − 1}. Otherwise,
when the path from i to j does not have k as an intermediate vertex,
choose the same predecessor of j as on a shortest path from i with all
intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k − 1}. Formally, for k ≥ 1,

[art]

Exercise 23.2-3 asks you to show how to incorporate the Π^((k)) matrix
computations into the FLOYD-WARSHALL procedure. Figure 23.4 shows the
sequence of Π^((k)) matrices that the resulting algorithm computes for
the graph of Figure 23.1. The exercise also asks for the more difficult
task of proving that the predecessor subgraph G_(π,i) is a
shortest-paths tree with root i. Exercise 23.2-7 asks for yet another
way to reconstruct shortest paths.

Transitive closure of a directed graph

Given a directed graph G = (V, E) with vertex set V = {1, 2, … , n}, you
might wish to determine simply whether G contains a path from i to j for
all vertex pairs i, j ∈ V, without regard to edge weights. We define the
transitive closure of G as the graph G* = (V, E*), where

E* = {(i, j) : there is a path from vertex i to vertex j in G}.

One way to compute the transitive closure of a graph in Θ(n³) time is to
assign a weight of 1 to each edge of E and run the Floyd-Warshall
algorithm. If there is a path from vertex i to vertex j, you get d_(ij)
< n. Otherwise, you get d_(ij) = ∞.

There is another, similar way to compute the transitive closure of G in
Θ(n³) time, which can save time and space in practice. This method
substitutes the logical operations ∨ (logical OR) and ∧ (logical AND)
for the arithmetic operations min and + in the Floyd-Warshall algorithm.
For i, j, k = 1, 2, … , n, define [art] to be 1 if there exists a path
in graph G from vertex i to vertex j with all intermediate vertices in
the set {1, 2, … , k}, and 0 otherwise. To construct the transitive
closure G* = (V, E*), put edge (i, j) into E* if and only if [art]. A
recursive definition of [art], analogous to recurrence (23.6), is

[art]

Figure 23.5 A directed graph and the matrices T^((k)) computed by the
transitive-closure algorithm.

[art]

and for k ≥ 1,

[art]

As in the Floyd-Warshall algorithm, the TRANSITIVE-CLOSURE procedure
computes the matrices [art] in order of increasing k.

TRANSITIVE-CLOSURE(G, n)

  ----- ---------------------------------
    1   let [art] be a new n × n matrix
    2   for i = 1 to n
    3   for j = 1 to n
    4   if i == j or (i, j) ∈ G.E
    5   [art]
    6   else [art]
    7   for k = 1 to n
    8   let [art] be a new n × n matrix
    9   for i = 1 to n
  10    for j = 1 to n
  11    [art]
  12    return T^((n))
  ----- ---------------------------------

Figure 23.5 shows the matrices T^((k)) computed by the
TRANSITIVE-CLOSURE procedure on a sample graph. The TRANSITIVE-CLOSURE
procedure, like the Floyd-Warshall algorithm, runs in Θ(n³) time. On
some computers, though, logical operations on single-bit values execute
faster than arithmetic operations on integer words of data. Moreover,
because the direct transitive-closure algorithm uses only boolean values
rather than integer values, its space requirement is less than the
Floyd-Warshall algorithm’s by a factor corresponding to the size of a
word of computer storage.

Exercises

23.2-1

Run the Floyd-Warshall algorithm on the weighted, directed graph of
Figure 23.2. Show the matrix D^((k)) that results for each iteration of
the outer loop.

23.2-2

Show how to compute the transitive closure using the technique of
Section 23.1.

23.2-3

Modify the FLOYD-WARSHALL procedure to compute the Π^((k)) matrices
according to equations (23.7) and (23.8). Prove rigorously that for all
i ∈ V, the predecessor subgraph G_(π,i) is a shortest-paths tree with
root i. (Hint: To show that G_(π,i) is acyclic, first show that [art]
implies [art], according to the definition of [art]. Then adapt the
proof of Lemma 22.16.)

23.2-4

As it appears on page 657, the Floyd-Warshall algorithm requires Θ(n³)
space, since it creates [art] for i, j, k = 1, 2, … , n. Show that the
procedure FLOYD-WARSHALL′, which simply drops all the superscripts, is
correct, and thus only Θ(n²) space is required.

FLOYD-WARSHALL′(W, n)

  --- ----------------------------------------
  1   D = W
  2   for k = 1 to n
  3   for i = 1 to n
  4   for j = 1 to n
  5   d_(ij) = min {d_(ij), d_(ik) + d_(kj)}
  6   return D
  --- ----------------------------------------

23.2-5

Consider the following change to how equation (23.8) handles equality:

[art]

Is this alternative definition of the predecessor matrix Π correct?

23.2-6

Show how to use the output of the Floyd-Warshall algorithm to detect the
presence of a negative-weight cycle.

23.2-7

Another way to reconstruct shortest paths in the Floyd-Warshall
algorithm uses values [art] for i,j,k = 1, 2, … , n, where [art] is the
highest-numbered intermediate vertex of a shortest path from i to j in
which all intermediate vertices lie in the set {1, 2, … , k}. Give a
recursive formulation for [art], modify the FLOYD-WARSHALL procedure to
compute the [art] values, and rewrite the PRINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PATH
procedure to take the matrix [art] as an input. How is the matrix Φ like
the s table in the matrix-chain multiplication problem of Section 14.2?

23.2-8

Give an O(VE)-time algorithm for computing the transitive closure of a
directed graph G = (V, E). Assume that |V| = O(E) and that the graph is
represented with adjacency lists.

23.2-9

Suppose that it takes f(|V|, |E|) time to compute the transitive closure
of a directed acyclic graph, where f is a monotonically increasing
function of both |V| and |E|. Show that the time to compute the
transitive closure G* = (V, E*) of a general directed graph G = (V, E)
is then f(|V|, |E|) + O(V + E*).

23.3    Johnson’s algorithm for sparse graphs

Johnson’s algorithm finds shortest paths between all pairs in O(V² lg
V + VE) time. For sparse graphs, it is asymptotically faster than either
repeated squaring of matrices or the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. The
algorithm either returns a matrix of shortest-path weights for all pairs
of vertices or reports that the input graph contains a negative-weight
cycle. Johnson’s algorithm uses as subroutines both Dijkstra’s algorithm
and the Bellman-Ford algorithm, which Chapter 22 describes.

Johnson’s algorithm uses the technique of reweighting, which works as
follows. If all edge weights w in a graph G = (V, E) are nonnegative,
Dijkstra’s algorithm can find shortest paths between all pairs of
vertices by running it once from each vertex. With the Fibonacci-heap
min-priority queue, the running time of this all-pairs algorithm is O(V²
lg V + VE). If G has negative-weight edges but no negative-weight
cycles, first compute a new set of nonnegative edge weights so that
Dijkstra’s algorithm applies. The new set of edge weights ŵ must satisfy
two important properties:

1.  For all pairs of vertices u, v ∈ V, a path p is a shortest path from
    u to v using weight function w if and only if p is also a shortest
    path from u to v using weight function ŵ.
2.  For all edges (u, v), the new weight ŵ(u, v) is nonnegative.

As we’ll see in a moment, preprocessing G to determine the new weight
function ŵ takes O(VE) time.

Preserving shortest paths by reweighting

The following lemma shows how to reweight the edges to satisfy the first
property above. We use δ to denote shortest-path weights derived from
weight function w and [art] to denote shortest-path weights derived from
weight function ŵ.

Lemma 23.1 (Reweighting does not change shortest paths)

Given a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with weight function w : E →
ℝ, let h : V → ℝ be any function mapping vertices to real numbers. For
each edge (u, v) ∈ E, define

[art]

Let p = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉 be any path from vertex v₀ to vertex
v_(k). Then p is a shortest path from v₀ to v_(k) with weight function w
if and only if it is a shortest path with weight function ŵ. That is,
w(p) = δ(v₀, v_(k)) if and only if [art]. Furthermore, G has a
negative-weight cycle using weight function w if and only if G has a
negative-weight cycle using weight function ŵ.

Proof   We start by showing that

[art]

We have

[art]

Therefore, any path p from v₀ to v_(k) has ŵ(p) = w(p) + h(v₀) −
h(v_(k)). Because h(v₀) and h(v_(k)) do not depend on the path, if one
path from v₀ to v_(k) is shorter than another using weight function w,
then it is also shorter using ŵ. Thus, w(p) = δ(v₀, v_(k)) if and only
if [art].

Finally, we show that G has a negative-weight cycle using weight
function w if and only if G has a negative-weight cycle using weight
function ŵ. Consider any cycle c = 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉, where v₀ =
v_(k). By equation (23.11),

  ------ --- -------------------------
  ŵ(c)   =   w(c) + h(v₀) + h(v_(k))
         =   w(c),
  ------ --- -------------------------

and thus c has negative weight using w if and only if it has negative
weight using ŵ.

▪

Producing nonnegative weights by reweighting

Our next goal is to ensure that the second property holds: ŵ(u, v) must
be nonnegative for all edges (u, v) = E. Given a weighted, directed
graph G = (V, E) with weight function w : E → ℝ, we’ll see how to make a
new graph G′ = (V′, E′), where V′ = V ∪ {s} for some new vertex s ∉ V
and E′ = E ∪ {(s, v) : v = V }. To incorporate the new vertex s, extend
the weight function w so that w(s, v) = 0 for all v ∈ V. Since no edges
enter s, no shortest paths in G′, other than those with source s,
contain s. Moreover, G′ has no negative-weight cycles if and only if G
has no negative-weight cycles. Figure 23.6(a) shows the graph G′
corresponding to the graph G of Figure 23.1.

Now suppose that G and G′ have no negative-weight cycles. Define the
function h(v) = δ(s, v) for all v ∈ V′. By the triangle inequality
(Lemma 22.10 on page 633), we have h(v) ≤ h(u) + w(u, v) for all edges
(u, v) ∈ E′. Thus, by defining reweighted edge weights ŵ according to
equation (23.10), we have ŵ(u, v) = w(u, v) + h(u) − h(v) ≥ 0, thereby
satisfying the second property. Figure 23.6(b) shows the graph G′ from
Figure 23.6(a) with reweighted edges.

Computing all-pairs shortest paths

Johnson’s algorithm to compute all-pairs shortest paths uses the
Bellman-Ford algorithm (Section 22.1) and Dijkstra’s algorithm (Section
22.3) as subroutines. The pseudocode appears in the procedure JOHNSON on
page 666. It assumes implicitly that the edges are stored in adjacency
lists. The algorithm returns the usual |V| × |V| matrix D = (d_(ij)),
where d_(ij) = δ(i, j), or it reports that the input graph contains a
negative-weight cycle. As is typical for an all-pairs shortest-paths
algorithm, it assumes that the vertices are numbered from 1 to |V|.

[art]

Figure 23.6 Johnson’s all-pairs shortest-paths algorithm run on the
graph of Figure 23.1. Vertex numbers appear outside the vertices. (a)
The graph G′ with the original weight function w. The new vertex s is
blue. Within each vertex v is h(v) = δ(s, v). (b) After reweighting each
edge (u, v) with weight function ŵ(u, v) = w(u, v) + h(u) − h(v).
(c)–(g) The result of running Dijkstra’s algorithm on each vertex of G
using weight function ŵ. In each part, the source vertex u is blue, and
blue edges belong to the shortest-paths tree computed by the algorithm.
Within each vertex v are the values [art] and δ(u, v), separated by a
slash. The value d_(uv) = δ(u, v) is equal to [art].

JOHNSON(G, w)

  ----- ----------------------------------------------------------
    1   compute G′, where G′.V = G.V ∪ {s},
        G′.E = G.E ∪ {(s, v) : v ∈ G.V}, and
        w(s, v) = 0 for all v ∈ G.V
    2   if BELLMAN-FORD(G′, w, s) == FALSE
    3   print “the input graph contains a negative-weight cycle”
    4   else for each vertex v ∈ G′.V
    5   set h(v) to the value of δ(s, v)
        computed by the Bellman-Ford algorithm
    6   for each edge (u, v) ∈ G′.E
    7   ŵ(u, v) = w(u, v) + h(u) − h(v)
    8   let D = (d_(uv)) be a new n × n matrix
    9   for each vertex u ∈ G.V
  10    run DIJKSTRA(G, ŵ, u) to compute [art] for all v ∈ G.V
  11    for each vertex v ∈ G.V
  12    [art]
  13    return D
  ----- ----------------------------------------------------------

The JOHNSON procedure simply performs the actions specified earlier.
Line 1 produces G′. Line 2 runs the Bellman-Ford algorithm on G′ with
weight function w and source vertex s. If G′, and hence G, contains a
negative-weight cycle, line 3 reports the problem. Lines 4–12 assume
that G′ contains no negative-weight cycles. Lines 4–5 set h(v) to the
shortest-path weight δ(s, v) computed by the Bellman-Ford algorithm for
all v ∈ V′. Lines 6–7 compute the new weights ŵ. For each pair of
vertices u, v ∈ V, the for loop of lines 9–12 computes the shortest-path
weight [art] by calling Dijkstra’s algorithm once from each vertex in V.
Line 12 stores in matrix entry d_(uv) the correct shortest-path weight
δ(u, v), calculated using equation (23.11). Finally, line 13 returns the
completed D matrix. Figure 23.6 depicts the execution of Johnson’s
algorithm.

If the min-priority queue in Dijkstra’s algorithm is implemented by a
Fibonacci heap, Johnson’s algorithm runs in O(V² lg V + VE) time. The
simpler binary min-heap implementation yields a running time of O(VE lg
V), which is still asymptotically faster than the Floyd-Warshall
algorithm if the graph is sparse.

Exercises

23.3-1

Use Johnson’s algorithm to find the shortest paths between all pairs of
vertices in the graph of Figure 23.2. Show the values of h and ŵ
computed by the algorithm.

23.3-2

What is the purpose of adding the new vertex s to V, yielding V′?

23.3-3

Suppose that w(u, v) ≥ 0 for all edges (u, v) ∈ E. What is the
relationship between the weight functions w and ŵ?

23.3-4

Professor Greenstreet claims that there is a simpler way to reweight
edges than the method used in Johnson’s algorithm. Letting w* = min
{w(u, v) : (u, v) ∈ E}, just define ŵ(u, v) = w(u, v) − w* for all edges
(u, v) ∈ E. What is wrong with the professor’s method of reweighting?

23.3-5

Show that if G contains a 0-weight cycle c, then ŵ(u, v) = 0 for every
edge (u, v) in c.

23.3-6

Professor Michener claims that there is no need to create a new source
vertex in line 1 of JOHNSON. He suggests using G′ = G instead and
letting s be any vertex. Give an example of a weighted, directed graph G
for which incorporating the professor’s idea into JOHNSON causes
incorrect answers. Assume that ∞ − ∞ is undefined, and in particular, it
is not 0. Then show that if G is strongly connected (every vertex is
reachable from every other vertex), the results returned by JOHNSON with
the professor’s modification are correct.

Problems

23-1     Transitive closure of a dynamic graph

You wish to maintain the transitive closure of a directed graph G = (V,
E) as you insert edges into E. That is, after inserting an edge, you
update the transitive closure of the edges inserted so far. Start with G
having no edges initially, and represent the transitive closure by a
boolean matrix.

a. Show how to update the transitive closure G* = (V, E*) of a graph G =
(V, E) in O(V²) time when a new edge is added to G.

b. Give an example of a graph G and an edge e such that Ω(V²) time is
required to update the transitive closure after inserting e into G, no
matter what algorithm is used.

c. Give an algorithm for updating the transitive closure as edges are
inserted into the graph. For any sequence of r insertions, your
algorithm should run in time [art], where t_(i) is the time to update
the transitive closure upon inserting the ith edge. Prove that your
algorithm attains this time bound.

23-2     Shortest paths in ϵ-dense graphs

A graph G = (V, E) is ϵ-dense if |E| = Θ(V^(1+ϵ)) for some constant in
the range 0 < ϵ ≤ 1. d-ary min-heaps (see Problem 6-2 on page 179)
provide a way to match the running times of Fibonacci-heap-based
shortest-path algorithms on ϵ-dense graphs without using as complicated
a data structure.

a. What are the asymptotic running times for the operations INSERT,
EXTRACT-MIN, and DECREASE-KEY, as a function of d and the number n of
elements in a d-ary min-heap? What are these running times if you choose
d = Θ(n^(π)) for some constant 0 < α ≤ 1? Compare these running times to
the amortized costs of these operations for a Fibonacci heap.

b. Show how to compute shortest paths from a single source on an ϵ-dense
directed graph G = (V, E) with no negative-weight edges in O(E) time.
(Hint: Pick d as a function of ϵ.)

c. Show how to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem on an ϵ-dense
directed graph G = (V, E) with no negative-weight edges in O(VE) time.

d. Show how to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem in O(VE) time
on an ϵ-dense directed graph G = (V, E) that may have negative-weight
edges but has no negative-weight cycles.

Chapter notes

Lawler [276] has a good discussion of the all-pairs shortest-paths
problem. He attributes the matrix-multiplication algorithm to the
folklore. The Floyd-Warshall algorithm is due to Floyd [144], who based
it on a theorem of Warshall [450] that describes how to compute the
transitive closure of boolean matrices. Johnson’s algorithm is taken
from [238].

Several researchers have given improved algorithms for computing
shortest paths via matrix multiplication. Fredman [153] shows how to
solve the all-pairs shortest paths problem using O(V^(5/2)) comparisons
between sums of edge weights and obtains an algorithm that runs in
O(V³lg lg V/lg V/^(1/3)) time, which is slightly better than the running
time of the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. This bound has been improved
several times, and the fastest algorithm is now by Williams [457], with
a running time of [art].

Another line of research demonstrates how to apply algorithms for fast
matrix multiplication (see the chapter notes for Chapter 4) to the
all-pairs shortest paths problem. Let O(n^(ω)) be the running time of
the fastest algorithm for multiplying two n × n matrices. Galil and
Margalit [170, 171] and Seidel [403] designed algorithms that solve the
all-pairs shortest paths problem in undirected, unweighted graphs in
(V^(ω)p(V)) time, where p(n) denotes a particular function that is
polylogarithmically bounded in n. In dense graphs, these algorithms are
faster than the O(VE) time needed to perform |V| breadth-first searches.
Several researchers have extended these results to give algorithms for
solving the all-pairs shortest paths problem in undirected graphs in
which the edge weights are integers in the range {1, 2, … , W}. The
asymptotically fastest such algorithm, by Shoshan and Zwick [410], runs
in O(W V^(ω)p(V W)) time. In directed graphs, the best algorithm to date
is due to Zwick [467] and runs in Õ(W^(1/(4−ω))V^(2+1/(4−ω))) time.

Karger, Koller, and Phillips [244] and independently McGeoch [320] have
given a time bound that depends on E*, the set of edges in E that
participate in some shortest path. Given a graph with nonnegative edge
weights, their algorithms run in O(VE* + V² lg V) time and improve upon
running Dijkstra’s algorithm |V| times when |E*| = o(E). Pettie [355]
uses an approach based on component hierarchies to achieve a running
time of O(VE + V² lg lg V), and the same running time is also achieved
by Hagerup [205].

Baswana, Hariharan, and Sen [37] examined decremental algorithms, which
allow a sequence of intermixed edge deletions and queries, for
maintaining all-pairs shortest paths and transitive-closure information.
When a path exists, their randomized transitive-closure algorithm can
fail to report it with probability 1/n^(c) for an arbitrary c > 0. The
query times are O(1) with high probability. For transitive closure, the
amortized time for each update is O(V^(4/3) lg^(1/3)V). By comparison,
Problem 23-1, in which edges are inserted, asks for an incremental
algorithm. For all-pairs shortest paths, the update times depend on the
queries. For queries just giving the shortest-path weights, the
amortized time per update is O(V³/E lg²V). To report the actual shortest
path, the amortized update time is min [art]. Demetrescu and Italiano
[111] showed how to handle update and query operations when edges are
both inserted and deleted, as long as the range of edge weights is
bounded.

Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5] defined an algebraic structure known as a
“closed semiring,” which serves as a general framework for solving path
problems in directed graphs. Both the Floyd-Warshall algorithm and the
transitive-closure algorithm from Section 23.2 are instantiations of an
all-pairs algorithm based on closed semirings. Maggs and Plotkin [309]
showed how to find minimum spanning trees using a closed semiring.

¹ According to a report cited by U.S. Department of Transportation
Federal Highway Administration, “a reasonable ‘rule of thumb’ is one
signalized intersection per 1,000 population.”

² An algebraic semiring contains operations ⊕, which is commutative with
identity I_(⊕), and ⊕, with identity I_(⊕), where ⊕ distributes over ⊕
on both the left and right, and where I_(⊕)⊕x = x⊕I_(⊕) = I_(⊕) for all
x. Standard matrix multiplication, as in MATRIX-MULTIPLY, uses the
semiring with + for ⊕, ⊕ for ⊕, 0 for I_(⊕), and 1 for I_(⊕). The
procedure EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS uses another semiring, known as the
tropical semiring, with min for ⊕, + for ⊕, ∞ for I_(⊕), and 0 for
I_(⊕).

24        Maximum Flow

Just as you can model a road map as a directed graph in order to find
the shortest path from one point to another, you can also interpret a
directed graph as a “flow network” and use it to answer questions about
material flows. Imagine a material coursing through a system from a
source, where the material is produced, to a sink, where it is consumed.
The source produces the material at some steady rate, and the sink
consumes the material at the same rate. The “flow” of the material at
any point in the system is intuitively the rate at which the material
moves. Flow networks can model many problems, including liquids flowing
through pipes, parts through assembly lines, current through electrical
networks, and information through communication networks.

You can think of each directed edge in a flow network as a conduit for
the material. Each conduit has a stated capacity, given as a maximum
rate at which the material can flow through the conduit, such as 200
gallons of liquid per hour through a pipe or 20 amperes of electrical
current through a wire. Vertices are conduit junctions, and other than
the source and sink, material flows through the vertices without
collecting in them. In other words, the rate at which material enters a
vertex must equal the rate at which it leaves the vertex. We call this
property “flow conservation,” and it is equivalent to Kirchhoff’s
current law when the material is electrical current.

The goal of the maximum-flow problem is to compute the greatest rate for
shipping material from the source to the sink without violating any
capacity constraints. It is one of the simplest problems concerning flow
networks and, as we shall see in this chapter, this problem can be
solved by efficient algorithms. Moreover, other network-flow problems
are solvable by adapting the basic techniques used in maximum-flow
algorithms.

This chapter presents two general methods for solving the maximum-flow
problem. Section 24.1 formalizes the notions of flow networks and flows,
formally defining the maximum-flow problem. Section 24.2 describes the
classical method of Ford and Fulkerson for finding maximum flows. We
finish up with a simple application of this method, finding a maximum
matching in an undirected bipartite graph, in Section 24.3. (Section
25.1 will give a more efficient algorithm that is specifically designed
to find a maximum matching in a bipartite graph.)

24.1    Flow networks

This section gives a graph-theoretic definition of flow networks,
discusses their properties, and defines the maximum-flow problem
precisely. It also introduces some helpful notation.

Flow networks and flows

A flow network G = (V, E) is a directed graph in which each edge (u, v)
∈ E has a nonnegative capacity c(u, v) ≥ 0. We further require that if E
contains an edge (u, v), then there is no edge (v, u) in the reverse
direction. (We’ll see shortly how to work around this restriction.) If
(u, v) ∉ E, then for convenience we define c(u, v) = 0, and we disallow
self-loops. Each flow network contains two distinguished vertices: a
source s and a sink t. For convenience, we assume that each vertex lies
on some path from the source to the sink. That is, for each vertex v ∈
V, the flow network contains a path s ⇝ v ⇝ t. Because each vertex other
than s has at least one entering edge, we have |E| ≥ |V | − 1. Figure
24.1 shows an example of a flow network.

[art]

Figure 24.1 (a) A flow network G = (V, E) for the Lucky Puck Company’s
trucking problem. The Vancouver factory is the source s, and the
Winnipeg warehouse is the sink t. The company ships pucks through
intermediate cities, but only c(u, v) crates per day can go from city u
to city v. Each edge is labeled with its capacity. (b) A flow f in G
with value |f | = 19. Each edge (u, v) is labeled by f (u, v)/c(u, v).
The slash notation merely separates the flow and capacity and does not
indicate division.

We are now ready to define flows more formally. Let G = (V, E) be a flow
network with a capacity function c. Let s be the source of the network,
and let t be the sink. A flow in G is a real-valued function f : V × V →
ℝ that satisfies the following two properties:

Capacity constraint: For all u, v ∈ V, we require

0 ≤ f(u, v) ≤ c(u, v).

The flow from one vertex to another must be nonnegative and must not
exceed the given capacity.

Flow conservation: For all u ∈ V − {s, t}, we require

[art]

The total flow into a vertex other than the source or sink must equal
the total flow out of that vertex—informally, “flow in equals flow out.”

When (u, v) ∉ E, there can be no flow from u to v, and f (u, v) = 0.

We call the nonnegative quantity f (u, v) the flow from vertex u to
vertex v. The value |f | of a flow f is defined as

[art]

that is, the total flow out of the source minus the flow into the
source. (Here, the |·| notation denotes flow value, not absolute value
or cardinality.) Typically, a flow network does not have any edges into
the source, and the flow into the source, given by the summation
Σ_(v∈V) f(v, s), is 0. We include it, however, because when we introduce
residual networks later in this chapter, the flow into the source can be
positive. In the maximum-flow problem, the input is a flow network G
with source s and sink t, and the goal is to find a flow of maximum
value.

An example of flow

A flow network can model the trucking problem shown in Figure 24.1(a).
The Lucky Puck Company has a factory (source s) in Vancouver that
manufactures hockey pucks, and it has a warehouse (sink t) in Winnipeg
that stocks them. Lucky Puck leases space on trucks from another firm to
ship the pucks from the factory to the warehouse. Because the trucks
travel over specified routes (edges) between cities (vertices) and have
a limited capacity, Lucky Puck can ship at most c(u, v) crates per day
between each pair of cities u and v in Figure 24.1(a). Lucky Puck has no
control over these routes and capacities, and so the company cannot
alter the flow network shown in Figure 24.1(a). They need to determine
the largest number p of crates per day that they can ship and then to
produce this amount, since there is no point in producing more pucks
than they can ship to their warehouse. Lucky Puck is not concerned with
how long it takes for a given puck to get from the factory to the
warehouse. They care only that p crates per day leave the factory and p
crates per day arrive at the warehouse.

[art]

Figure 24.2 Converting a network with antiparallel edges to an
equivalent one with no antiparallel edges. (a) A flow network containing
both the edges (v₁, v₂) and (v₂, v₁). (b) An equivalent network with no
antiparallel edges. A new vertex v′ was added, and edge (v₁, v₂) was
replaced by the pair of edges (v₁, v′) and (v′, v₂), both with the same
capacity as (v₁, v₂).

A flow in this network models the “flow” of shipments because the number
of crates shipped per day from one city to another is subject to a
capacity constraint. Additionally, the model must obey flow
conservation, for in a steady state, the rate at which pucks enter an
intermediate city must equal the rate at which they leave. Otherwise,
crates would accumulate at intermediate cities.

Modeling problems with antiparallel edges

Suppose that the trucking firm offers Lucky Puck the opportunity to
lease space for 10 crates in trucks going from Edmonton to Calgary. It
might seem natural to add this opportunity to our example and form the
network shown in Figure 24.2(a). This network suffers from one problem,
however: it violates the original assumption that if edge (v₁, v₂) ∈ E,
then (v₂, v₁) ∉ E. We call the two edges (v₁, v₂) and (v₂, v₁)
antiparallel. Thus, to model a flow problem with antiparallel edges, the
network must be transformed into an equivalent one containing no
antiparallel edges. Figure 24.2(b) displays this equivalent network. To
transform the network, choose one of the two antiparallel edges, in this
case (v₁, v₂), and split it by adding a new vertex v′ and replacing edge
(v₁, v₂) with the pair of edges (v₁, v′) and (v′, v₂). Also set the
capacity of both new edges to the capacity of the original edge. The
resulting network satisfies the property that if an edge belongs to the
network, the reverse edge does not. As Exercise 24.1-1 asks you to
prove, the resulting network is equivalent to the original one.

[art]

Figure 24.3 Converting a multiple-source, multiple-sink maximum-flow
problem into a problem with a single source and a single sink. (a) A
flow network with three sources S = {s₁, s₂, s₃} and two sinks T = {t₁,
t₂}. (b) An equivalent single-source, single-sink flow network. Add a
supersource s and an edge with infinite capacity from s to each of the
multiple sources. Also add a supersink t and an edge with infinite
capacity from each of the multiple sinks to t.

Networks with multiple sources and sinks

A maximum-flow problem may have several sources and sinks, rather than
just one of each. The Lucky Puck Company, for example, might actually
have a set of m factories {s₁, s₂, …, s_(m)} and a set of n warehouses
{t₁, t₂, …, t_(n)}, as shown in Figure 24.3(a). Fortunately, this
problem is no harder than ordinary maximum flow.

The problem of determining a maximum flow in a network with multiple
sources and multiple sinks reduces to an ordinary maximum-flow problem.
Figure 24.3(b) shows how to convert the network from (a) to an ordinary
flow network with only a single source and a single sink. Add a
supersource s and add a directed edge (s, s_(i)) with capacity c(s,
s_(i)) = ∞ for each i = 1, 2, …, m. Similarly, create a new supersink t
and add a directed edge (t_(i), t) with capacity c(t_(i), t) = ∞ for
each i = 1, 2, …, n. Intuitively, any flow in the network in (a)
corresponds to a flow in the network in (b), and vice versa. The single
supersource s provides as much flow as desired for the multiple sources
s_(i), and the single supersink t likewise consumes as much flow as
desired for the multiple sinks t_(i). Exercise 24.1-2 asks you to prove
formally that the two problems are equivalent.

Exercises

24.1-1

Show that splitting an edge in a flow network yields an equivalent
network. More formally, suppose that flow network G contains edge (u,
v), and define a new flow network G′ by creating a new vertex x and
replacing (u, v) by new edges (u, x) and (x, v) with c(u, x) = c(x, v) =
c(u, v). Show that a maximum flow in G′ has the same value as a maximum
flow in G.

24.1-2

Extend the flow properties and definitions to the multiple-source,
multiple-sink problem. Show that any flow in a multiple-source,
multiple-sink flow network corresponds to a flow of identical value in
the single-source, single-sink network obtained by adding a supersource
and a supersink, and vice versa.

24.1-3

Suppose that a flow network G = (V, E) violates the assumption that the
network contains a path s ⇝ v ⇝ t for all vertices v ∈ V. Let u be a
vertex for which there is no path s ⇝ u ⇝ t. Show that there must exist
a maximum flow f in G such that f (u, v) = f (v, u) = 0 for all vertices
v ∈ V.

24.1-4

Let f be a flow in a network, and let α be a real number. The scalar
flow product, denoted αf, is a function from V × V to ℝ defined by

(αf)(u, v) = α · f (u, v).

Prove that the flows in a network form a convex set. That is, show that
if f₁ and f₂ are flows, then so is αf₁ + (1 − α) f₂ for all α in the
range 0 ≤ α ≤ 1.

24.1-5

State the maximum-flow problem as a linear-programming problem.

24.1-6

Professor Adam has two children who, unfortunately, dislike each other.
The problem is so severe that not only do they refuse to walk to school
together, but in fact each one refuses to walk on any block that the
other child has stepped on that day. The children have no problem with
their paths crossing at a corner. Fortunately both the professor’s house
and the school are on corners, but beyond that he is not sure if it is
going to be possible to send both of his children to the same school.
The professor has a map of his town. Show how to formulate the problem
of determining whether both his children can go to the same school as a
maximum-flow problem.

24.1-7

Suppose that, in addition to edge capacities, a flow network has vertex
capacities. That is each vertex v has a limit l(v) on how much flow can
pass through v. Show how to transform a flow network G = (V, E) with
vertex capacities into an equivalent flow network G′ = (V′, E′) without
vertex capacities, such that a maximum flow in G′ has the same value as
a maximum flow in G. How many vertices and edges does G′ have?

24.2    The Ford-Fulkerson method

This section presents the Ford-Fulkerson method for solving the
maximum-flow problem. We call it a “method” rather than an “algorithm”
because it encompasses several implementations with differing running
times. The Ford-Fulkerson method depends on three important ideas that
transcend the method and are relevant to many flow algorithms and
problems: residual networks, augmenting paths, and cuts. These ideas are
essential to the important max-flow min-cut theorem (Theorem 24.6),
which characterizes the value of a maximum flow in terms of cuts of the
flow network. We end this section by presenting one specific
implementation of the Ford-Fulkerson method and analyzing its running
time.

The Ford-Fulkerson method iteratively increases the value of the flow.
It starts with f (u, v) = 0 for all u, v ∈ V, giving an initial flow of
value 0. Each iteration increases the flow value in G by finding an
“augmenting path” in an associated “residual network” G_(f). The edges
of the augmenting path in G_(f) indicate on which edges in G to update
the flow in order to increase the flow value. Although each iteration of
the Ford-Fulkerson method increases the value of the flow, we’ll see
that the flow on any particular edge of G may increase or decrease.
Although it might seem counterintuitive to decrease the flow on an edge,
doing so may enable flow to increase on other edges, allowing more flow
to travel from the source to the sink. The Ford-Fulkerson method, given
in the procedure FORD-FULKERSON-METHOD, repeatedly augments the flow
until the residual network has no more augmenting paths. The max-flow
min-cut theorem shows that upon termination, this process yields a
maximum flow.

FORD-FULKERSON-METHOD (G, s, t)

  --- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   initialize flow f to 0
  2   while there exists an augmenting path p in the residual network G_(f)
  3   augment flow f along p
  4   return f
  --- -----------------------------------------------------------------------

In order to implement and analyze the Ford-Fulkerson method, we need to
introduce several additional concepts.

Residual networks

Intuitively, given a flow network G and a flow f, the residual network
G_(f) consists of edges whose capacities represent how the flow can
change on edges of G. An edge of the flow network can admit an amount of
additional flow equal to the edge’s capacity minus the flow on that
edge. If that value is positive, that edge goes into G_(f) with a
“residual capacity” of c_(f) (u, v) = c(u, v) − f (u, v). The only edges
of G that belong to G_(f) are those that can admit more flow. Those
edges (u, v) whose flow equals their capacity have c_(f) (u, v) = 0, and
they do not belong to G_(f).

You might be surprised that the residual network G_(f) can also contain
edges that are not in G. As an algorithm manipulates the flow, with the
goal of increasing the total flow, it might need to decrease the flow on
a particular edge in order to increase the flow elsewhere. In order to
represent a possible decrease in the positive flow f (u, v) on an edge
in G, the residual network G_(f) contains an edge (v, u) with residual
capacity c_(f) (v, u) = f (u, v)—that is, an edge that can admit flow in
the opposite direction to (u, v), at most canceling out the flow on (u,
v). These reverse edges in the residual network allow an algorithm to
send back flow it has already sent along an edge. Sending flow back
along an edge is equivalent to decreasing the flow on the edge, which is
a necessary operation in many algorithms.

More formally, for a flow network G = (V, E) with source s, sink t, and
a flow f, consider a pair of vertices u, v ∈ V. We define the residual
capacity c_(f) (u, v) by

[art]

In a flow network, (u, v) ∈ E implies (v, u) ∉ E, and so exactly one
case in equation (24.2) applies to each ordered pair of vertices.

As an example of equation (24.2), if c(u, v) = 16 and f (u, v) = 11,
then f (u, v) can increase by up to c_(f) (u, v) = 5 units before
exceeding the capacity constraint on edge (u, v). Alternatively, up to
11 units of flow can return from v to u, so that c_(f) (v, u) = 11.

Given a flow network G = (V, E) and a flow f, the residual network of G
induced by f is G_(f) = (V, E_(f)), where

[art]

[art]

Figure 24.4 (a) The flow network G and flow f of Figure 24.1(b). (b) The
residual network G_(f) with augmenting path p, having residual capacity
c_(f) (p) = c_(f) (v₂, v₃) = 4, in blue. Edges with residual capacity
equal to 0, such as (v₁, v₃), are not shown, a convention we follow in
the remainder of this section. (c) The flow in G that results from
augmenting along path p by its residual capacity 4. Edges carrying no
flow, such as (v₃, v₂), are labeled only by their capacity, another
convention we follow throughout. (d) The residual network induced by the
flow in (c).

That is, as promised above, each edge of the residual network, or
residual edge, can admit a flow that is greater than 0. Figure 24.4(a)
repeats the flow network G and flow f of Figure 24.1(b), and Figure
24.4(b) shows the corresponding residual network G_(f). The edges in
E_(f) are either edges in E or their reversals, and thus

|E_(f)| ≤ 2 |E|.

Observe that the residual network G_(f) is similar to a flow network
with capacities given by c_(f). It does not satisfy the definition of a
flow network, however, because it could contain antiparallel edges.
Other than this difference, a residual network has the same properties
as a flow network, and we can define a flow in the residual network as
one that satisfies the definition of a flow, but with respect to
capacities c_(f) in the residual network G_(f).

A flow in a residual network provides a roadmap for adding flow to the
original flow network. If f is a flow in G and f′ is a flow in the
corresponding residual network G_(f), we define f ↑ f′, the augmentation
of flow f by f ′, to be a function from V × V to ℝ, defined by

[art]

The intuition behind this definition follows the definition of the
residual network. The flow on (u, v) increases by f ′(u, v), but
decreases by f ′(v, u) because pushing flow on the reverse edge in the
residual network signifies decreasing the flow in the original network.
Pushing flow on the reverse edge in the residual network is also known
as cancellation. For example, suppose that 5 crates of hockey pucks go
from u to v and 2 crates go from v to u. That is equivalent (from the
perspective of the final result) to sending 3 crates from u to v and
none from v to u. Cancellation of this type is crucial for any
maximum-flow algorithm.

The following lemma shows that augmenting a flow in G by a flow in G_(f)
yields a new flow in G with a greater flow value.

Lemma 24.1

Let G = (V, E) be a flow network with source s and sink t, and let f be
a flow in G. Let G_(f) be the residual network of G induced by f, and
let f ′ be a flow in G_(f). Then the function f ↑ f ′ defined in
equation (24.4) is a flow in G with value |f ↑ f ′| = |f | + |f ′|.

Proof   We first verify that f ↑ f ′ obeys the capacity constraint for
each edge in E and flow conservation at each vertex in V − {s, t}.

For the capacity constraint, first observe that if (u, v) ∈ E, then
c_(f) (v, u) = f (u, v). Because f ′ is a flow in G_(f), we have f ′(v,
u) ≤ c_(f) (v, u), which gives f ′(v, u) ≤ f (u, v). Therefore,

  ---------------- --- ---------------------------------- --------------------------------
  (f ↑ f′)(u, v)   =   f (u, v) + f ′(u, v) − f ′(v, u)   (by equation (24.4))
                   ≥   f (u, v) + f ′(u, v) − f (u, v)    (because f ′(v, u) ≤ f (u, v))
                   =   f ′(u, v)                          
                   ≥   0.                                 
  ---------------- --- ---------------------------------- --------------------------------

In addition,

+-------+-------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| (f ↑ f′)(u, v)                                                      |
+-------+-------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|       | =     | f (u, v) + f ′(u, v) − f | (by equation (24.4))     |
|       |       | ′(v, u)                  |                          |
+-------+-------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|       | ≤     | f (u, v) + f ′(u, v)     | (because flows are       |
|       |       |                          | nonnegative)             |
+-------+-------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|       | ≤     | f (u, v) + c_(f) (u, v)  | (capacity constraint)    |
+-------+-------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|       | =     | f (u, v) + c(u, v) − f   | (definition of c_(f))    |
|       |       | (u, v)                   |                          |
+-------+-------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|       | =     | c(u, v).                 |                          |
+-------+-------+--------------------------+--------------------------+

To show that flow conservation holds and that |f ↑ f ′| = |f | + |f ′|,
we first prove the claim that for all u ∈ V, we have

[art]

Because we disallow antiparallel edges in G (but not in G_(f)), we know
that for each vertex u, there can be an edge (u, v) or (v, u) in G, but
never both. For a fixed vertex u, define V_(l)(u) = {v : (u, v) ∈ E} to
be the set of vertices with edges in G leaving u, and define V_(e)(u) =
{v : (v, u) ∈ E} to be the set of vertices with edges in G entering u.
We have V_(l)(u) ∪ V_(e)(u) ⊆ V and, because G contains no antiparallel
edges, V_(l)(u) ∩ V_(e)(u) = ∅. By the definition of flow augmentation
in equation (24.4), only vertices v in V_(l)(u) can have positive (f ↑
f′)(u, v), and only vertices v in V_(e)(u) can have positive (f ↑ f
′)(v, u). Starting from the left-hand side of equation (24.5), we use
this fact and then reorder and group terms, giving

[art]

In equation (24.6), all four summations can extend to sum over V, since
each additional term has value 0. (Exercise 24.2-1 asks you to prove
this formally.) Taking all four summations over V, instead of just
subsets of V, proves the claim in equation (24.5).

Now we are ready to prove flow conservation for f ↑ f ′ and that |f ↑
f′| = | f | + |f ′|. For the latter property, let u = s in equation
(24.5). Then, we have

[art]

For flow conservation, observe that for any vertex u that is neither s
nor t, flow conservation for f and f ′ means that the right-hand side of
equation (24.5) is 0, and thus Σ_(v∈V) (f ↑ f′)(u, v) = Σ_(v∈V) (f ↑
f′)(v, u).

▪

Augmenting paths

Given a flow network G = (V, E) and a flow f, an augmenting path p is a
simple path from s to t in the residual network G_(f). By the definition
of the residual network, the flow on an edge (u, v) of an augmenting
path may increase by up to c_(f) (u, v) without violating the capacity
constraint on whichever of (u, v) and (v, u) belongs to the original
flow network G.

The blue path in Figure 24.4(b) is an augmenting path. Treating the
residual network G_(f) in the figure as a flow network, the flow through
each edge of this path can increase by up to 4 units without violating a
capacity constraint, since the smallest residual capacity on this path
is c_(f) (v₂, v₃) = 4. We call the maximum amount by which we can
increase the flow on each edge in an augmenting path p the residual
capacity of p, given by

c_(f) (p) = min {c_(f) (u, v) : (u, v) is in p}.

The following lemma, which Exercise 24.2-7 asks you to prove, makes the
above argument more precise.

Lemma 24.2

Let G = (V, E) be a flow network, let f be a flow in G, and let p be an
augmenting path in G_(f). Define a function f_(p) : V × V → ℝ by

[art]

Then, f_(p) is a flow in G_(f) with value |f_(p)| = c_(f) (p) > 0.

▪

The following corollary shows that augmenting f by f_(p) produces
another flow in G whose value is closer to the maximum. Figure 24.4(c)
shows the result of augmenting the flow f from Figure 24.4(a) by the
flow f_(p) in Figure 24.4(b), and Figure 24.4(d) shows the ensuing
residual network.

Corollary 24.3

Let G = (V, E) be a flow network, let f be a flow in G, and let p be an
augmenting path in G_(f). Let f_(p) be defined as in equation (24.7),
and suppose that f is augmented by f_(p). Then the function f ↑ f_(p) is
a flow in G with value |f ↑ f_(p)| = |f| + |f_(p)| > |f|.

Proof   Immediate from Lemmas 24.1 and 24.2.

▪

Cuts of flow networks

The Ford-Fulkerson method repeatedly augments the flow along augmenting
paths until it has found a maximum flow. How do we know that when the
algorithm terminates, it has actually found a maximum flow? The max-flow
min-cut theorem, which we will prove shortly, tells us that a flow is
maximum if and only if its residual network contains no augmenting path.
To prove this theorem, though, we must first explore the notion of a cut
of a flow network.

A cut (S, T) of flow network G = (V, E) is a partition of V into S and T
= V − S such that s ∈ S and t ∈ T. (This definition is similar to the
definition of “cut” that we used for minimum spanning trees in Chapter
21, except that here we are cutting a directed graph rather than an
undirected graph, and we insist that s ∈ S and t ∈ T.) If f is a flow,
then the net flow f(S, T) across the cut (S, T) is defined to be

[art]

The capacity of the cut (S, T) is

[art]

A minimum cut of a network is a cut whose capacity is minimum over all
cuts of the network.

You probably noticed that the definitions of flow across a cut and
capacity of a cut differ in that flow counts edges going in both
directions across the cut, but capacity counts only edges going from the
source side of the cut toward the sink side. This asymmetry is
intentional and important. The reason for this difference will become
apparent later in this section.

Figure 24.5 shows the cut ({s, v₁, v₂}, {v₃, v₄, t}) in the flow network
of Figure 24.1(b). The net flow across this cut is

  -------------------------------------- --- -------------
  f (v₁, v₃) + f (v₂, v₄) − f (v₃, v₂)   =   12 + 11 − 4
                                         =   19,
  -------------------------------------- --- -------------

and the capacity of this cut is

[art]

Figure 24.5 A cut (S, T) in the flow network of Figure 24.1(b), where S
= {s, v₁, v₂} and T = {v₃, v₄, t}. The vertices in S are orange, and the
vertices in T are tan. The net flow across (S, T) is f (S, T) = 19, and
the capacity is c(S, T) = 26.

  ----------------------- --- ---------
  c(v₁, v₃) + c(v₂, v₄)   =   12 + 14
                          =   26.
  ----------------------- --- ---------

The following lemma shows that, for a given flow f, the net flow across
any cut is the same, and it equals |f|, the value of the flow.

Lemma 24.4

Let f be a flow in a flow network G with source s and sink t, and let
(S, T) be any cut of G. Then the net flow across (S, T) is f (S, T) =|
f|.

Proof   For any vertex u ∈ V − {s, t}, rewrite the flow-conservation
condition as

[art]

Taking the definition of| f| from equation (24.1) and adding the
left-hand side of equation (24.10), which equals 0, summed over all
vertices in S − {s}, gives

[art]

Expanding the right-hand summation and regrouping terms yields

[art]

Because V = S ∪ T and S ∩ T = ∅, splitting each summation over V into
summations over S and T gives

[art]

The two summations within the parentheses are actually the same, since
for all vertices x, y ∈ S, the term f (x, y) appears once in each
summation. Hence, these summations cancel, yielding

[art]

▪

A corollary to Lemma 24.4 shows how cut capacities bound the value of a
flow.

Corollary 24.5

The value of any flow f in a flow network G is bounded from above by the
capacity of any cut of G.

Proof   Let (S, T) be any cut of G and let f be any flow. By Lemma 24.4
and the capacity constraint,

[art]

▪

Corollary 24.5 yields the immediate consequence that the value of a
maximum flow in a network is bounded from above by the capacity of a
minimum cut of the network. The important max-flow min-cut theorem,
which we now state and prove, says that the value of a maximum flow is
in fact equal to the capacity of a minimum cut.

Theorem 24.6 (Max-flow min-cut theorem)

If f is a flow in a flow network G = (V, E) with source s and sink t,
then the following conditions are equivalent:

1.  f is a maximum flow in G.
2.  The residual network G_(f) contains no augmenting paths.
3.  |f| = c(S, T) for some cut (S, T) of G.

Proof   (1) ⇒ (2): Suppose for the sake of contradiction that f is a
maximum flow in G but that G_(f) has an augmenting path p. Then, by
Corollary 24.3, the flow found by augmenting f by f_(p), where f_(p) is
given by equation (24.7), is a flow in G with value strictly greater
than |f|, contradicting the assumption that f is a maximum flow.

(2) ⇒ (3): Suppose that G_(f) has no augmenting path, that is, that
G_(f) contains no path from s to t. Define

S = {v ∈ V : there exists a path from s to v in G_(f) }

and T = V − S. The partition (S, T) is a cut: we have s ∈ S trivially
and t ∉ S because there is no path from s to t in G_(f). Now consider a
pair of vertices u ∈ S and v ∈ T. If (u, v) ∈ E, we must have f (u, v) =
c(u, v), since otherwise (u, v) ∈ E_(f), which would place v in set S.
If (v, u) ∈ E, we must have f (v, u) = 0, because otherwise c_(f) (u, v)
= f (v, u) would be positive and we would have (u, v) ∈ E_(f), which
again would place v in S. Of course, if neither (u, v) nor (v, u)
belongs to E, then f (u, v) = f (v, u) = 0. We thus have

[art]

By Lemma 24.4, therefore, |f| = f (S, T) = c(S, T).

(3) ⇒ (1): By Corollary 24.5, |f| ≤ c(S, T) for all cuts (S, T). The
condition |f| = c(S, T) thus implies that f is a maximum flow.

▪

The basic Ford-Fulkerson algorithm

Each iteration of the Ford-Fulkerson method finds some augmenting path p
and uses p to modify the flow f. As Lemma 24.2 and Corollary 24.3
suggest, replacing f by f ↑ f_(p) produces a new flow whose value is
|f| + |f_(p)|. The procedure FORD-FULKERSON on the next page implements
the method by updating the flow attribute (u, v).f for each edge (u, v)
∈ E.¹ It assumes implicitly that (u, v).f = 0 if (u, v) ∉ E. The
procedure also assumes that the capacities c(u, v) come with the flow
network, and that c(u, v) = 0 if (u, v) ∉ E. The procedure computes the
residual capacity c_(f) (u, v) in accordance with the formula (24.2).
The expression c_(f) (p) in the code is just a temporary variable that
stores the residual capacity of the path p.

FORD-FULKERSON (G, s, t)

  --- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   for each edge (u, v) ∈ G.E
  2   (u, v).f = 0
  3   while there exists a path p from s to t in the residual network G_(f)
  4   c_(f) (p) = min {c_(f) (u, v) : (u, v) is in p}
  5   for each edge (u, v) in p
  6   if (u, v) ∈ G.E
  7   (u, v).f = (u, v).f + c_(f) (p)
  8   else (v, u).f = (v, u).f − c_(f) (p)
  9   return f
  --- -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The FORD-FULKERSON procedure simply expands on the FORD-FULKERSON-METHOD
pseudocode given earlier. Figure 24.6 shows the result of each iteration
in a sample run. Lines 1–2 initialize the flow f to 0. The while loop of
lines 3–8 repeatedly finds an augmenting path p in G_(f) and augments
flow f along p by the residual capacity c_(f) (p). Each residual edge in
path p is either an edge in the original network or the reversal of an
edge in the original network. Lines 6–8 update the flow in each case
appropriately, adding flow when the residual edge is an original edge
and subtracting it otherwise. When no augmenting paths exist, the flow f
is a maximum flow.

Analysis of Ford-Fulkerson

The running time of FORD-FULKERSON depends on the augmenting path p and
how it’s found in line 3. If the edge capacities are irrational numbers,
it’s possible to choose the augmenting path so that the algorithm never
terminates: the value of the flow increases with successive
augmentations, but never converges to the maximum flow value. The good
news is that if the algorithm finds the augmenting path by using a
breadth-first search (which we saw in Section 20.2), it runs in
polynomial time. Before proving this result, we obtain a simple bound
for the case in which all capacities are integers and the algorithm
finds any augmenting path.

[art]

Figure 24.6 The execution of the basic Ford-Fulkerson algorithm. (a)–(e)
Successive iterations of the while loop. The left side of each part
shows the residual network G_(f) from line 3 with a blue augmenting path
p. The right side of each part shows the new flow f that results from
augmenting f by f_(p). The residual network in (a) is the input flow
network G. (f) The residual network at the last while loop test. It has
no augmenting paths, and the flow f shown in (e) is therefore a maximum
flow. The value of the maximum flow found is 23.

[art]

Figure 24.7 (a) A flow network for which FORD-FULKERSON can take Θ(E |
f*|) time, where f* is a maximum flow, shown here with |f*| = 2,000,000.
The blue path is an augmenting path with residual capacity 1. (b) The
resulting residual network, with another augmenting path whose residual
capacity is 1. (c) The resulting residual network.

In practice, the maximum-flow problem often arises with integer
capacities. If the capacities are rational numbers, an appropriate
scaling transformation can make them all integers. If f* denotes a
maximum flow in the transformed network, then a straightforward
implementation of FORD-FULKERSON executes the while loop of lines 3–8 at
most |f*| times, since the flow value increases by at least 1 unit in
each iteration.

A good implementation should perform the work done within the while loop
efficiently. It should represent the flow network G = (V, E) with the
right data structure and find an augmenting path by a linear-time
algorithm. Let’s assume that the implementation keeps a data structure
corresponding to a directed graph G′ = (V, E′), where E′ = {(u, v) : (u,
v) ∈ E or (v, u) ∈ E}. Edges in the network G are also edges in G′,
making it straightforward to maintain capacities and flows in this data
structure. Given a flow f on G, the edges in the residual network G_(f)
consist of all edges (u, v) of G′ such that c_(f) (u, v) > 0, where
c_(f) conforms to equation (24.2). The time to find a path in a residual
network is therefore O(V + E′) = O(E) using either depth-first search or
breadth-first search. Each iteration of the while loop thus takes O(E)
time, as does the initialization in lines 1–2, making the total running
time of the FORD-FULKERSON algorithm O(E |f*|).

When the capacities are integers and the optimal flow value |f*| is
small, the running time of the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm is good. Figure
24.7(a) shows an example of what can happen on a simple flow network for
which |f*| is large. A maximum flow in this network has value 2,000,000:
1,000,000 units of flow traverse the path s → u → t, and another
1,000,000 units traverse the path s → v → t. If the first augmenting
path found by FORD-FULKERSON is s → u → v → t, shown in Figure 24.7(a),
the flow has value 1 after the first iteration. The resulting residual
network appears in Figure 24.7(b). If the second iteration finds the
augmenting path s → v → u → t, as shown in Figure 24.7(b), the flow then
has value 2. Figure 24.7(c) shows the resulting residual network. If the
algorithm continues alternately choosing the augmenting paths s → u → v
→ t and s → v → u → t, it performs a total of 2,000,000 augmentations,
increasing the flow value by only 1 unit in each.

The Edmonds-Karp algorithm

In the example of Figure 24.7, the algorithm never chooses the
augmenting path with the fewest edges. It should have. By using
breadth-first search to find an augmenting path in the residual network,
the algorithm runs in polynomial time, independent of the maximum flow
value. We call the Ford-Fulkerson method so implemented the Edmonds-Karp
algorithm.

Let’s now prove that the Edmonds-Karp algorithm runs in O(VE²) time. The
analysis depends on the distances to vertices in the residual network
G_(f). The notation δ_(f) (u, v) denotes the shortest-path distance from
u to v in G_(f), where each edge has unit distance.

Lemma 24.7

If the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is run on a flow network G = (V, E) with
source s and sink t, then for all vertices v ∈ V − {s, t}, the
shortest-path distance δ_(f) (s, v) in the residual network G_(f)
increases monotonically with each flow augmentation.

Proof   We’ll suppose that a flow augmentation occurs that causes the
shortest-path distance from s to some vertex v ∈ V − {s, t} to decrease
and then derive a contradiction. Let f be the flow just before an
augmentation that decreases some shortest-path distance, and let f′ be
the flow just afterward. Let v be a vertex with the minimum δ_(f′) (s,
v) whose distance was decreased by the augmentation, so that δ_(f)′ (s,
v) < δ_(f) (s, v). Let p = s ⇝ u → v be a shortest path from s to v in
G_(f)′, so that (u, v) ∈ E_(f)′ and

[art]

Because of how we chose v, we know that the distance of vertex u from
the source s did not decrease, that is,

[art]

We claim that (u, v) ∉ E_(f). Why? If we have (u, v) ∈ E_(f), then we
also have

  -------------- --- ------------------- -------------------------------------------
  δ_(f) (s, v)   ≤   δ_(f) (s, u) + 1    (by Lemma 22.10, the triangle inequality)
                 ≤   δ_(f)′ (s, u) + 1   (by inequality (24.12))
                 =   δ_(f)′ (s, v)       (by equation (24.11)),
  -------------- --- ------------------- -------------------------------------------

which contradicts our assumption that δ_(f′) (s, v) < δ_(f) (s, v).

How can we have (u, v) ∉ E_(f) and (u, v) ∈ E_(f′)? The augmentation
must have increased the flow from v to u, so that edge (v, u) was in the
augmenting path. The augmenting path was a shortest path from s to t in
G_(f), and since any subpath of a shortest path is itself a shortest
path, this augmenting path includes a shortest path from s to u in G_(f)
that has (v, u) as its last edge. Therefore,

  -------------- --- ------------------- -------------------------
  δ_(f) (s, v)   =   δ_(f) (s, u) − 1    
                 ≤   δ_(f′) (s, u) − 1   (by inequality (24.12))
                 =   δ_(f′) (s, v) − 2   (by equation (24.11)),
  -------------- --- ------------------- -------------------------

so that δ_(f′) (s, v) > δ_(f) (s, v), contradicting our assumption that
δ_(f′) (s, v) < δ_(f) (s, v). We conclude that our assumption that such
a vertex v exists is incorrect.

▪

The next theorem bounds the number of iterations of the Edmonds-Karp
algorithm.

Theorem 24.8

If the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is run on a flow network G = (V, E) with
source s and sink t, then the total number of flow augmentations
performed by the algorithm is O(VE).

Proof   We say that an edge (u, v) in a residual network G_(f) is
critical on an augmenting path p if the residual capacity of p is the
residual capacity of (u, v), that is, if c_(f) (p) = c_(f) (u, v). After
flow is augmented along an augmenting path, any critical edge on the
path disappears from the residual network. Moreover, at least one edge
on any augmenting path must be critical. We’ll show that each of the |E|
edges can become critical at most |V|/2 times.

Let u and v be vertices in V that are connected by an edge in E. Since
augmenting paths are shortest paths, when (u, v) is critical for the
first time, we have

δ_(f) (s, v) = δ_(f) (s, u) + 1.

Once the flow is augmented, the edge (u, v) disappears from the residual
network. It cannot reappear later on another augmenting path until after
the flow from u to v is decreased, which occurs only if (v, u) appears
on an augmenting path. If f ′ is the flow in G when this event occurs,
then we have

δ_(f′) (s, u) = δ_(f′) (s, v) + 1.

Since δ_(f) (s, v) ≤ δ_(f′) (s, v) by Lemma 24.7, we have

  --------------- --- -------------------
  δ_(f′) (s, u)   =   δ_(f′) (s, v) + 1
                  ≥   δ_(f) (s, v) + 1
                  =   δ_(f) (s, u) + 2.
  --------------- --- -------------------

Consequently, from the time (u, v) becomes critical to the time when it
next becomes critical, the distance of u from the source increases by at
least 2. The distance of u from the source is initially at least 0.
Because edge (u, v) is on an augmenting path, and augmenting paths end
at t, we know that u cannot be t, so that in any residual network that
has a path from s to u, the shortest such path has at most |V| − 2
edges. Thus, after the first time that (u, v) becomes critical, it can
become critical at most (|V| − 2)/2 = |V|/2 − 1 times more, for a total
of at most |V|/2 times. Since there are O(E) pairs of vertices that can
have an edge between them in a residual network, the total number of
critical edges during the entire execution of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm
is O(VE). Each augmenting path has at least one critical edge, and hence
the theorem follows.

▪

Because each iteration of FORD-FULKERSON takes O(E) time when it uses
breadth-first search to find the augmenting path, the total running time
of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is O(VE²).

Exercises

24.2-1

Prove that the summations in equation (24.6) equal the summations on the
right-hand side of equation (24.5).

24.2-2

In Figure 24.1(b), what is the net flow across the cut ({s, v₂, v₄},
{v₁, v₃, t})? What is the capacity of this cut?

24.2-3

Show the execution of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm on the flow network of
Figure 24.1(a).

24.2-4

In the example of Figure 24.6, what is the minimum cut corresponding to
the maximum flow shown? Of the augmenting paths appearing in the
example, which one cancels flow?

24.2-5

The construction in Section 24.1 to convert a flow network with multiple
sources and sinks into a single-source, single-sink network adds edges
with infinite capacity. Prove that any flow in the resulting network has
a finite value if the edges of the original network with multiple
sources and sinks have finite capacity.

24.2-6

Suppose that each source s_(i) in a flow network with multiple sources
and sinks produces exactly p_(i) units of flow, so that Σ_(v∈V) f
(s_(i), v) = p_(i). Suppose also that each sink t_(j) consumes exactly
q_(j) units, so that Σ_(v∈V) f (v, t_(j)) = q_(j), where Σ_(i) p_(i) =
Σ_(j) q_(j). Show how to convert the problem of finding a flow f that
obeys these additional constraints into the problem of finding a maximum
flow in a single-source, single-sink flow network.

24.2-7

Prove Lemma 24.2.

24.2-8

Suppose that we redefine the residual network to disallow edges into s.
Argue that the procedure FORD-FULKERSON still correctly computes a
maximum flow.

24.2-9

Suppose that both f and f ′ are flows in a flow network. Does the
augmented flow f ↑ f ′ satisfy the flow conservation property? Does it
satisfy the capacity constraint?

24.2-10

Show how to find a maximum flow in a flow network G = (V, E) by a
sequence of at most |E| augmenting paths. (Hint: Determine the paths
after finding the maximum flow.)

24.2-11

The edge connectivity of an undirected graph is the minimum number k of
edges that must be removed to disconnect the graph. For example, the
edge connectivity of a tree is 1, and the edge connectivity of a cyclic
chain of vertices is 2. Show how to determine the edge connectivity of
an undirected graph G = (V, E) by running a maximum-flow algorithm on at
most |V| flow networks, each having O(V + E) vertices and O(E) edges.

24.2-12

You are given a flow network G, where G contains edges entering the
source s. Let f be a flow in G with |f| ≥ 0 in which one of the edges
(v, s) entering the source has f (v, s) = 1. Prove that there must exist
another flow f ′ with f ′(v, s) = 0 such that |f| = |f′|. Give an
O(E)-time algorithm to compute f′, given f and assuming that all edge
capacities are integers.

24.2-13

Suppose that you wish to find, among all minimum cuts in a flow network
G with integer capacities, one that contains the smallest number of
edges. Show how to modify the capacities of G to create a new flow
network G′ in which any minimum cut in G′ is a minimum cut with the
smallest number of edges in G.

24.3    Maximum bipartite matching

Some combinatorial problems can be cast as maximum-flow problems, such
as the multiple-source, multiple-sink maximum-flow problem from Section
24.1. Other combinatorial problems seem on the surface to have little to
do with flow networks, but they can in fact be reduced to maximum-flow
problems. This section presents one such problem: finding a maximum
matching in a bipartite graph. In order to solve this problem, we’ll
take advantage of an integrality property provided by the Ford-Fulkerson
method. We’ll also see how to use the Ford-Fulkerson method to solve the
maximum-bipartite-matching problem on a graph G = (V, E) in O(VE) time.
Section 25.1 will present an algorithm specifically designed to solve
this problem.

The maximum-bipartite-matching problem

Given an undirected graph G = (V, E), a matching is a subset of edges M
⊆ E such that for all vertices v ∈ V, at most one edge of M is incident
on v. We say that a vertex v ∈ V is matched by the matching M if some
edge in M is incident on v, and otherwise, v is unmatched. A maximum
matching is a matching of maximum cardinality, that is, a matching M
such that for any matching M′, we have |M| ≥ |M′|. In this section, we
restrict our attention to finding maximum matchings in bipartite graphs:
graphs in which the vertex set can be partitioned into V = L ∪ R, where
L and R are disjoint and all edges in E go between L and R. We further
assume that every vertex in V has at least one incident edge. Figure
24.8 illustrates the notion of a matching in a bipartite graph.

The problem of finding a maximum matching in a bipartite graph has many
practical applications. As an example, consider matching a set L of
machines with a set R of tasks to be performed simultaneously. An edge
(u, v) in E signifies that a particular machine u ∈ L is capable of
performing a particular task v ∈ R. A maximum matching provides work for
as many machines as possible.

[art]

Figure 24.8 A bipartite graph G = (V, E) with vertex partition V = L ∪
R. (a) A matching with cardinality 2, indicated by blue edges. (b) A
maximum matching with cardinality 3. (c) The corresponding flow network
G′ with a maximum flow shown. Each edge has unit capacity. Blue edges
have a flow of 1, and all other edges carry no flow. The blue edges from
L to R correspond to those in the maximum matching from (b).

Finding a maximum bipartite matching

The Ford-Fulkerson method provides a basis for finding a maximum
matching in an undirected bipartite graph G = (V, E) in time polynomial
in |V| and |E|. The trick is to construct a flow network in which flows
correspond to matchings, as shown in Figure 24.8(c). We define the
corresponding flow network G′ = (V′, E′) for the bipartite graph G as
follows. Let the source s and sink t be new vertices not in V, and let
V′ = V ∪ {s, t}. If the vertex partition of G is V = L ∪ R, the directed
edges of G′ are the edges of E, directed from L to R, along with |V |
new directed edges:

  ---- --- -------------------------------------------
  E′   =   {(s, u) : u ∈ L}
           ∪ {(u, v) : u ∈ L, v ∈ R, and (u, v) ∈ E}
           ∪ {(v, t) : v ∈ R}.
  ---- --- -------------------------------------------

To complete the construction, assign unit capacity to each edge in E′.
Since each vertex in V has at least one incident edge, |E| ≥ |V|/2.
Thus, |E| ≤ |E′| = |E| + |V| ≤ 3 |E|, and so |E′| = Θ(E).

The following lemma shows that a matching in G corresponds directly to a
flow in G’s corresponding flow network G′. We say that a flow f on a
flow network G = (V, E) is integer-valued if f (u, v) is an integer for
all (u, v) ∈ V × V.

Lemma 24.9

Let G = (V, E) be a bipartite graph with vertex partition V = L ∪ R, and
let G′ = (V′, E′) be its corresponding flow network. If M is a matching
in G, then there is an integer-valued flow f in G′ with value |f| = |M|.
Conversely, if f is an integer-valued flow in G′, then there is a
matching M in G with cardinality |M| = |f| consisting of edges (u, v) ∈
E such that f (u, v) > 0.

Proof   We first show that a matching M in G corresponds to an
integer-valued flow f in G′. Define f as follows. If (u, v) ∈ M, then f
(s, u) = f (u, v) = f (v, t) = 1. For all other edges (u, v) ∈ E′,
define f (u, v) = 0. It is simple to verify that f satisfies the
capacity constraint and flow conservation.

Intuitively, each edge (u, v) ∈ M corresponds to 1 unit of flow in G′
that traverses the path s → u → v → t. Moreover, the paths induced by
edges in M are vertex-disjoint, except for s and t. The net flow across
cut (L ∪ {s}, R ∪ {t}) is equal to |M|, and thus, by Lemma 24.4, the
value of the flow is |f| = |M|.

To prove the converse, let f be an integer-valued flow in G′ and, as in
the statement of the lemma, let

M = {(u, v) : u ∈ L, v ∈ R, and f (u, v) > 0}.

Each vertex u ∈ L has only one entering edge, namely (s, u), and its
capacity is 1. Thus, each u ∈ L has at most 1 unit of flow entering it,
and if 1 unit of flow does enter, by flow conservation, 1 unit of flow
must leave. Furthermore, since the flow f is integer-valued, for each u
∈ L, the 1 unit of flow can enter on at most one edge and can leave on
at most one edge. Thus, 1 unit of flow enters u if and only if there is
exactly one vertex v ∈ R such that f (u, v) = 1, and at most one edge
leaving each u ∈ L carries positive flow. A symmetric argument applies
to each v ∈ R. The set M is therefore a matching.

To see that |M| = |f|, observe that of the edges (u, v) ∈ E′ such that u
∈ L and v ∈ R,

[art]

Consequently, f (L ∪ {s}, R ∪ {t}), the net flow across cut (L ∪ {s}, R
∪ {t}), is equal to |M|. Lemma 24.4 gives that |f| = f (L ∪ {s}, R ∪
{t}) = |M|.

▪

Based on Lemma 24.9, we would like to conclude that a maximum matching
in a bipartite graph G corresponds to a maximum flow in its
corresponding flow network G′, and therefore running a maximum-flow
algorithm on G′ provides a maximum matching in G. The only hitch in this
reasoning is that the maximum-flow algorithm might return a flow in G′
for which some f (u, v) is not an integer, even though the flow value
|f| must be an integer. The following theorem shows that the
Ford-Fulkerson method cannot produce a solution with this problem.

Theorem 24.10 (Integrality theorem)

If the capacity function c takes on only integer values, then the
maximum flow f produced by the Ford-Fulkerson method has the property
that |f| is an integer. Moreover, for all vertices u and v, the value of
f (u, v) is an integer.

Proof   Exercise 24.3-2 asks you to provide the proof by induction on
the number of iterations.

▪

We can now prove the following corollary to Lemma 24.9.

Corollary 24.11

The cardinality of a maximum matching M in a bipartite graph G equals
the value of a maximum flow f in its corresponding flow network G′.

Proof   We use the nomenclature from Lemma 24.9. Suppose that M is a
maximum matching in G and that the corresponding flow f in G′ is not
maximum. Then there is a maximum flow f′ in G′ such that |f′| > |f|.
Since the capacities in G′ are integer-valued, by Theorem 24.10, we can
assume that f′ is integer-valued. Thus, f′ corresponds to a matching M′
in G with cardinality |M′| = |f′| > |f| = |M|, contradicting our
assumption that M is a maximum matching. In a similar manner, we can
show that if f is a maximum flow in G′, its corresponding matching is a
maximum matching on G.

▪

Thus, to find a maximum matching in a bipartite undirected graph G,
create the flow network G′, run the Ford-Fulkerson method on G′, and
convert the integer-valued maximum flow found into a maximum matching
for G. Since any matching in a bipartite graph has cardinality at most
min {|L|, |R|} = O(V), the value of the maximum flow in G′ is O(V).
Therefore, finding a maximum matching in a bipartite graph takes O(VE′)
= O(VE) time, since |E′| = Θ(E).

Exercises

24.3-1

Run the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm on the flow network in Figure 24.8(c)
and show the residual network after each flow augmentation. Number the
vertices in L top to bottom from 1 to 5 and in R top to bottom from 6 to
9. For each iteration, pick the augmenting path that is
lexicographically smallest.

24.3-2

Prove Theorem 24.10. Use induction on the number of iterations of the
Ford-Fulkerson method.

24.3-3

Let G = (V, E) be a bipartite graph with vertex partition V = L ∪ R, and
let G′ be its corresponding flow network. Give a good upper bound on the
length of any augmenting path found in G′ during the execution of
FORD-FULKERSON.

Problems

24-1     Escape problem

An n×n grid is an undirected graph consisting of n rows and n columns of
vertices, as shown in Figure 24.9. We denote the vertex in the ith row
and the j th column by (i, j). All vertices in a grid have exactly four
neighbors, except for the boundary vertices, which are the points (i, j)
for which i = 1, i = n, j = 1, or j = n.

Given m ≤ n² starting points (x₁, y₁), (x₂, y₂), …, (x_(m), y_(m)) in
the grid, the escape problem is to determine whether there are m
vertex-disjoint paths from the starting points to any m different points
on the boundary. For example, the grid in Figure 24.9(a) has an escape,
but the grid in Figure 24.9(b) does not.

[art]

Figure 24.9 Grids for the escape problem. Starting points are blue, and
other grid vertices are tan. (a) A grid with an escape, shown by blue
paths. (b) A grid with no escape.

a. Consider a flow network in which vertices, as well as edges, have
capacities. That is, the total positive flow entering any given vertex
is subject to a capacity constraint. Show how to reduce the problem of
determining the maximum flow in a network with edge and vertex
capacities to an ordinary maximum-flow problem on a flow network of
comparable size.

b. Describe an efficient algorithm to solve the escape problem, and
analyze its running time.

24-2     Minimum path cover

A path cover of a directed graph G = (V, E) is a set P of
vertex-disjoint paths such that every vertex in V is included in exactly
one path in P. Paths may start and end anywhere, and they may be of any
length, including 0. A minimum path cover of G is a path cover
containing the fewest possible paths.

a. Give an efficient algorithm to find a minimum path cover of a
directed acyclic graph G = (V, E). (Hint: Assuming that V = {1, 2, …,
n}, construct a flow network based on the graph G′ = (V′, E′), where

V′ = {x₀, x₁, …, x_(n)} ∪ {y₀, y₁, …, y_(n)},

E′ = {(x₀, x_(i)) : i ∈ V } ∪ {(y_(i), y₀) : i ∈ V } ∪ {(x_(i), y_(j)) :
(i, j) ∈ E},

and run a maximum-flow algorithm.)

b. Does your algorithm work for directed graphs that contain cycles?
Explain.

24-3     Hiring consulting experts

Professor Fieri wants to open a consulting company for the food
industry. He has identified n important food categories, which he
represents by the set C = {C₁, C₂, …, C_(n)}. In each category C_(k), he
can hire an expert in that category for e_(k) > 0 dollars. The
consulting company has lined up a set J = {J₁, J₂, …, J_(m)} of
potential jobs. In order to perform job J_(i), the company needs to have
hired experts in a subset R_(i) ⊆ C of categories. Each expert can work
on multiple jobs simultaneously. If the company chooses to accept job
J_(i), it must have hired experts in all categories in R_(i), and it
takes in revenue of p_(i) > 0 dollars.

Professor Fieri’s job is to determine which categories to hire experts
in and which jobs to accept in order to maximize the net revenue, which
is the total income from jobs accepted minus the total cost of employing
the experts.

Consider the following flow network G. It contains a source vertex s,
vertices C₁, C₂, …, C_(n), vertices J₁, J₂, …, J_(m), and a sink vertex
t. For k = 1, 2 …, n, the flow network contains an edge (s, C_(k)) with
capacity c(s, C_(k)) = e_(k), and for i = 1, 2, …, m, the flow network
contains an edge (J_(i), t) with capacity c(J_(i), t) = p_(i). For k =
1, 2, …, n and i = 1, 2, …, m, if C_(k) ∈ R_(i), then G contains an edge
(C_(k), J_(i)) with capacity c(C_(k), J_(i)) = ∞.

a. Show that if J_(i) ∈ T for a finite-capacity cut (S, T) of G, then
C_(k) ∈ T for each C_(k) ∈ R_(i).

b. Show how to determine the maximum net revenue from the capacity of a
minimum cut of G and the given p_(i) values.

c. Give an efficient algorithm to determine which jobs to accept and
which experts to hire. Analyze the running time of your algorithm in
terms of m, n, and [art].

24-4     Updating maximum flow

Let G = (V, E) be a flow network with source s, sink t, and integer
capacities. Suppose that you are given a maximum flow in G.

a. Suppose that the capacity of a single edge (u, v) ∈ E increases by 1.
Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to update the maximum flow.

b. Suppose that the capacity of a single edge (u, v) ∈ E decreases by 1.
Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to update the maximum flow.

24-5     Maximum flow by scaling

Let G = (V, E) be a flow network with source s, sink t, and an integer
capacity c(u, v) on each edge (u, v) ∈ E. Let C = max {c(u, v) : (u, v)
∈ E}.

a. Argue that a minimum cut of G has capacity at most C |E|.

b. For a given number K, show how to find an augmenting path of capacity
at least K in O(E) time, if such a path exists.

The procedure MAX-FLOW-BY-SCALING appearing on the following page
modifies the basic FORD-FULKERSON-METHOD procedure to compute a maximum
flow in G.

c. Argue that MAX-FLOW-BY-SCALING returns a maximum flow.

d. Show that the capacity of a minimum cut of the residual network G_(f)
is less than 2K |E| each time line 4 executes.

e. Argue that the inner while loop of lines 5–6 executes O(E) times for
each value of K.

MAX-FLOW-BY-SCALING (G, s, t)

  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------
  1   C = max {c(u, v) : (u, v) ∈ E}
  2   initialize flow f to 0
  3   K = 2^(⌊lg C⌋)
  4   while K ≥ 1
  5   while there exists an augmenting path p of capacity at least K
  6   augment flow f along p
  7   K = K/2
  8   return f
  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------

f. Conclude that MAX-FLOW-BY-SCALING can be implemented so that it runs
in O(E² lg C) time.

24-6     Widest augmenting path

The Edmonds-Karp algorithm implements the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm by
always choosing a shortest augmenting path in the residual network.
Suppose instead that the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm chooses a widest
augmenting path: an augmenting path with the greatest residual capacity.
Assume that G = (V, E) is a flow network with source s and sink t, that
all capacities are integer, and that the largest capacity is C. In this
problem, you will show that choosing a widest augmenting path results in
at most |E| ln |f*| augmentations to find a maximum flow f*.

a. Show how to adjust Dijkstra’s algorithm to find the widest augmenting
path in the residual network.

b. Show that a maximum flow in G can be formed by successive flow
augmentations along at most |E| paths from s to t.

c. Given a flow f, argue that the residual network G_(f) has an
augmenting path p with residual capacity c_(f) (p) ≥ (|f*| − |f|)/|E|.

d. Assuming that each augmenting path is a widest augmenting path, let
f_(i) be the flow after augmenting the flow by the ith augmenting path,
where f₀ has f (u, v) = 0 for all edges (u, v). Show that |f*| − |f_(i)|
≤ |f*| (1 − 1/|E|)^(i).

e. Show that |f* | − |f_(i)| < |f*| e^(−i/|E|).

f. Conclude that after the flow is augmented at most |E| ln |f*| times,
the flow is a maximum flow.

24-7     Global minimum cut

A global cut in an undirected graph G = (V, E) is a partition (see page
1156) of V into two nonempty sets V₁ and V₂. This definition is like the
definition of cut that we have used in this chapter, except that we no
longer have distinguished vertices s and t. Any edge (u, v) with u ∈ V₁
and v ∈ V₂ is said to cross the cut.

We can extend this definition of a cut to a multigraph G = (V, E) (see
page 1167), and we denote by c(u, v) the number of edges in the
multigraph with endpoints u and v. A global cut in a multigraph is still
a partition of the vertices, and the value of a global cut (V₁, V₂) is
[art]. A solution to the global-minimum-cut problem is a cut (V₁, V₂)
such that c(V₁, V₂) is minimum. Let μ(G) denote the value of a global
minimum cut in a graph or multigraph G.

a. Show how to find a global minimum cut of a graph G = (V, E) by
solving [art] maximum-flow problems, each with a different pair of
vertices as the source and sink, and taking the mininum value of the
cuts found.

b. Give an algorithm to find a global minimum cut by solving only Θ(V)
maximum-flow problems. What is the running time of your algorithm?

The remainder of this problem develops an algorithm for the
global-minimum-cut problem that does not use any maximum-flow
computations. It uses the notion of an edge contraction, defined on page
1168, with one crucial difference. The algorithm maintains a multigraph,
so that upon contracting an edge (u, v), it creates a new vertex x, and
for any other vertex y ∈ V, the number of edges between x and y is c(u,
y) + c(v, y). The algorithm does not maintain self-loops, and so it sets
c(x, x) to 0. Denote by G/(u, v) the multigraph that results from
contracting edge (u, v) in multigraph G.

Consider what can happen to the minimum cut when an edge is contracted.
Assume that, at all points, the minimum cut in a multigraph G is unique.
We’ll remove this assumption later.

c. Show that for any edge (u, v), we have μ(G/(u, v)) ≤ μ(G). Under what
conditions is μ(G/(u, v)) < μ(G)?

Next, you will show that if you pick an edge uniformly at random, the
probability that it belongs to the minimum cut is small.

d. Show that for any multigraph G = (V, E), the value of the global
minimum cut is at most the average degree of a vertex: that μ(G) ≤ 2
|E|/|V|, where |E| denotes the total number of edges in the multigraph.

e. Using the results from parts (c) and (d), show that, if we pick an
edge (u, v) uniformly at random, then the probability that (u, v)
belongs to the minimum cut is at most 2/V.

Consider the algorithm that repeatedly chooses an edge at random and
contracts it until the multigraph has exactly two vertices, say u and v.
At that point, the multigraph corresponds to a cut in the original
graph, with vertex u representing all the nodes in one side of the
original graph, and v representing all the vertices on the other side.
The number of edges given by c(u, v) corresponds exactly to the number
of edges crossing the corresponding cut in the original graph. We call
this algorithm the contraction algorithm.

f. Suppose that the contraction algorithm terminates with a multigraph
whose only vertices are u and v. Show that [art].

g. Prove that if the contraction algorithm repeats [art] times, then the
probability that at least one of the runs returns the minimum cut is at
least 1 − 1/|V|.

h. Give a detailed implementation of the contraction algorithm that runs
in O(V²) time.

i. Combine the previous parts and remove the assumption that the minimum
cut must be unique, to conclude that running the contraction algorithm
[art] times yields an algorithm that runs in O(V⁴ lg V) time and returns
a minimum cut with probability at least 1 − 1/V.

Chapter notes

Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin [7], Even [137], Lawler [276], Papadimitriou
and Steiglitz [353], Tarjan [429], and Williamson [458] are good
references for network flows and related algorithms. Schrijver [399] has
written an interesting review of historical developments in the field of
network flows.

The Ford-Fulkerson method is due to Ford and Fulkerson [149], who
originated the formal study of many of the problems in the area of
network flow, including the maximum-flow and bipartite-matching
problems. Many early implementations of the Ford-Fulkerson method found
augmenting paths using breadth-first search. Edmonds and Karp [132], and
independently Dinic [119], proved that this strategy yields a
polynomial-time algorithm. A related idea, that of using “blocking
flows,” was also first developed by Dinic [119].

A class of algorithms known as push-relabel algorithms, due to Goldberg
[185] and Goldberg and Tarjan [188], takes a different approach from the
Ford-Fulkerson method. Push-relabel algorithms allow flow conservation
to be violated at vertices other than the source and sink as they
execute. Using an idea first developed by Karzonov [251], they allow a
preflow in which the flow into a vertex may exceed the flow out of the
vertex. Such a vertex is said to be overflowing. Initially, every edge
leaving the source is filled to capacity, so that all neighbors of the
source are overflowing. In a push-relabel algorithm, each vertex is
assigned an integer height. An overflowing vertex may push flow to a
neighboring vertex to which it has a residual edge provided that it is
higher than the neighbor. If all residual edges from an overflowing
vertex go to neighbors with equal or greater heights, then the vertex
may increase its height. Once all vertices other than the sink are no
longer overflowing, the preflow is not only a legal flow, but also a
maximum flow.

Goldberg and Tarjan [188] gave an O(V³)-time algorithm that uses a queue
to maintain the set of overflowing vertices, as well as an algorithm
that uses dynamic trees to achieve a running time of O(VE lg(V²/E + 2)).
Several other researchers developed improved variants and
implementations [9, 10, 15, 86, 87, 255, 358], the fastest of which, by
King, Rao, and Tarjan [255], runs in O(VE log_(E/(V lg V)) V) time.

Another efficient algorithm for maximum flow, by Goldberg and Rao [187],
runs in O (min{V^(2/3), E^(1/2)} E lg (V²/E + 2) lg C) time, where C is
the maximum capacity any edge. Orlin [350] gave an algorithm in the same
spirit as this algorithm that runs in O(VE + E^(31/16) lg² V) time.
Combining it with the algorithm of King, Rao, and Tarjan results in an
O(VE)-time algorithm.

A different approach to maximum flows and related problems is to use
techniques from continuous optimization including electrical flows and
interior-point methods. The first breakthrough in this line of work is
due to Madry [308], who gave an Õ(E^(10/7))-time algorithm for
unit-capacity maximum flow and bipartite maximum matching. (See Problem
3-6 on page 73 for a definition of Õ.) There has been a series of papers
in this area for matchings, maximum flows, and minimum-cost flows. The
fastest algorithm to date in this line of work for maximum flow is due
to Lee and Sidford [285], taking [art] time. If the capacities are not
too large, this algorithm is faster than the O(VE)-time algorithm
mentioned above. Another algorithm, due to Liu and Sidford [303] runs in
Õ(E^(11/8)C^(1/4)) time, where C is the maximum capacity of any edge.
This algorithm does not run in polynomial time, but for small enough
capacities, it is faster than the previous ones.

In practice, push-relabel algorithms currently dominate algorithms based
on augmenting paths, continuous-optimization, and linear programming for
the maximum-flow problem [88].

¹ Recall from Section 20.1 that we represent an attribute f for edge (u,
v) with the same style of notation—(u, v).f—that we use for an attribute
of any other object.

25        Matchings in Bipartite Graphs

Many real-world problems can be modeled as finding matchings in an
undirected graph. For an undirected graph G = (V, E), a matching is a
subset of edges M ⊆ E such that every vertex in V has at most one
incident edge in M.

For example, consider the following scenario. You have one or more
positions to fill and several candidates to interview. According to your
schedule, you are able to interview candidates at certain time slots.
You ask the candidates to indicate the subsets of time slots at which
they are available. How can you schedule the interviews so that each
time slot has at most one candidate scheduled, while maximizing the
number of candidates that you can interview? You can model this scenario
as a matching problem on a bipartite graph in which each vertex
represents either a candidate or a time slot, with an edge between a
candidate and a time slot if the candidate is available then. If an edge
is included in the matching, that means you are scheduling a particular
candidate for a particular time slot. Your goal is to find a maximum
matching: a matching of maximum cardinality. One of the authors of this
book was faced with exactly this situation when hiring teaching
assistants for a large class. He used the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm in
Section 25.1 to schedule the interviews.

Another application of matching is the U.S. National Resident Matching
Program, in which medical students are matched to hospitals where they
will be stationed as medical residents. Each student ranks the hospitals
by preference, and each hospital ranks the students. The goal is to
assign students to hospitals so that there is never a student and a
hospital that both have regrets because the student was not assigned to
the hospital, yet each ranked the other higher than who or where they
were assigned. This scenario is perhaps the best-known real-world
example of the “stable-marriage problem,” which Section 25.2 examines.

Yet another instance where matching comes into play occurs when workers
must be assigned to tasks in order to maximize the overall effectiveness
of the assignment. For each worker and each task, the worker has some
quantified effectiveness for that task. Assuming that there are equal
numbers of workers and tasks, the goal is to find a matching with the
maximum total effectiveness. Such a situation is an example of an
assignment problem, which Section 25.3 shows how to solve.

The algorithms in this chapter find matchings in bipartite graphs. As in
Section 24.3, the input is an undirected graph G = (V, E), where V = L ∪
R, the vertex sets L and R are disjoint, and every edge in E is incident
on one vertex in L and one vertex in R. A matching, therefore, matches
vertices in L with vertices in R. In some applications, the sets L and R
have equal cardinality, and in other applications they need not be the
same size.

An undirected graph need not be bipartite for the concept of matching to
apply. Matching in general undirected graphs has applications in areas
such as scheduling and computational chemistry. It models problems in
which you want to pair up entities, represented by vertices. Two
vertices are adjacent if they represent compatible entities, and you
need to find a large set of compatible pairs. Maximum-matching and
maximum-weight matching problems on general graphs can be solved by
polynomial-time algorithms whose running times are similar to those for
bipartite matching, but the algorithms are significantly more
complicated. Exercise 25.2-5 discusses the general version of the
stable-marriage problem, known as the “stable-roommates problem.”
Although matching applies to general undirected graphs, this chapter
deals only with bipartite graphs.

25.1    Maximum bipartite matching (revisited)

Section 24.3 demonstrated one way to find a maximum matching in a
bipartite graph, by finding a maximum flow. This section provides a more
efficient method, the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, which runs in [art] time.
Figure 25.1(a) shows a matching in an undirected bipartite graph. A
vertex that has an incident edge in matching M is matched under M, and
otherwise, it is unmatched. A maximal matching is a matching M to which
no other edges can be added, that is, for every edge e ∈ E − M, the edge
set M ∪ {e} fails to be a matching. A maximum matching is always
maximal, but the reverse does not always hold.

Many algorithms to find maximum matchings, the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm
included, work by incrementally increasing the size of a matching. Given
a matching M in an undirected graph G = (V, E), an M-alternating path is
a simple path whose edges alternate between being in M and being in E −
M. Figure 25.1(b) depicts an M-augmenting path (sometimes called an
augmenting path with respect to M): an M-alternating path whose first
and last edges belong to E − M. Since an M-augmenting path contains one
more edge in E − M than in M, it must consist of an odd number of edges.

[art]

Figure 25.1 A bipartite graph, where V = L ∪ R, L = {l₁, l₂, … , l₇},
and R = {r₁, r₂, … , r₈}. (a) A matching M with cardinality 4,
highlighted in blue. Matched vertices are blue, and unmatched vertices
are tan. (b) The five edges highlighted in orange form an M-augmenting
path P going between vertices l₆ and r₈. (c) The set of edges M′ = M ⊕ P
highlighted in blue is a matching containing one more edge than M and
adding l₆ and r₈ to the matched vertices. This matching is not a maximum
matching (see Exercise 25.1-1).

Figure 25.1(c) demonstrates the following lemma, which shows that by
removing from matching M the edges in an M-augmenting path that belong
to M and adding to M the edges in the M-augmenting path that are not in
M, the result is a new matching with one more edge than M. Since a
matching is a set of edges, the lemma relies on the notion of the
symmetric difference of two sets: X ⊕ Y = (X − Y) ∪ (Y − X), that is,
the elements that belong to X or Y, but not both. Alternatively, you can
think of X ⊕ Y as (X ∪ Y)−(X ∩ Y). The operator ⊕ is commutative and
associative. Furthermore, X ⊕ X = Ø and X ⊕ Ø = Ø ⊕ X = X for any set X,
so that the empty set is the identity for ⊕.

Lemma 25.1

Let M be a matching in any undirected graph G = (V, E), and let P be an
M-augmenting path. Then the set of edges M′ = M ⊕ P is also a matching
in G with |M′| = |M| + 1.

Proof   Let P contain q edges, so that ⌈q/2⌉ edges belong to E − M and
⌊q/2⌋ edges belong to M, and let these q edges be (v₁, v₂), (v₂, v₃), …
, (v_(q), v_(q+1)). Because P is an M-augmenting path, vertices v₁ and
v_(q+1) are unmatched under M and all other vertices in P are matched.
Edges (v₁, v₂), (v₃, v₄), … , (v_(q), v_(q+1)) belong to E − M, and
edges (v₂, v₃), (v₄, v₅), … , (v_(q−1), v_(q)) belong to M. The
symmetric difference M′ = M ⊕ P reverses these roles, so that edges (v₁,
v₂), (v₃, v₄), … , (v_(q), v_(q+1)) belong to M′ and (v₂, v₃), (v₄, v₅),
… , (v_(q−1), v_(q)) belong to E − M′. Each vertex v₁, v₂, … , v_(q),
v_(q+1) is matched under M′, which gains one additional edge relative to
M, and no other vertices or edges in G are affected by the change from M
to M′. Hence, M′ is a matching in G, and |M′| = |M| + 1.

▪

Since taking the symmetric difference of a matching M with an
M-augmenting path increases the size of the matching by 1, the following
corollary shows that taking the symmetric difference of M with k
vertex-disjoint M-augmenting paths increases the size of the matching by
k.

Corollary 25.2

Let M be a matching in any undirected graph G = (V, E) and P₁, P₂, … ,
P_(k) be vertex-disjoint M-augmenting paths. Then the set of edges M′ =
M ⊕ (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ … ∪ P_(k)) is a matching in G with |M′| = |M| + k.

Proof   Since the M-augmenting paths P₁, P₂, … , P_(k) are
vertex-disjoint, we have that P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪⋯∪ P_(k) = P₁⊕ P₂ ⊕⋯⊕ P_(k).
Because the operator ⊕ is associative, we have

  --------------------------- --- --------------------------------------------
  M ⊕ (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k))   =   M ⊕ (P₁ ⊕ P₂ ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ P_(k))
                              =   (⋯ ((M ⊕ P₁) ⊕ P₂) ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ P_(k−1)) ⊕ P_(k).
  --------------------------- --- --------------------------------------------

A simple induction on i using Lemma 25.1 shows that M ⊕ (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪
P_(i−1)) is a matching in G containing |M| + i − 1 edges and that path
P_(i) is an augmenting path with respect to M ⊕ (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(i−1)).
Each of these augmenting paths increases the size of the matching by 1,
and so |M′| = |M| + k.

▪

As the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm goes from matching to matching, it will
be useful to consider the symmetric difference between two matchings.

Lemma 25.3

Let M and M* be matchings in graph G = (V, E), and consider the graph G′
= (V, E′), where E′ = M ⊕ M*. Then, G′ is a disjoint union of simple
paths, simple cycles, and/or isolated vertices. The edges in each such
simple path or simple cycle alternate between M and M*. If |M*| > |M|,
then G′ contains at least |M*|−|M| vertex-disjoint M-augmenting paths.

Proof   Each vertex in G′ has degree 0, 1, or 2, since at most two edges
of E′ can be incident on a vertex: at most one edge from M and at most
one edge from M*. Therefore, each connected component of G′ is either a
singleton vertex, an even-length simple cycle with edges alternately in
M and M*, or a simple path with edges alternately in M and M*. Since

  ---- --- ---------------------
  E′   =   M ⊕ M*
       =   (M ∪ M*) − (M ∩ M*)
  ---- --- ---------------------

and |M*| > |M|, the edge set E′ must contain |M*| − |M| more edges from
M* than from M. Because each cycle in G′ has an even number of edges
drawn alternately from M and M*, each cycle has an equal number of edges
from M and M*. Therefore, the simple paths in G′ account for there being
|M*| − |M| more edges from M* than M. Each path containing a different
number of edges from M and M* either starts and ends with edges from M,
containing one more edge from M than from M*, or starts and ends with
edges from M*, containing one more edge from M* than from M. Because E′
contains |M*| − |M| more edges from M* than from M, there are at least
|M*| − |M| paths of the latter type, and each one is an M-augmenting
path. Because each vertex has at most two incident edges from E′, these
paths must be vertex-disjoint.

▪

If an algorithm finds a maximum matching by incrementally increasing the
size of the matching, how does it determine when to stop? The following
corollary gives the answer: when there are no augmenting paths.

Corollary 25.4

Matching M in graph G = (V, E) is a maximum matching if and only if G
contains no M-augmenting path.

Proof   We prove the contrapositive of both directions of the lemma
statement. The contrapositive of the forward direction is
straightforward. If there is an M-augmenting path P in G, then by Lemma
25.1, the matching M ⊕ P contains one more edge than M, meaning that M
could not be a maximum matching.

To show the contrapositive of the backward direction—if M is not a
maximum matching, then G contains an M-augmenting path—let M* be a
maximum matching in Lemma 25.3, so that |M*| > |M|. Then G contains at
least |M*| − |M| > 0 vertex-disjoint M-augmenting paths.

▪

We already have learned enough to create a maximum-matching algorithm
that runs in O(VE) time. Start with the matching M empty. Then
repeatedly run a variant of either breadth-first search or depth-first
search from an unmatched vertex that takes alternating paths until you
find another unmatched vertex. Use the resulting M-augmenting path to
increase the size of M by 1.

The Hopcroft-Karp algorithm

The Hopcroft-Karp algorithm improves the running time to [art]. The
procedure HOPCROFT-KARP is given an undirected bipartite graph, and it
uses Corollary 25.2 to repeatedly increase the size of the matching M it
finds. Corollary 25.4 proves that the algorithm is correct, since it
terminates once there are no M-augmenting paths. It remains to show that
the algorithm does run in [art] time. We’ll see that the repeat loop of
lines 2–5 iterates [art] times and how to implement line 3 so that it
runs in O(E) time in each iteration.

HOPCROFT-KARP (G)

  --- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   M = Ø
  2   repeat
  3   let P = {P₁, P₂, … , P_(k)} be a maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest M-augmenting paths
  4   M = M ⊕ (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k))
  5   until P == Ø
  6   return M
  --- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let’s first see how to find a maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest
M-augmenting paths in O(E) time. There are three phases. The first phase
forms a directed version G_(M) of the undirected bipartite graph G. The
second phase creates a directed acyclic graph H from G_(M) via a variant
of breadth-first search. The third phase finds a maximal set of
vertex-disjoint shortest M-augmenting paths by running a variant of
depth-first search on the transpose H^(T) of H. (Recall that the
transpose of a directed graph reverses the direction of each edge. Since
H is acyclic, so is H^(T).)

Given a matching M, you can think of an M-augmenting path P as starting
at an unmatched vertex in L, traversing an odd number of edges, and
ending at an unmatched vertex in R. The edges in P traversed from L to R
must belong to E − M, and the edges in P traversed from R to L must
belong to M. The first phase, therefore, creates the directed graph
G_(M) by directing the edges accordingly: G_(M) = (V, E_(M)), where

[art]

Figure 25.2 (a) The directed graph G_(M) created in the first phase for
the undirected bipartite graph G and matching M in Figure 25.1(a).
Breadth-first distances from any unmatched vertex in L appear next to
each vertex. (b) The dag H created from G_(M) in the second phase.
Because the smallest distance to an unmatched vertex in R is 3, vertices
l₇ and r₈, with distances greater than 3, are not in H.

  ------- --- ---------------------------------------------- ----------------------
  E_(M)   =   {(l, r) : l ∈ L, r ∈ R, and (l, r) ∈ E − M }   (edges from L to R)
              ∪ {(r, l) : r ∈ R, l ∈ L, and (l, r) ∈ M }     (edges from R to L).
  ------- --- ---------------------------------------------- ----------------------

Figure 25.2(a) shows the graph G_(M) for the graph G and matching M in
Figure 25.1(a).

The dag H = (V_(H), E_(H)) created by the second phase has layers of
vertices. Figure 25.2(b) shows the dag H corresponding to the directed
graph G_(M) in part (a) of the figure. Each layer contains only vertices
from L or only vertices from R, alternating from layer to layer. The
layer that a vertex resides in is given by that vertex’s minimum
breadth-first distance in G_(M) from any unmatched vertex in L. Vertices
in L appear in even-numbered layers, and vertices in R appear in
odd-numbered layers. Let q denote the smallest distance in G_(M) of any
unmatched vertex in R. Then, the last layer in H contains the vertices
in R with distance q. Vertices whose distance exceeds q do not appear in
V_(H). (The graph H in Figure 25.2(b) omits vertices l₇ and r₈ because
their distances from any unmatched vertex in L exceed q = 3.) The edges
in E_(H) form a subset of E_(M):

E_(H) = {(l, r) ∈ E_(M) : r.d ≤ q and r.d = l.d + 1} ∪ {(r, l) ∈ E_(M) :
l.d ≤ q},

where the attribute d of a vertex gives the vertex’s breadth-first
distance in G_(M) from any unmatched vertex in L. Edges that do not go
between two consecutive layers are omitted from E_(H).

To determine the breadth-first distances of vertices, run breadth-first
search on the graph G_(M), but starting from all the unmatched vertices
in L. (In the BFS procedure on page 556, replace the root vertex s by
the set of unmatched vertices in L.) The predecessor attributes π
computed by the BFS procedure are not needed here, since H is a dag and
not necessarily a tree.

Every path in H from a vertex in layer 0 to an unmatched vertex in layer
q corresponds to a shortest M-augmenting path in the original bipartite
graph G. Just use the undirected versions of the directed edges in H.
Moreover, every shortest M-augmenting path in G is present in H.

The third phase identifies a maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest
M-augmenting paths. As Figure 25.3 shows, it starts by creating the
transpose H^(T) of H. Then, for each unmatched vertex r in layer q, it
performs a depth-first search starting from r until it either reaches a
vertex in layer 0 or has exhausted all possible paths without reaching a
vertex in layer 0. Instead of maintaining discovery and finish times,
the depth-first search just needs to keep track of the predecessor
attributes π in the depth-first tree of each search. Upon reaching a
vertex in layer 0, tracing back along the predecessors identifies an
M-augmenting path. Each vertex is searched from only when it is first
discovered in any search. If the search from a vertex r in layer q
cannot find a path of undiscovered vertices to an undiscovered vertex in
layer 0, then no M-augmenting path including r goes into the maximal
set.

Figure 25.3 shows the result of the third phase. The first depth-first
search starts from vertex r₁. It identifies the M-augmenting path 〈(r₁,
l₃), (l₃, r₃), (r₃, l₁)〉, which is highlighted in orange, and discovers
vertices r₁, l₃, r₃, and l₁. The next depth-first search starts from
vertex r₄. This search first examines the edge (r₄, l₃), but because l₃
was already discovered, it backtracks and examines edge (r₄, l₅). From
there, it continues and identifies the M-augmenting path 〈(r₄, l₅),
(l₅, r₇), (r₇, l₆)〉, which is highlighted in yellow, and discovers
vertices r₄, l₅, r₇, and l₆. The depth-first search from vertex r₆ gets
stuck at vertices l₃ and l₅, which have already been discovered, and so
this search fails to find a path of undiscovered vertices to a vertex in
layer 0. There is no depth-first search from vertex r₅ because it is
matched, and depth-first searches start from unmatched vertices.
Therefore, the maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest M-augmenting
paths found contains just the two M-augmenting paths (〈r₁, l₃), (l₃,
r₃), (r₃, l₁)〉 and 〈(r₄, l₅), (l₅, r₇), (r₇, l₆)〉.

You might have noticed that in this example, this maximal set of two
vertex-disjoint shortest M-augmenting paths is not a maximum set. The
graph contains three vertex-disjoint shortest M-augmenting paths: 〈(r₁,
l₂), (l₂, r₂), (r₂, l₁)〉, 〈(r₄, l₃), (l₃, r₃), (r₃, l₄)〉, and 〈(r₆,
l₅), (l₅, r₇), (r₇, l₆)〉. No matter: the algorithm requires the set of
vertex-disjoint shortest M-augmenting paths found in line 3 of
HOPCROFT-KARP to be only maximal, not necessarily maximum.

[art]

Figure 25.3 The transpose H^(T) of the dag H created in the third phase.
The first depth-first search, starting from vertex r₁, identifies the
M-augmenting path 〈(r₁, l₃), (l₃, r₃), (r₃, l₁)〉 highlighted in
orange, and it discovers vertices r₁, l₃, r₃, l₁. The second depth-first
search, starting from vertex r₄, identifies the M-augmenting path 〈(r₄,
l₅), (l₅, r₇), (r₇, l₆)〉 highlighted in yellow, discovering vertices
r₄, l₅, r₇, l₆.

It remains to show that all three phases of line 3 take O(E) time. We
assume that in the original bipartite graph G, each vertex has at least
one incident edge so that |V| = O(E), which in turn implies that |V| +
|E| = O(E). The first phase creates the directed graph G_(M) by simply
directing each edge of G, so that |V_(M)| = |V| and |E_(M) = |E|. The
second phase performs a breadth-first search on G_(M), taking O(V_(M) +
E_(M)) = O(E_(M)) = O(E) time. In fact, it can stop once the first
distance in the queue within the breadth-first search exceeds the
shortest distance q to an unmatched vertex in R. The dag H has |V_(H)| ≤
|V_(M)| and |E_(H)| ≤ |E_(M)|, so that it takes O(V_(H) + E_(H)) = O(E)
time to construct. Finally, the third phase performs depth-first
searches from the unmatched vertices in layer q. Once a vertex is
discovered, it is not searched from again, and so the analysis of
depth-first search from Section 20.3 applies here: O(V_(H) + E_(H)) =
O(E). Hence, all three phases take just O(E) time.

Once the maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest M-augmenting paths have
been found in line 3, updating the matching in line 4 takes O(E) time,
as it is just a matter of going through the edges of the M-augmenting
paths and adding edges to and removing edges from the matching M. Thus,
each iteration of the repeat loop of lines 2–5 can run in O(E) time.

It remains to show that the repeat loop iterates [art] times. We start
with the following lemma, which shows that after each iteration of the
repeat loop, the length of an augmenting path increases.

Lemma 25.5

Let G = (V, E) be an undirected bipartite graph with matching M, and let
q be the length of a shortest M-augmenting path. Let P = {P₁, P₂, … ,
P_(k)} be a maximal set of vertex-disjoint M-augmenting paths of length
q. Let M′ = M ⊕ (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k)), and suppose that P is a shortest
M′-augmenting path. Then P has more than q edges.

Proof   We consider separately the cases in which P is vertex-disjoint
from the augmenting paths in P and in which it is not vertex-disjoint.

First, assume that P is vertex-disjoint from the augmenting paths in P.
Then, P contains edges that are in M but are not in any of P₁, P₂, … ,
P_(k), so that P is also an M-augmenting path. Since P is disjoint from
P₁, P₂, … , P_(k) but is also an M-augmenting path, and since P is a
maximal set of shortest M-augmenting paths, P must be longer than any of
the augmenting paths in P, each of which has length q. Therefore, P has
more than q edges.

Now, assume that P visits at least one vertex from the M-augmenting
paths in P. By Corollary 25.2, M ′ is a matching in G with |M′| = |M| +
k. Since P is an M′-augmenting path, by Lemma 25.1, M′ ⊕ P is a matching
with |M′ ⊕ P| = |M′| + 1 = |M| + k + 1. Now let A = M ⊕ M′ ⊕ P. We claim
that A = (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k)) ⊕ P:

  --- --- ------------------------------------- ------------------------
  A   =   M ⊕ M′ ⊕ P                            
      =   M ⊕ (M ⊕ (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k))) ⊕ P   
      =   (M ⊕ M) ⊕ (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k)) ⊕ P   (associativity of ⊕)
      =   Ø ⊕ (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k)) ⊕ P         (X ⊕ X = Ø for all X)
      =   (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k)) ⊕ P             (Ø ⊕ X = X for all X).
  --- --- ------------------------------------- ------------------------

Lemma 25.3 with M* = M′ ⊕ P gives that A contains at least |M′ ⊕ P| −
|M| = k + 1 vertex-disjoint M-augmenting paths. Since each such
M-augmenting path has at least q edges, we have |A| ≥ (k + 1)q = kq + q.

Now we claim that P shares at least one edge with some M-augmenting path
in P. Under the matching M′, every vertex in each M-augmenting path in P
is matched. (Only the first and last vertex in each M-augmenting path
P_(i) is unmatched under M, and under M ⊕ P_(i), all vertices in P_(i)
are matched. Because the M-augmenting paths in P are vertex-disjoint, no
other path in P can affect whether the vertices in P_(i) are matched.
That is, the vertices in P_(i) are matched under (M ⊕ P_(i)) ⊕ P_(j) if
and only if they are matched under M ⊕ P_(i), for any other path P_(j) ∈
P.) Suppose that P shares a vertex v with some path P_(i) ∈ P. Vertex v
cannot be an endpoint of P, because the endpoints of P are unmatched
under M′. Therefore, v has an incident edge in P that belongs to M′.
Since any vertex has at most one incident edge in a matching, this edge
must also belong to P_(i), thus proving the claim.

Because A = (P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k)) ⊕ P and P shares at least one edge
with some P_(i) ∈ P, we have that |A| < |P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k)| + |P|.
Thus, we have

  -------- --- -----------------------------
  kq + q   ≤   |A|
           <   |P₁ ∪ P₂ ∪ ⋯ ∪ P_(k)| + |P|
           =   kq + |P|,
  -------- --- -----------------------------

so that q < |P|. We conclude that P contains more than q edges.

▪

The next lemma bounds the size of a maximum matching, based on the
length of a shortest augmenting path.

Lemma 25.6

Let M be a matching in graph G = (V, E), and let a shortest M-augmenting
path in G contain q edges. Then the size of a maximum matching in G is
at most |M| + |V| / (q + 1).

Proof   Let M* be a maximum matching in G. By Lemma 25.3, G contains at
least |M*| − |M| vertex-disjoint M-augmenting paths. Each of these paths
contains at least q edges, and hence at least q + 1 vertices. Because
these paths are vertex-disjoint, we have (|M*|−|M|)(q+1) ≤ |V|, so that
|M*| ≤ |M| + |V|/(q+1).

▪

The final lemma bounds the number of iterations of the repeat loop of
lines 2–5.

Lemma 25.7

When the HOPCROFT-KARP procedure runs on an undirected bipartite graph G
= (V, E), the repeat loop of lines 2–5 iterates [art] times.

Proof   By Lemma 25.5, the length q of the shortest M-augmenting paths
found in line 3 increases from iteration to iteration. After [art]
iterations, therefore, we must have [art]. Consider the situation after
the first time line 4 executes with M-augmenting paths whose length is
at least [art]. Since the size of a matching increases by at least one
edge per iteration, Lemma 25.6 implies that the number of additional
iterations before achieving a maximum matching is at most

[art]

Hence, the total number of loop iterations is less than [art].

▪

Thus, we have the following bound on the running time of the
HOPCROFT-KARP procedure.

Theorem 25.8

The procedure HOPCROFT-KARP runs in [art] time on an undirected
bipartite graph G = (V, E).

Proof   By Lemma 25.7 the repeat loop iterates [art] times, and we have
seen how to implement each iteration in O(E) time.

▪

Exercises

25.1-1

Use the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm to find a maximum matching for the graph
in Figure 25.1.

25.1-2

How are M-augmenting paths and augmenting paths in flow networks
similar? How do they differ?

25.1-3

What is the advantage of searching in the transpose H^(T) from unmatched
vertices in layer q (the first layer that contains an unmatched vertex
in R) to layer 0 versus searching in the dag H from layer 0 to layer q?

25.1-4

Show how to bound the number of iterations of the the repeat loop of
lines 2–5 of HOPCROFT-KARP by [art].

★ 25.1-5

A perfect matching is a matching under which every vertex is matched.
Let G = (V, E) be an undirected bipartite graph with vertex partition V
= L ∪ R, where |L| = |R|. For any X ⊆ V, define the neighborhood of X as

N(X) = {y ∈ V : (x, y) ∈ E for some x ∈ X},

that is, the set of vertices adjacent to some member of X. Prove Hall’s
theorem: there exists a perfect matching in G if and only if |A| ≤
|N(A)| for every subset A ⊆ L.

25.1-6

In a d-regular graph, every vertex has degree d. If G = (V, E) is
bipartite with vertex partition V = L ∪ R and also d-regular, then |L| =
|R|. Use Hall’s theorem (see Exercise 25.1-5) to prove that every
d-regular bipartite graph contains a perfect matching. Then use that
result to prove that every d-regular bipartite graph contains d disjoint
perfect matchings.

25.2    The stable-marriage problem

In Section 25.1, the goal was to find a maximum matching in an
undirected bipartite graph. If you know that the graph G = (V, E) with
vertex partition V = L ∪ R is a complete bipartite graph¹—containing an
edge from every vertex in L to every vertex in R—then you can find a
maximum matching by a simple greedy algorithm.

When a graph can have several matchings, you might want to decide which
matchings are most desirable. In Section 25.3, we’ll add weights to the
edges and find a matching of maximum weight. In this section, we will
instead add some information to each vertex in a complete bipartite
graph: a ranking of the vertices in the other side. That is, each vertex
in L has an ordered list of all the vertices in R, and vice-versa. To
keep things simple, let’s assume that L and R each contain n vertices.
The goal here is to match each vertex in L with a vertex in R in a
“stable” way.

This problem derives its name, the stable-marriage problem, from the
notion of heterosexual marriage, viewing L as a set of women and R as a
set of men.² Each woman ranks all the men in terms of desirability, and
each man does the same with all the women. The goal is to pair up women
and men (a matching) so that if a woman and a man are not matched to
each other, then at least one of them prefers their assigned partner.

If a woman and a man are not matched to each other but each prefers the
other over their assigned partner, they form a blocking pair. A blocking
pair has incentive to opt out of the assigned pairing and get together
on their own. If that were to occur, then this pair would block the
matching from being “stable.” A stable matching, therefore, is a
matching that has no blocking pair. If there is a blocking pair, then
the matching is unstable.

Let’s look at an example with four women—Wanda, Emma, Lacey, and
Karen—and four men—Oscar, Davis, Brent, and Hank—having the following
preferences:

  -------- ---------------------------
  Wanda:   Brent, Hank, Oscar, Davis
  Emma:    Davis, Hank, Oscar, Brent
  Lacey:   Brent, Davis, Hank, Oscar
  Karen:   Brent, Hank, Davis, Oscar
  Oscar:   Wanda, Karen, Lacey, Emma
  Davis:   Wanda, Lacey, Karen, Emma
  Brent:   Lacey, Karen, Wanda, Emma
  Hank:    Lacey, Wanda, Emma, Karen
  -------- ---------------------------

A stable matching comprises the following pairs:

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Lacey and Brent                                                       |
|                                                                       |
| Wanda and Hank                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| Karen and Davis                                                       |
|                                                                       |
| Emma and Oscar                                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

You can verify that this matching has no blocking pair. For example,
even though Karen prefers Brent and Hank to her partner Davis, Brent
prefers his partner Lacey to Karen, and Hank prefers his partner Wanda
to Karen, so that neither Karen and Brent nor Karen and Hank form a
blocking pair. In fact, this stable matching is unique. Suppose instead
that the last two pairs were

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Emma and Davis                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| Karen and Oscar                                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Then Karen and Davis would be a blocking pair, because they were not
paired together, Karen prefers Davis to Oscar, and Davis prefers Karen
to Emma. Therefore, this matching is not stable.

Stable matchings need not be unique. For example, suppose that there are
three women—Monica, Phoebe, and Rachel—and three men—Chandler, Joey, and
Ross—with these preferences:

  ------------ ------------------------
  Monica:      Chandler, Joey, Ross
  Phoebe:      Joey, Ross, Chandler
  Rachel:      Ross, Chandler, Joey
  Chandler:    Phoebe, Rachel, Monica
  Joey:        Rachel, Monica, Phoebe
  Ross:        Monica, Phoebe, Rachel
  ------------ ------------------------

In this case, there are three stable matchings:

+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Matching 1                                                               | Matching 2                                                               | Matching 3                                                               |
|                                                                          |                                                                          |                                                                          |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Monica and Chandler                                                      | Phoebe and Chandler                                                      | Rachel and Chandler                                                      |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Phoebe and Joey                                                          | Rachel and Joey                                                          | Monica and Joey                                                          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Rachel and Ross                                                          | Monica and Ross                                                          | Phoebe and Ross                                                          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+

In matching 1, all women get their first choice and all men get their
last choice. Matching 2 is the opposite, with all men getting their
first choice and all women getting their last choice. When all the women
or all the men get their first choice, there plainly cannot be a
blocking pair. In matching 3, everyone gets their second choice. You can
verify that there are no blocking pairs.

You might wonder whether it is always possible to come up with a stable
matching no matter what rankings each participant provides. The answer
is yes. (Exercise 25.2-3 asks you to show that even in the scenario of
the National Resident Matching Program, where each hospital takes on
multiple students, it is always possible to devise a stable assignment.)
A simple algorithm known as the Gale-Shapley algorithm always finds a
stable matching. The algorithm has two variants, which mirror each
other: “woman-oriented” and “man-oriented.” Let’s examine the
woman-oriented version. Each participant is either “free” or “engaged.”
Everyone starts out free. Engagements occur when a free woman proposes
to a man. When a man is first proposed to, he goes from free to engaged,
and he always stays engaged, though not necessarily to the same woman.
If an engaged man receives a proposal from a woman whom he prefers to
the woman he’s currently engaged to, that engagement is broken, the
woman to whom he had been engaged becomes free, and the man and the
woman whom he prefers become engaged. Each woman proposes to the men in
her preference list, in order, until the last time she becomes engaged.
When a woman is engaged, she temporarily stops proposing, but if she
becomes free again, she continues down her list. Once everyone is
engaged, the algorithm terminates. The procedure GALE-SHAPLEY on the
next page makes this process more concrete. The procedure allows for
some choice: any free woman may be selected in line 2. We’ll see that
the procedure produces a stable matching regardless of the order in
which line 2 chooses free women. For the man-oriented version, just
reverse the roles of men and women in the procedure.

Let’s see how the GALE-SHAPLEY procedure executes on the example with
Wanda, Emma, Lacey, Karen, Oscar, Davis, Brent, and Hank. After everyone
is initialized to free, here is one possible version of what can occur
in successive iterations of the while loop of lines 2–9:

1.  Wanda proposes to Brent. Brent is free, so that Wanda and Brent
    become engaged and no longer free.
2.  Emma proposes to Davis. Davis is free, so that Emma and Davis become
    engaged and no longer free.
3.  Lacey proposes to Brent. Brent is engaged to Wanda, but he prefers
    Lacey. Brent breaks the engagement to Wanda, who becomes free. Lacey
    and Brent become engaged, with Lacey no longer free.
4.  Karen proposes to Brent. Brent is engaged to Lacey, whom he prefers
    to Karen. Brent rejects Karen, who remains free.
5.  Karen proposes to Hank. Hank is free, so that Karen and Hank become
    engaged and no longer free.
6.  Wanda proposes to Hank. Hank is engaged to Karen, but he prefers
    Wanda. Hank breaks the engagement with Karen, who becomes free.
    Wanda and Hank become engaged, with Wanda no longer free.
7.  Karen proposes to Davis. Davis is engaged to Emma, but he prefers
    Karen. Davis breaks the engagement to Emma, who becomes free. Karen
    and Davis become engaged, with Karen no longer free.
8.  Emma proposes to Hank. Hank is engaged to Wanda, whom he prefers to
    Emma. Hank rejects Emma, who remains free.
9.  Emma proposes to Oscar. Oscar is free, so that Emma and Oscar become
    engaged and no longer free.

GALE-SHAPLEY (men, women, rankings)

  ----- ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    1   assign each woman and man as free
    2   while some woman w is free
    3   let m be the first man on w’s ranked list to whom she has not proposed
    4   if m is free
    5   w and m become engaged to each other (and not free)
    6   elseif m ranks w higher than the woman w′ he is currently engaged to
    7   m breaks the engagement to w′, who becomes free
    8   w and m become engaged to each other (and not free)
    9   else m rejects w, with w remaining free
  10    return the stable matching consisting of the engaged pairs
  ----- ------------------------------------------------------------------------

At this point, everyone is engaged and nobody is free, so the while loop
terminates. The procedure returns the stable matching we saw earlier.

The following theorem shows that not only does GALE-SHAPLEY terminate,
but that it always returns a stable matching, thereby proving that a
stable matching always exists.

Theorem 25.9

The procedure GALE-SHAPLEY always terminates and returns a stable
matching.

Proof   Let’s first show that the while loop of lines 2–9 always
terminates, so that the procedure terminates. The proof is by
contradiction. If the loop fails to terminate, it is because some woman
remains free. In order for a woman to remain free, she must have
proposed to all the men and been rejected by each one. In order for a
man to reject a woman, he must be already engaged. Therefore, all the
men are engaged. Once engaged, a man stays engaged (though not
necessarily to the same woman). There are an equal number n of women and
men, however, which means that every woman is engaged, leading to the
contradiction that no women are free. We must also show that the while
loop makes a bounded number of iterations. Since each of the n women
goes through her ranking of the n men in order, possibly not reaching
the end of her list, the total number of iterations is at most n².
Therefore, the while loop always terminates, and the procedure returns a
matching.

We need to show that there are no blocking pairs. We first observe that
once a man m is engaged to a woman w, all subsequent actions for m occur
in lines 6–8. Therefore, once a man is engaged, he stays engaged, and
any time he breaks an engagement to a woman w, it’s for a woman whom he
prefers to w. Suppose that a woman w is matched with a man m, but she
prefers man m′. We’ll show that w and m′ is not a blocking pair, because
m′ does not prefer w to his partner. Because w ranks m′ higher than m,
she must have proposed to m′ before proposing to m, and m′ either
rejected her proposal or accepted it and later broke the engagement. If
m′ rejected the proposal from w, it is because he was already engaged to
some woman he prefers to w. If m′ accepted and later broke the
engagement, he was at some point engaged to w but later accepted a
proposal from a woman he prefers to w. In either case, he ultimately
ends up with a partner whom he prefers to w. We conclude that even
though w might prefer m′ to her partner m, it is not also the case that
m′ prefers w to his partner. Therefore, the procedure returns a matching
containing no blocking pairs.

▪

Exercise 25.2-1 asks you to provide the proof of the following
corollary.

Corollary 25.10

Given preference rankings for n women and n men, the Gale-Shapley
algorithm can be implemented to run in O(n²) time.

▪

Because line 2 can choose any free woman, you might wonder whether
different choices can produce different stable matchings. The answer is
no: as the following theorem shows, every execution of the GALE-SHAPLEY
produces exactly the same result. Moreover, the stable matching returned
is optimal for the women.

Theorem 25.11

Regardless of how women are chosen in line 2 of GALE-SHAPLEY, the
procedure always returns the same stable matching, and in this stable
matching, each woman has the best partner possible in any stable
matching.

Proof   The proof that each woman has the best partner possible in any
stable matching is by contradiction. Suppose that the GALE-SHAPLEY
procedure returns a stable matching M, but that there is a different
stable matching M′ in which some woman w prefers her partner m′ to the
partner m she has in M. Because w ranks m′ higher than m, she must have
proposed to m′ before proposing to m. Then there is a woman w′ whom m′
prefers to w, and m′ was already engaged to w′ when w proposed or m′
accepted the proposal from w and later broke the engagement in favor of
w′. Either way, there is a moment when m′ decided against w in favor of
w′. Now suppose, without loss of generality, that this moment was the
first time that any man rejected a partner who belongs to some stable
matching.

We claim that w′ cannot have a partner m″ in a stable matching whom she
prefers to m′. If there were such a man m″, then in order for w′ to
propose to m′, she would have proposed to m″ and been rejected at some
point before proposing to m′. If m′ accepted the proposal from w and
later broke it to accept w′, then since this was the first rejection in
a stable matching, we get the contradiction that m″ could not have
rejected w′ beforehand. If m″ was already engaged to w′ when w proposed,
then again, m″ could not have rejected w′ beforehand, thus proving the
claim.

Since w′ does not prefer anyone to m′ in a stable matching and w′ is not
matched with m′ in M′ (because m′ is matched with w in M′), w′ prefers
m′ to her partner in M′. Since w′ prefers m′ over her partner in M′ and
m′ prefers w′ over his partner w in M′, the pair w′ and m′ is a blocking
pair in M′. Because M′ has a blocking pair, it cannot be a stable
matching, thereby contradicting the assumption that there exists some
stable matching in which each woman has the best partner possible other
than the matching M returned by GALE-SHAPLEY.

We put no condition on the execution of the procedure, which means that
all possible orders in which line 2 selects women result in the same
stable matching being returned.

▪

Corollary 25.12

There can be stable matchings that the GALE-SHAPLEY procedure does not
return.

Proof   Theorem 25.11 says that for a given set of rankings,
GALE-SHAPLEY returns just one matching, no matter how it chooses women
in line 2. The earlier example of three women and three men with three
different stable matchings shows that there can be multiple stable
matchings for a given set of rankings. A call of GALE-SHAPLEY is capable
of returning only one of these stable matchings.

▪

Although the GALE-SHAPLEY procedure gives the best possible outcome for
the women, the following corollary shows that it also produces the worst
possible outcome for the men.

Corollary 25.13

In the stable matching returned by the procedure GALE-SHAPLEY, each man
has the worst partner possible in any stable matching.

Proof   Let M be the matching returned by a call to GALE-SHAPLEY.
Suppose that there is another stable matching M′ and a man m who prefers
his partner w in M to his partner w′ in M′. Let the partner of w in M′
be m′. By Theorem 25.11, m is the best partner that w can have in any
stable matching, which means that w prefers m to m′. Since m prefers w
to w′, the pair w and m is a blocking pair in M′, contradicting the
assumption that M′ is a stable matching.

▪

Exercises

25.2-1

Describe how to implement the Gale-Shapley algorithm so that it runs in
O(n²) time.

25.2-2

Is it possible to have an unstable matching with just two women and two
men? If so, provide and justify an example. If not, argue why not.

25.2-3

The National Resident Matching Program differs from the scenario for the
stable-marriage problem set out in this section in two ways. First, a
hospital may be matched with more than one student, so that hospital h
takes r_(h) ≥ 1 students. Second, the number of students might not equal
the number of hospitals. Describe how to modify the Gale-Shapley
algorithm to fit the requirements of the National Resident Matching
Program.

25.2-4

Prove the following property, which is known as weak Pareto optimality:

Let M be the stable matching produced by the GALE-SHAPLEY procedure,
with women proposing to men. Then, for a given instance of the
stable-marriage problem there is no matching—stable or unstable—such
that every woman has a partner whom she prefers to her partner in the
stable matching M.

25.2-5

The stable-roommates problem is similar to the stable-marriage problem,
except that the graph is a complete graph, not bipartite, with an even
number of vertices. Each vertex represents a person, and each person
ranks all the other people. The definitions of blocking pairs and stable
matching extend in the natural way: a blocking pair comprises two people
who both prefer each other to their current partner, and a matching is
stable if there are no blocking pairs. For example, consider four
people—Wendy, Xenia, Yolanda, and Zelda—with the following preference
lists:

  ----------- -----------------------
  Wendy:      Xenia, Yolanda, Zelda
  Xenia:      Wendy, Zelda, Yolanda
  Yolanda:    Wendy, Zelda, Xenia
  Zelda:      Xenia, Yolanda, Wendy
  ----------- -----------------------

You can verify that the following matching is stable:

  -------------------
  Wendy and Xenia
  Yolanda and Zelda
  -------------------

Unlike the stable-marriage problem, the stable-roommates problem can
have inputs for which no stable matching exists. Find such an input and
explain why no stable matching exists.

25.3    The Hungarian algorithm for the assignment problem

Let us once again add some information to a complete bipartite graph G =
(V, E), where V = L ∪ R. This time, instead of having the vertices of
each side rank the vertices on the other side, we assign a weight to
each edge. Again, let’s assume that the vertex sets L and R each contain
n vertices, so that the graph contains n² edges. For l ∈ L and r ∈ R,
denote the weight of edge (l, r) by w(l, r), which represents the
utility gained by matching vertex l with vertex r.

The goal is to find a perfect matching M* (see Exercises 25.1-5 and
25.1-6) whose edges have the maximum total weight over all perfect
matchings. That is, letting w(M) = ∑_((l,r)∈M) w(l, r) denote the total
weight of the edges in matching M, we want to find a perfect matching M*
such that

w(M*) = max {w(M) : M is a perfect matching}.

We call finding such a maximum-weight perfect matching the assignment
problem. A solution to the assignment problem is a perfect matching that
maximizes the total utility. Like the stable-marriage problem, the
assignment problem finds a matching that is “good,” but with a different
definition of good: maximizing total value rather than achieving
stability.

Although you could enumerate all n! perfect matchings to solve the
assignment problem, an algorithm known as the Hungarian algorithm solves
it much faster. This section will prove an O(n⁴) time bound, and Problem
25-2 asks you to refine the algorithm to reduce the running time to
O(n³). Instead of working with the complete bipartite graph G, the
Hungarian algorithm works with a subgraph of G called the “equality
subgraph.” The equality subgraph, which is defined below, changes over
time and has the beneficial property that any perfect matching in the
equality subgraph is also an optimal solution to the assignment problem.

The equality subgraph depends on assigning an attribute h to each
vertex. We call h the label of a vertex, and we say that h is a feasible
vertex labeling of G if

l.h + r.h ≥ w(l, r) for all l ∈ L and r ∈ R.

A feasible vertex labeling always exists, such as the default vertex
labeling given by

[art]

Given a feasible vertex labeling h, the equality subgraph G_(h) = (V,
E_(h)) of G consists of the same vertices as G and the subset of edges

E_(h) = {(l, r) ∈ E : l.h + r.h = w(l, r)}.

The following theorem ties together a perfect matching in an equality
subgraph and an optimal solution to the assignment problem.

Theorem 25.14

Let G = (V, E), where V = L ∪ R, be a complete bipartite graph where
each edge (l, r) ∈ E has weight w(l, r). Let h be a feasible vertex
labeling of G and G_(h) be the equality subgraph of G. If G_(h) contains
a perfect matching M*, then M* is an optimal solution to the assignment
problem on G.

Proof   If G_(h) contains a perfect matching M*, then because G_(h) and
G have the same sets of vertices, M* is also a perfect matching in G.
Because each edge of M* belongs to G_(h) and each vertex has exactly one
incident edge from any perfect matching, we have

[art]

Letting M be any perfect matching in G, we have

[art]

Thus, we have

[art]

so that M* is a maximum-weight perfect matching in G.

▪

The goal now becomes finding a perfect matching in an equality subgraph.
Which equality subgraph? It does not matter! We have free rein to not
only choose an equality subgraph, but to change which equality subgraph
we choose as we go along. We just need to find some perfect matching in
some equality subgraph.

To understand the equality subgraph better, consider again the proof of
Theorem 25.14 and, in the second half, let M be any matching. The proof
is still valid, in particular, inequality (25.3): the weight of any
matching is always at most the sum of the vertex labels. If we choose
any set of vertex labels that define an equality subgraph, then a
maximum-cardinality matching in this equality subgraph has total value
at most the sum of the vertex labels. If the set of vertex labels is the
“right” one, then it will have total value equal to w(M*), and a
maximum-cardinality matching in the equality subgraph is also a
maximum-weight perfect matching. The Hungarian algorithm repeatedly
modifies the matching and the vertex labels in order to achieve this
goal.

The Hungarian algorithm starts with any feasible vertex labeling h and
any matching M in the equality subgraph G_(h). It repeatedly finds an
M-augmenting path P in G_(h) and, using Lemma 25.1, updates the matching
to be M ⊕ P, thereby incrementing the size of the matching. As long as
there is some equality subgraph that contains an M-augmenting path, the
size of the matching can increase, until a perfect matching is achieved.

Four questions arise:

1.  What initial feasible vertex labeling should the algorithm start
    with? Answer: the default vertex labeling given by equations (25.1)
    and (25.2).
2.  What initial matching in G_(h) should the algorithm start with?
    Short answer: any matching, even an empty matching, but a greedy
    maximal matching works well.
3.  If an M-augmenting path exists in G_(h), how to find it? Short
    answer: use a variant of breadth-first search similar to the second
    phase of the procedure used in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm to find a
    maximal set of shortest M-augmenting paths.
4.  What if the search for an M-augmenting path fails? Short answer:
    update the feasible vertex labeling to bring in at least one new
    edge.

We’ll elaborate on the short answers using the example that starts in
Figure 25.4. Here, L = {l₁, l₂, … , l₇} and R = {r₁, r₂, … , r₇}. The
edge weights appear in the matrix shown in part (a), where the weight
w(l_(i), r_(j)) appears in row i and column j. The feasible vertex
labels, given by the default vertex labeling, appear to the left of and
above the matrix. Matrix entries in red indicate edges (l_(i), r_(j))
for which l_(i).h + r_(j).h = w(l_(i), r_(j)), that is, edges in the
equality subgraph G_(h) appearing in part (b) of the figure.

Greedy maximal bipartite matching

There are several ways to implement a greedy method to find a maximal
bipartite matching. The procedure GREEDY-BIPARTITE-MATCHING shows one.
Edges in Figure 25.4(b) highlighted in blue indicate the initial greedy
maximal matching in G_(h). Exercise 25.3-2 asks you to show that the
GREEDY-BIPARTITE-MATCHING procedure returns a matching that is at least
half the size of a maximum matching.

GREEDY-BIPARTITE-MATCHING (G)

  --- ------------------------------------------
  1   M = Ø
  2   for each vertex l ∈ L
  3   if l has an unmatched neighbor in R
  4   choose any such unmatched neighbor r ∈ R
  5   M = M ∪ {(l, r)}
  6   return M
  --- ------------------------------------------

[art]

Figure 25.4 The start of the Hungarian algorithm. (a) The matrix of edge
weights for a bipartite graph with L = {l₁, l₂, … , l₇}. The value in
row i and column j indicates w(l_(i), r_(j)). Feasible vertex labels
appear above and next to the matrix. Red entries correspond to edges in
the equality subgraph. (b) The equality subgraph G_(h). Edges
highlighted in blue belong to the initial greedy maximal matching M.
Blue vertices are matched, and tan vertices are unmatched. (c) The
directed equality subgraph G_(M,h) created from G_(h) by directing edges
in M from R to L and all other edges from L to R.

Finding an M-augmenting path in G_(h)

To find an M-augmenting path in the equality subgraph G_(h) with a
matching M, the Hungarian algorithm first creates the directed equality
subgraph G_(M,h) from G_(h), just as the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm creates
G_(M) from G. As in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, you can think of an
M-augmenting path as starting from an unmatched vertex in L, ending at
an unmatched vertex in R, taking unmatched edges from L to R, and taking
matched edges from R to L. Thus, G_(M,h) = (V, E_(M,h)), where

  --------- --- -------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
  E_(M,h)   =   {(l, r) : l ∈ L, r ∈ R, and (l, r) ∈ E_(h) − M }   (edges from L to R)
                ∪ {(r, l) : r ∈ R, l ∈ L, and (l, r) ∈ M }         (edges from R to L).
  --------- --- -------------------------------------------------- ----------------------

Because an M-augmenting path in the directed equality subgraph G_(M.h)
is also an M-augmenting path in the equality subgraph G_(h), it suffices
to find M-augmenting paths in G_(M.h). Figure 25.4(c) shows the directed
equality subgraph G_(M,h) corresponding to the equality subgraph G_(h)
and matching M from part (b) of the figure.

With the directed equality subgraph G_(M,h) in hand, the Hungarian
algorithm searches for an M-augmenting path from any unmatched vertex in
L to any unmatched vertex in R. Any exhaustive graph-search method
suffices. Here, we’ll use breadth-first search, starting from all the
unmatched vertices in L (just as the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm does when
creating the dag H), but stopping upon first discovering some unmatched
vertex in R. Figure 25.5 shows the idea. To start from all the unmatched
vertices in L, initialize the first-in, first-out queue with all the
unmatched vertices in L, rather than just one source vertex. Unlike the
dag H in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, here each vertex needs just one
predecessor, so that the breadth-first search creates a breadth-first
forest F = (V_(F), E_(F)). Each unmatched vertex in L is a root in F.

In Figure 25.5(g), the breadth-first search has found the M-augmenting
path 〈(l₄, r₂), (r₂, l₁), (l₁, r₃), (r₃, l₆), (l₆, r₅)〉. Figure
25.6(a) shows the new matching created by taking the symmetric
difference of the matching M in Figure 25.5(a) with this M-augmenting
path.

When the search for an M-augmenting path fails

Having updated the matching M from an M-augmenting path, the Hungarian
algorithm updates the directed equality subgraph G_(M,h) according to
the new matching and then starts a new breadth-first search from all the
unmatched vertices in L. Figure 25.6 shows the start of this process,
picking up from Figure 25.5.

In Figure 25.6(d), the queue contains vertices l₄ and l₃. Neither of
these vertices has an edge that leaves it, however, so that once these
vertices are removed from the queue, the queue becomes empty. The search
terminates at this point, before discovering an unmatched vertex in R to
yield an M-augmenting path. Whenever this situation occurs, the most
recently discovered vertices must belong to L. Why? Whenever an
unmatched vertex in R is discovered, the search has found an
M-augmenting path, and when a matched vertex in R is discovered, it has
an unvisited neighbor in L, which the search can then discover.

Recall that we have the freedom to work with any equality subgraph. We
can change the directed equality subgraph “on the fly,” as long we do
not counteract the work already done. The Hungarian algorithm updates
the feasible vertex labeling h to fulfill the following criteria:

1.  No edge in the breadth-first forest F leaves the directed equality
    subgraph.
2.  No edge in the matching M leaves the directed equality subgraph.
3.  At least one edge (l, r), where l ∈ L ∩ V_(F) and r ∈ R − V_(F) goes
    into E_(h), and hence into E_(M,h). Therefore, at least one vertex
    in R will be newly discovered.

Thus, at least one new edge enters the directed equality subgraph, and
any edge that leaves the directed equality subgraph belongs to neither
the matching M nor the breadth-first forest F. Newly discovered vertices
in R are enqueued, but their distances are not necessarily 1 greater
than the distances of the most recently discovered vertices in L.

[art]

Figure 25.5 Finding an M-augmenting path in G_(M,h) by breadth-first
search. (a) The directed equality subgraph G_(M,h) from Figure 25.4(c).
(b)–(g) Successive versions of the breadth-first forest F, shown as the
vertices at each distance from the roots—the unmatched vertices in L—are
discovered. In parts (b)–(f), the layer of vertices closest to the
bottom of the figure are those in the first-in, first-out queue. For
example, in part (b), the queue contains the roots 〈l₄, l₅, l₇〉, and
in part (e), the queue contains 〈r₃, r₄〉, at distance 3 from the
roots. In part (g), the unmatched vertex r₅ is discovered, so the
breadth-first search terminates. The path 〈(l₄, r₂), (r₂, l₁), (l₁,
r₃), (r₃, l₆), (l₆, r₅)〉, highlighted in orange in parts (a) and (g),
is an M-augmenting path. Taking its symmetric difference with the
matching M yields a new matching with one more edge than M.

[art]

Figure 25.6 (a) The new matching M and the new directed equality
subgraph G_(M.h) after updating the matching in Figure 25.5(a) with the
M-augmenting path in Figure 25.5(g). (b)–(d) Successive versions of the
breadth-first forest F in a new breadth-first search with roots l₅ and
l₇. After the vertices l₄ and l₃ in part (d) have been removed from the
queue, the queue becomes empty before the search can discover an
unmatched vertex in R.

To update the feasible vertex labeling, the Hungarian algorithm first
computes the value

[art]

where F_(L) = L ∩ V_(F) and F_(R) = R ∩ V_(F) denote the vertices in the
breadth-first forest F that belong to L and R, respectively. That is, δ
is the smallest difference by which an edge incident on a vertex in
F_(L) missed being in the current equality subgraph G_(h). The Hungarian
algorithm then creates a new feasible vertex labeling, say h′, by
subtracting δ from l.h for all vertices l ∈ F_(L) and adding δ to r.h
for all vertices r ∈ F_(R):

[art]

The following lemma shows that these changes achieve the three criteria
above.

Lemma 25.15

Let h be a feasible vertex labeling for the complete bipartite graph G
with equality subgraph G_(h), and let M be a matching for G_(h) and F be
a breadth-first forest being constructed for the directed equality
subgraph G_(M,h). Then, the labeling h′ in equation (25.5) is a feasible
vertex labeling for G with the following properties:

1.  If (u, v) is an edge in the breadth-first forest F for G_(M,h), then
    (u, v) ∈ E_(M,h′).
2.  If (l, r) belongs to the matching M for G_(h), then (r, l) ∈
    E_(M,h′).
3.  There exist vertices l ∈ F_(L) and r ∈ R − F_(R) such that (l, r) ∉
    E_(M,h) but (l, r) ∈ E_(M,h′).

Proof   We first show that h′ is a feasible vertex labeling for G.
Because h is a feasible vertex labeling, we have l.h + r.h ≥ w(l, r) for
all l ∈ L and r ∈ R. In order for h′ to not be a feasible vertex
labeling, we would need l.h′ + r.h′ < l.h + r.h for some l ∈ L and r ∈
R. The only way this could occur would be for some l ∈ F_(L) and r ∈ R −
F_(R). In this instance, the amount of the decrease equals δ, so that
l.h′ + r.h′ = l.h − δ + r.h. By equation (25.4), we have that l.h−δ+r.h
≥ w(l, r) for any l ∈ F_(L) and r ∈ R−F_(R), so that l.h′+r.h′ ≥ w(l,
r). For all other edges, we have l.h′ + r.h′ ≥ l.h+r.h ≥ w(l, r). Thus,
h′ is a feasible vertex labeling.

Now we show that each of the three desired properties holds:

1.  If l ∈ F_(L) and r ∈ F_(R), then we have l.h′+r.h′ = l.h+r.h because
    δ is added to the label of l and subtracted from the label of r.
    Therefore, if an edge belongs to F for the directed graph G_(M,h),
    it also belongs to G_(M,h)′.

2.  We claim that at the time the Hungarian algorithm computes the new
    feasible vertex labeling h′, for every edge (l, r) ∈ M, we have l ∈
    F_(L) if and only if r ∈ F_(R). To see why, consider a matched
    vertex r and let (l, r) ∈ M. First suppose that r ∈ F_(R), so that
    the search discovered r and enqueued it. When r was removed from the
    queue, l was discovered, so l ∈ F_(L). Now suppose that r ∉ F_(R),
    so r is undiscovered. We will show that l ∉ F_(L). The only edge in
    G_(M,h) that enters l is (r, l), and since r is undiscovered, the
    search has not taken this edge; if l ∈ F_(L), it is not because of
    the edge (r, l). The only other way that a vertex in L can be in
    F_(L) is if it is a root of the search, but only unmatched vertices
    in L are roots and l is matched. Thus, l ∉ F_(L), and the claim is
    proved.

    We already saw that l ∈ F_(L) and r ∈ F_(R) implies l.h′ + r.h′ =
    l.h + r.h. For the opposite case, when l ∈ L − F_(L) and R ∈ R −
    F_(R), we have that l.h′ = l.h and r.h′ = r.h, so that again l.h′ +
    r.h′ = l.h + r.h. Thus, if edge (l, r) is in the matching M for the
    equality graph G_(h), then (r, l) ∈ E_(M,h′).

3.  Let (l, r) be an edge not in E_(h) such that l ∈ F_(L), r ∈ R −
    F_(R), and δ = l.h + r.h − w(l, r). By the definition of δ, there is
    at least one such edge. Then, we have

      ------------- --- -----------------------------------
      l.h′ + r.h′   =   l.h − δ + r.h
                    =   l.h − (l.h + r.h − w(l, r)) + r.h
                    =   w(l, r),
      ------------- --- -----------------------------------

    and thus (l, r) ∈ E_(h′). Since (l, r) is not in E_(h), it is not in
    the matching M, so that in E_(M,h′) it must be directed from L to R.
    Thus, (l, r) ∈ E_(M,h′).

    ▪

It is possible for an edge to belong to E_(M,h) but not to E_(M,h′). By
Lemma 25.15, any such edge belongs neither to the matching M nor to the
breadth-first forest F at the time that the new feasible vertex labeling
h′ is computed. (See Exercise 25.3-3.)

Going back to Figure 25.6(d), the queue became empty before an
M-augmenting path was found. Figure 25.7 shows the next steps taken by
the algorithm. The value of δ = 1 is achieved by the edge (l₅, r₃)
because in Figure 25.4(a), l₅.h + r₃.h − w(l₅, r₃) = 6 + 0 − 5 = 1. In
Figure 25.7(a), the values of l₃.h, l₄.h, l₅.h, and l₇.h have decreased
by 1 and the values of r₂.h and r₇.h have increased by 1 because these
vertices are in F. As a result, the edges (l₁, r₂) and (l₆, r₇) leave
G_(M,h) and the edge (l₅, r₃) enters. Figure 25.7(b) shows the new
directed equality subgraph G_(M,h). With edge (l₅, r₃) now in G_(M,h),
Figure 25.7(c) shows that this edge is added to the breadth-first forest
F, and r₃ is added to the queue. Parts (c)–(f) show the breadth-first
forest continuing to be built until in part (f), the queue once again
becomes empty after vertex l₂, which has no edges leaving, is removed.
Again, the algorithm must update the feasible vertex labeling and the
directed equality subgraph. Now the value of δ = 1 is achieved by three
edges: (l₁, r₆), (l₅, r₆), and (l₇, r₆).

As Figure 25.8 shows in parts (a) and (b), these edges enter G_(M,h),
and edge (l₆, r₃) leaves. Part (c) shows that edge (l₁, r₆) is added to
the breadth-first forest. (Either of edges (l₅, r₆) or (l₇, r₆) could
have been added instead.) Because r₆ is unmatched, the search has found
the M-augmenting path 〈(l₅, r₃), (r₃, l₁), (l₁, r₆)〉, highlighted in
orange.

Figure 25.9(a) shows G_(M,h) after the matching M has been updated by
taking its symmetric difference with the M-augmenting path. The
Hungarian algorithm starts its last breadth-first search, with vertex l₇
as the only root. The search proceeds as shown in parts (b)–(h) of the
figure, until the queue becomes empty after removing l₄. This time, we
find that δ = 2, achieved by the five edges (l₂, r₅), (l₃, r₁), (l₄,
r₅), (l₅, r₁), and (l₅, r₅), each of which enters G_(M,h). Figure
25.10(a) shows the results of decreasing the feasible vertex label of
each vertex in F_(L) by 2 and increasing the feasible vertex label of
each vertex in F_(R) by 2, and Figure 25.10(b) shows the resulting
directed equality subgraph G_(M,h). Part (c) shows that edge (l₃, r₁) is
added to the breadth-first forest. Since r₁ is an unmatched vertex, the
search terminates, having found the M-augmenting path 〈(l₇, r₇), (r₇,
l₃), (l₃, r₁)〉, highlighted in orange. If r₁ had been matched, vertex
r₅ would also have been added to the breadth-first forest, with any of
l₂, l₄, or l₅ as its parent.

[art]

Figure 25.7 Updating the feasible vertex labeling and the directed
equality subgraph G_(M,h) when the queue becomes empty before finding an
M-augmenting path. (a) With δ = 1, the values of l₃.h, l₄.h, l₅.h, and
l₇.h decreased by 1 and r₂.h and r₇.h increased by 1. Edges (l₁, r₂) and
(l₆, r₇) leave G_(M,h), and edge (l₅, r₃) enters. These changes are
highlighted in yellow. (b) The resulting directed equality subgraph
G_(M,h). (c)–(f) With edge (l₅, r₃) added to the breadth-first forest
and r₃ added to the queue, the breadth-first search continues until the
queue once again becomes empty in part (f).

After updating the matching M, the algorithm arrives at the perfect
matching shown for the equality subgraph G_(h) in Figure 25.11. By
Theorem 25.14, the edges in M form an optimal solution to the original
assignment problem given in the matrix. Here, the weights of edges (l₁,
r₆), (l₂, r₄), (l₃, r₁), (l₄, r₂), (l₅, r₃), (l₆, r₅), and (l₇, r₇) sum
to 65, which is the maximum weight of any matching.

The weight of the maximum-weight matching equals the sum of all the
feasible vertex labels. These problems—maximizing the weight of a
matching and minimizing the sum of the feasible vertex labels—are
“duals” of each other, in a similar vein to how the value of a maximum
flow equals the capacity of a minimum cut. Section 29.3 explores duality
in more depth.

[art]

Figure 25.8 Another update to the feasible vertex labeling and directed
equality subgraph G_(M,h) because the queue became empty before finding
an M-augmenting path. (a) With δ = 1, the values of l₁.h, l₂.h, l₃.h,
l₄.h, l₅.h, and l₇.h decrease by 1, and r₂.h, r₃.h, r₄.h, and r₇.h
increase by 1. Edge (l₆, r₃) leaves G_(M,h), and edges (l₁, r₆), (l₅,
r₆) and (l₇, r₆) enter. (b) The resulting directed equality subgraph
G_(M,h). (c) With edge (l₁, r₆) added to the breadth-first forest and r₆
unmatched, the search terminates, having found the M-augmenting path
〈(l₅, r₃), (r₃, l₁), (l₁, r₆)〉, highlighted in orange in parts (b) and
(c).

The Hungarian algorithm

The procedure HUNGARIAN on page 737 and its subroutine
FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH on page 738 follow the steps we have just seen. The
third property in Lemma 25.15 ensures that in line 23 of
FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH the queue Q is nonempty. The pseudocode uses the
attribute π to indicate predecessor vertices in the breadth-first
forest. Instead of coloring vertices, as in the BFS procedure on page
556, the search puts the discovered vertices into the sets F_(L) and
F_(R). Because the Hungarian algorithm does not need breadth-first
distances, the pseudocode omits the d attribute computed by the BFS
procedure.

[art]

Figure 25.9 (a) The new matching M and the new directed equality
subgraph G_(M,h) after updating the matching in Figure 25.8 with the
M-augmenting path in Figure 25.8 parts (b) and (c). (b)–(h) Successive
versions of the breadth-first forest F in a new breadth-first search
with root l₇. After the vertex l₄ in part (h) has been removed from the
queue, the queue becomes empty before the search discovers an unmatched
vertex in R.

Now, let’s see why the Hungarian algorithm runs in O(n⁴) time, where |V|
= n/2 and |E| = n² in the original graph G. (Below we outline how to
reduce the running time to O(n³).) You can go through the pseudocode of
HUNGARIAN to verify that lines 1–6 and 11 take O(n²) time. The while
loop of lines 7–10 iterates at most n times, since each iteration
increases the size of the matching M by 1. Each test in line 7 can take
constant time by just checking whether |M| < n, each update of M in line
9 takes O(n) time, and the updates in line 10 take O(n²) time.

To achieve the O(n⁴) time bound, it remains to show that each call of
FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH runs in O(n³) time. Let’s call each execution of
lines 10–22 a growth step. Ignoring the growth steps, you can verify
that FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH is a breadth-first search. With the sets F_(L)
and F_(R) represented appropriately, the breadth-first search takes
O(V + E) = O(n²) time. Within a call of FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH, at most n
growth steps can occur, since each growth step is guaranteed to discover
at least one vertex in R. Since there are at most n² edges in G_(M,h),
the for loop of lines 16–22 iterates at most n² times per call of
FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH. The bottleneck is lines 10 and 15, which take
O(n²) time, so that FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH takes O(n³) time.

[art]

Figure 25.10 Updating the feasible vertex labeling and directed equality
subgraph G_(M,h). (a) Here, δ = 2, so the values of l₁.h, l₂.h, l₃.h,
l₄.h, l₅.h, and l₇.h decreased by 2, and the values of r₂.h, r₃.h, r₄.h,
r₆.h, and r₇.h increased by 2. Edges (l₂, r₅), (l₃, r₁), (l₄, r₅), (l₅,
r₁), and (l₅, r₅) enter G_(M,h). (b) The resulting directed graph
G_(M,h). (c) With edge (l₃, r₁) added to the breadth-first forest and r₁
unmatched, the search terminates, having found the M-augmenting path
〈(l₇, r₇), (r₇, l₃), (l₃, r₁)〉, highlighted in orange in parts (b) and
(c).

Exercise 25.3-5 asks you to show that reconstructing the directed
equality subgraph G_(M,h) in line 15 is actually unnecessary, so that
its cost can be eliminated. Reducing the cost of computing δ in line 10
to O(n) takes a little more effort and is the subject of Problem 25-2.
With these changes, each call of FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH takes O(n²) time,
so that the Hungarian algorithm runs in O(n³) time.

[art]

Figure 25.11 The final matching, shown for the equality subgraph G_(h)
with blue edges and blue entries in the matrix. The weights of the edges
in the matching sum to 65, which is the maximum for any matching in the
original complete bipartite graph G, as well as the sum of all the final
feasible vertex labels.

HUNGARIAN (G)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | for each vertex l ∈ L                                         |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | l.h = max {w(l, r) : r ∈ R}   | // from equation (25.1)       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | for each vertex r ∈ R                                         |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | r.h = 0                       | // from equation (25.2)       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | let M be any matching in G_(h) (such as the matching returned |
|     | by                                                            |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|     | GREEDY-BIPARTITE-MATCHING)                                    |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   6 | from G, M, and h, form the equality subgraph G_(h)            |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|     | and the directed equality subgraph G_(M,h)                    |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   7 | while M is not a perfect matching in G_(h)                    |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   8 | P = FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH (G_(M,h))                            |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   9 | M = M ⊕ P                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10  | update the equality subgraph G_(h)                            |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|     | and the directed equality subgraph G_(M,h)                    |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11  | return M                                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH (G_(M,h))

+-----+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|   1 | Q = Ø                                                         |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   2 | F_(L) = Ø                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   3 | F_(R) = Ø                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   4 | for each unmatched vertex l ∈ L                               |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   5 | l.π = NIL                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   6 | ENQUEUE (Q, l)                                                |
+-----+---------------+-----------------------------------------------+
|   7 | F_(L) = F_(L) | // forest F starts with unmatched vertices in |
|     | ∪ {l}         | L                                             |
+-----+---------------+-----------------------------------------------+
|   8 | repeat                                                        |
+-----+---------------+-----------------------------------------------+
|   9 | if Q is empty | // ran out of vertices to search from?        |
+-----+---------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| 10  | δ = min {l.h + r.h − w(l, r) : l ∈ F_(L) and r ∈ R − F_(R)}   |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11  | for each vertex l ∈ F_(L)                                     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 12  | l.h = l.h − δ                 | // relabel according to       |
|     |                               | equation (25.5)               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 13  | for each vertex r ∈ F_(R)                                     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 14  | r.h = r.h + δ                 | // relabel according to       |
|     |                               | equation (25.5)               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 15  | from G, M, and h, form a new directed equality graph G_(M,h)  |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 16  | for each new edge (l, r) in G_(M,h)           | // continue   |
|     |                                               | search with   |
|     |                                               | new edges     |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 17  | if r ∉ F_(R)                                                  |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 18  | r.π = l                                       | // discover   |
|     |                                               | r, add it to  |
|     |                                               | F             |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 19  | if r is unmatched                                             |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 20  | an M-augmenting path has been found                           |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 20  | (exit the repeat loop)                                        |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 21  | else ENQUEUE (Q, r)                           | // can search |
|     |                                               | from r later  |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 22  | F_(R) = F_(R) ∪ {r}                                           |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 23  | u = DEQUEUE (Q)                               | // search     |
|     |                                               | from u        |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 24  | for each neighbor v of u in G_(M,h)                           |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 25  | if v ∈ L                                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 26  | v.π = u                                                       |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 27  | F_(L) = F_(L) ∪ {v}                           | // discover   |
|     |                                               | v, add it to  |
|     |                                               | F             |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 28  | ENQUEUE (Q, v)                                | // can search |
|     |                                               | from v later  |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 29  | elseif v ∉ F_(R)                              | // v ∈ R, do  |
|     |                                               | same as lines |
|     |                                               | 18–22         |
+-----+-----------------------------------------------+---------------+
| 30  | v.π = u                                                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 31  | if v is unmatched                                             |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 32  | an M-augmenting path has been found                           |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|     | (exit the repeat loop)                                        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 33  | else ENQUEUE (Q, v)                                           |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 34  | F_(R) = F_(R) ∪ {v}                                           |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 35  | until an M-augmenting path has been found                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 36  | using the predecessor attributes π, construct an M-augmenting |
|     | path P by tracing back from the unmatched vertex in R         |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 37  | return P                                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

Exercises

25.3-1

The FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH procedure checks in two places (lines 19 and
31) whether a vertex it discovers in R is unmatched. Show how to rewrite
the pseudocode so that it checks for an unmatched vertex in R in only
one place. What is the downside of doing so?

25.3-2

Show that for any bipartite graph, the GREEDY-BIPARTITE-MATCHING
procedure on page 726 returns a matching at least half the size of a
maximum matching.

25.3-3

Show that if an edge (l, r) belongs to the directed equality subgraph
G_(M,h) but is not a member of G_(M,h′), where h′ is given by equation
(25.5), then l ∈ L − F_(L) and r ∈ F_(R) at the time that h′ is
computed.

25.3-4

At line 29 in the FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH procedure, it has already been
established that v ∈ R. This line checks to see whether v is already
discovered by testing whether v ∈ F_(R). Why doesn’t the procedure need
to check whether v is already discovered for the case when v ∈ L, in
lines 26–28?

25.3-5

Professor Hrabosky asserts that the directed equality subgraph G_(M,h)
must be constructed and maintained by the Hungarian algorithm, so that
line 6 of HUNGARIAN and line 15 of FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH are required.
Argue that the professor is incorrect by showing how to determine
whether an edge belongs to E_(M,h) without explicitly constructing
G_(M,h).

25.3-6

How can you modify the Hungarian algorithm to find a matching of
vertices in L to vertices in R that minimizes, rather than maximizes,
the sum of the edge weights in the matching?

25.3-7

How can an assignment problem with |L| ≠ |R| be modified so that the
Hungarian algorithm solves it?

Problems

25-1     Perfect matchings in a regular bipartite graph

a. Problem 20-3 asked about Euler tours in directed graphs. Prove that a
connected, undirected graph G = (V, E) has an Euler tour—a cycle
traversing each edge exactly once, though it may visit a vertex multiple
times—if and only if the degree of every vertex in V is even.

b. Assuming that G is connected, undirected, and every vertex in V has
even degree, give an O(E)-time algorithm to find an Euler tour of G, as
in Problem 20-3(b).

c. Exercise 25.1-6 states that if G = (V, E) is a d-regular bipartite
graph, then it contains d disjoint perfect matchings. Suppose that d is
an exact power of 2. Give an algorithm to find all d disjoint perfect
matchings in a d-regular bipartite graph in Θ(E lg d) time.

25-2     Reducing the running time of the Hungarian algorithm to O(n³)

In this problem, you will show how to reduce the running time of the
Hungarian algorithm from O(n⁴) to O(n³) by showing how to reduce the
running time of the FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH procedure from O(n³) to O(n²).
Exercise 25.3-5 demonstrates that line 6 of HUNGARIAN and line 15 of
FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH are unnecessary. Now you will show how to reduce
the running time of each execution of line 10 in FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH to
O(n).

For each vertex r ∈ R − F_(R), define a new attribute r.σ where

r.σ = min {l.h + r.h − w(l, r) : l ∈ F_(L)}.

That is, r.σ indicates how close r is to being adjacent to some vertex l
∈ F_(L) in the directed equality subgraph G_(m,h). Initially, before
placing any vertices into F_(L), set r.σ to ∞ for all r ∈ R.

a. Show how to compute δ in line 10 in O(n) time, based on the σ
attribute.

b. Show how to update all the σ attributes in O(n) time after δ has been
computed.

c. Show that updating all the σ attributes when F_(L) changes takes
O(n²) time per call of FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH.

d. Conclude that the HUNGARIAN procedure can be implemented to run in
O(n³) time.

25-3     Other matching problems

The Hungarian algorithm finds a maximum-weight perfect matching in a
complete bipartite graph. It is possible to use the Hungarian algorithm
to solve problems in other graphs by modifying the input graph, running
the Hungarian algorithm, and then possibly modifying the output. Show
how to solve the following matching problems in this manner.

a. Give an algorithm to find a maximum-weight matching in a weighted
bipartite graph that is not necessarily complete and with all edge
weights positive.

b. Redo part (a), but with edge weights allowed to also be 0 or
negative.

c. A cycle cover in a directed graph, not necessarily bipartite, is a
set of edge-disjoint directed cycles such that each vertex lies on at
most one cycle. Given nonnegative edge weights w(u, v), let C be the set
of edges in a cycle cover, and define w(C) = ∑_((u,v)∈C) w(u, v) to be
the weight of the cycle cover. Give an algorithm to find a
maximum-weight cycle cover.

25-4     Fractional matchings

It is possible to define a fractional matching. Given a graph G = (V,
E), we define a fractional matching x as a function x : E → [0, 1] (real
numbers between 0 and 1, inclusive) such that for every vertex u ∈ V, we
have ∑_((u,v)∈E) x(u, v) ≤ 1. The value of a fractional matching is
∑_((u, v)∈E) x(u, v). The definition of a fractional matching is
identical to that of a matching, except that a matching has the
additional constraint that x(u, v) ∈ {0, 1} for all edges (u, v) ∈ E.
Given a graph, we let M* denote a maximum matching and x* denote a
fractional matching with maximum value.

a. Argue that, for any bipartite graph, we must have ∑_((u, v)∈E) x*(u,
v) ≥ |M*|.

b. Prove that, for any bipartite graph, we must have ∑_((u, v)∈E) x*(e)
≤ |M*|. (Hint: Give an algorithm that converts a fractional matching
with an integer value to a matching.) Conclude that the maximum value of
a fractional matching in a bipartite graph is the same as the size of
the maximum cardinality matching.

c. We can define a fractional matching in a weighted graph in the same
manner: the value of the matching is now ∑_((u, v)∈E) w(u, v) x(u, v).
Extend the results of the previous parts to show that in a weighted
bipartite graph, the maximum value of a weighted fractional matching is
equal to the value of a maximum weighted matching.

d. In a general graph, the analogous results do not necessarily hold.
Give an example of a small graph that is not bipartite for which the
fractional matching with maximum value is not a maximum matching.

25-5     Computing vertex labels

You are given a complete bipartite graph G = (V, E) with edge weights
w(l, r) for all (l, r) ∈ E. You are also given a maximum-weight perfect
matching M* for G. You wish to compute a feasible vertex labeling h such
that M* is a perfect matching in the equality subgraph G_(h). That is,
you want to compute a labeling h of vertices such that

[art]

(Requirement (25.6) holds for all edges, and the stronger requirement
(25.7) holds for all edges in M*.) Give an algorithm to compute the
feasible vertex labeling h, and prove that it is correct. (Hint: Use the
similarity between conditions (25.6) and (25.7) and some of the
properties of shortest paths proved in Chapter 22, in particular the
triangle inequality (Lemma 22.10) and the convergence property (Lemma
22.14.))

Chapter notes

Matching algorithms have a long history and have been central to many
breakthroughs in algorithm design and analysis. The book by Lovász and
Plummer [306] is an excellent reference on matching problems, and the
chapter on matching in the book by Ahuja, Magnanti and Orlin [10] also
has extensive references.

The Hopcroft-Karp algorithm is by Hopcroft and Karp [224]. Madry [308]
gave an Õ(E^(10/7))-time algorithm, which is asymptotically faster than
Hopcroft-Karp for sparse graphs.

Corollary 25.4 is due to Berge [53], and it also holds in graphs that
are not bipartite. Matching in general graphs requires more complicated
algorithms. The first polynomial-time algorithm, running in O(V ⁴) time,
is due to Edmonds [130] (in a paper that also introduced the notion of a
polynomial-time algorithm). Like the bipartite case, this algorithm also
uses augmenting paths, although the algorithm for finding augmenting
paths in general graphs is more involved than the one for bipartite
graphs. Subsequently, several [art]-time algorithms appeared, including
ones by Gabow and Tarjan [168] as part of an algorithm for weighted
matching and a simpler one by Gabow [164].

The Hungarian algorithm is described in the book by Bondy and Murty [67]
and is based on work by Kuhn [273] and Munkres [337]. Kuhn adopted the
name “Hungarian algorithm” because the algorithm derived from work by
the Hungarian mathematicians D. Kőnig and J. Egervéry. The algorithm is
an early example of a primal-dual algorithm. A faster algorithm that
runs in [art] time, where the edge weights are integers from 0 to W, was
given by Gabow and Tarjan [167], and an algorithm with the same time
bound for maximum-weight matching in general graphs was given by Duan,
Pettie, and Su [127].

The stable-marriage problem was first defined and analyzed by Gale and
Shapley [169]. The stable-marriage problem has numerous variants. The
books by Gusfield and Irving [203], Knuth [266], and Manlove [313] serve
as excellent sources for cataloging and solving them.

¹ The definition of a complete bipartite graph differs from the
definition of complete graph given on page 1167 because in a bipartite
graph, there are no edges between vertices in L and no edges between
vertices in R.

² Although marriage norms are changing, it’s traditional to view the
stable-marriage problem through the lens of heterosexual marriage.

Part VII    Selected Topics

 

 

Introduction

This part contains a selection of algorithmic topics that extend and
complement earlier material in this book. Some chapters introduce new
models of computation such as circuits or parallel computers. Others
cover specialized domains such as matrices or number theory. The last
two chapters discuss some of the known limitations to the design of
efficient algorithms and introduce techniques for coping with those
limitations.

Chapter 26 presents an algorithmic model for parallel computing based on
task-parallel computing, and more specifically, fork-join parallelism.
The chapter introduces the basics of the model, showing how to quantify
parallelism in terms of the measures of work and span. It then
investigates several interesting fork-join algorithms, including
algorithms for matrix multiplication and merge sorting.

An algorithm that receives its input over time, rather than having the
entire input available at the start, is called an “online” algorithm.
Chapter 27 examines techniques used in online algorithms, starting with
the “toy” problem of how long to wait for an elevator before taking the
stairs. It then studies the “move-to-front” heuristic for maintaining a
linked list and finishes with the online version of the caching problem
we saw back in Section 15.4. The analyses of these online algorithms are
remarkable in that they prove that these algorithms, which do not know
their future inputs, perform within a constant factor of optimal
algorithms that know the future inputs.

Chapter 28 studies efficient algorithms for operating on matrices. It
presents two general methods—LU decomposition and LUP decomposition—for
solving linear equations by Gaussian elimination in O(n³) time. It also
shows that matrix inversion and matrix multiplication can be performed
equally fast. The chapter concludes by showing how to compute a
least-squares approximate solution when a set of linear equations has no
exact solution.

Chapter 29 studies how to model problems as linear programs, where the
goal is to maximize or minimize an objective, given limited resources
and competing constraints. Linear programming arises in a variety of
practical application areas. The chapter also addresses the concept of
“duality” which, by establishing that a maximization problem and
minimization problem have the same objective value, helps to show that
solutions to each are optimal.

Chapter 30 studies operations on polynomials and shows how to use a
well-known signal-processing technique—the fast Fourier transform
(FFT)—to multiply two degree-n polynomials in O(n lg n) time. It also
derives a parallel circuit to compute the FFT.

Chapter 31 presents number-theoretic algorithms. After reviewing
elementary number theory, it presents Euclid’s algorithm for computing
greatest common divisors. Next, it studies algorithms for solving
modular linear equations and for raising one number to a power modulo
another number. Then, it explores an important application of
number-theoretic algorithms: the RSA public-key cryptosystem. This
cryptosystem can be used not only to encrypt messages so that an
adversary cannot read them, but also to provide digital signatures. The
chapter finishes with the Miller-Rabin randomized primality test, which
enables finding large primes efficiently—an essential requirement for
the RSA system.

Chapter 32 studies the problem of finding all occurrences of a given
pattern string in a given text string, a problem that arises frequently
in text-editing programs. After examining the naive approach, the
chapter presents an elegant approach due to Rabin and Karp. Then, after
showing an efficient solution based on finite automata, the chapter
presents the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, which modifies the
automaton-based algorithm to save space by cleverly preprocessing the
pattern. The chapter finishes by studying suffix arrays, which can not
only find a pattern in a text string, but can do quite a bit more, such
as finding the longest repeated substring in a text and finding the
longest common substring appearing in two texts.

Chapter 33 examines three algorithms within the expansive field of
machine learning. Machine-learning algorithms are designed to take in
vast amounts of data, devise hypotheses about patterns in the data, and
test these hypotheses. The chapter starts with k-means clustering, which
groups data elements into k classes based on how similar they are to
each other. It then shows how to use the technique of multiplicative
weights to make predictions accurately based on a set of “experts” of
varying quality. Perhaps surprisingly, even without knowing which
experts are reliable and which are not, you can predict almost as
accurately as the most reliable expert. The chapter finishes with
gradient descent, an optimization technique that finds a local minimum
value for a function. Gradient descent has many applications, including
finding parameter settings for many machine-learning models.

Chapter 34 concerns NP-complete problems. Many interesting computational
problems are NP-complete, but no polynomial-time algorithm is known for
solving any of them. This chapter presents techniques for determining
when a problem is NP-complete, using them to prove several classic
problems NP-complete: determining whether a graph has a hamiltonian
cycle (a cycle that includes every vertex), determining whether a
boolean formula is satisfiable (whether there exists an assignment of
boolean values to its variables that causes the formula to evaluate to
TRUE), and determining whether a given set of numbers has a subset that
adds up to a given target value. The chapter also proves that the famous
traveling-salesperson problem (find a shortest route that starts and
ends at the same location and visits each of a set of locations once) is
NP-complete.

Chapter 35 shows how to find approximate solutions to NP-complete
problems efficiently by using approximation algorithms. For some
NP-complete problems, approximate solutions that are near optimal are
quite easy to produce, but for others even the best approximation
algorithms known work progressively more poorly as the problem size
increases. Then, there are some problems for which investing increasing
amounts of computation time yields increasingly better approximate
solutions. This chapter illustrates these possibilities with the
vertex-cover problem (unweighted and weighted versions), an optimization
version of 3-CNF satisfiability, the traveling-salesperson problem, the
set-covering problem, and the subset-sum problem.

26        Parallel Algorithms

The vast majority of algorithms in this book are serial algorithms
suitable for running on a uniprocessor computer that executes only one
instruction at a time. This chapter extends our algorithmic model to
encompass parallel algorithms, where multiple instructions can execute
simultaneously. Specifically, we’ll explore the elegant model of
task-parallel algorithms, which are amenable to algorithmic design and
analysis. Our study focuses on fork-join parallel algorithms, the most
basic and best understood kind of task-parallel algorithm. Fork-join
parallel algorithms can be expressed cleanly using simple linguistic
extensions to ordinary serial code. Moreover, they can be implemented
efficiently in practice.

Parallel computers—computers with multiple processing units—are
ubiquitous. Handheld, laptop, desktop, and cloud machines are all
multicore computers, or simply, multicores, containing multiple
processing “cores.” Each processing core is a full-fledged processor
that can directly access any location in a common shared memory.
Multicores can be aggregated into larger systems, such as clusters, by
using a network to interconnect them. These multicore clusters usually
have a distributed memory, where one multicore’s memory cannot be
accessed directly by a processor in another multicore. Instead, the
processor must explicitly send a message over the cluster network to a
processor in the remote multicore to request any data it requires. The
most powerful clusters are supercomputers, comprising many thousands of
multicores. But since shared-memory programming tends to be conceptually
easier than distributed-memory programming, and multicore machines are
widely available, this chapter focuses on parallel algorithms for
multicores.

One approach to programming multicores is thread parallelism. This
processor-centric parallel-programming model employs a software
abstraction of “virtual processors,” or threads that share a common
memory. Each thread maintains its own program counter and can execute
code independently of the other threads. The operating system loads a
thread onto a processing core for execution and switches it out when
another thread needs to run.

Unfortunately, programming a shared-memory parallel computer using
threads tends to be difficult and error-prone. One reason is that it can
be complicated to dynamically partition the work among the threads so
that each thread receives approximately the same load. For any but the
simplest of applications, the programmer must use complex communication
protocols to implement a scheduler that load-balances the work.

Task-parallel programming

The difficulty of thread programming has led to the creation of
task-parallel platforms, which provide a layer of software on top of
threads to coordinate, schedule, and manage the processors of a
multicore. Some task-parallel platforms are built as runtime libraries,
but others provide full-fledged parallel languages with compiler and
runtime support.

Task-parallel programming allows parallelism to be specified in a
“processor-oblivious” fashion, where the programmer identifies what
computational tasks may run in parallel but does not indicate which
thread or processor performs the task. Thus, the programmer is freed
from worrying about communication protocols, load balancing, and other
vagaries of thread programming. The task-parallel platform contains a
scheduler, which automatically load-balances the tasks across the
processors, thereby greatly simplifying the programmer’s chore.
Task-parallel algorithms provide a natural extension to ordinary serial
algorithms, allowing performance to be reasoned about mathematically
using “work/span analysis.”

Fork-join parallelism

Although the functionality of task-parallel environments is still
evolving and increasing, almost all support fork-join parallelism, which
is typically embodied in two linguistic features: spawning and parallel
loops. Spawning allows a subroutine to be “forked”: executed like a
subroutine call, except that the caller can continue to execute while
the spawned subroutine computes its result. A parallel loop is like an
ordinary for loop, except that multiple iterations of the loop can
execute at the same time.

Fork-join parallel algorithms employ spawning and parallel loops to
describe parallelism. A key aspect of this parallel model, inherited
from the task-parallel model but different from the thread model, is
that the programmer does not specify which tasks in a computation must
run in parallel, only which tasks may run in parallel. The underlying
runtime system uses threads to load-balance the tasks across the
processors. This chapter investigates parallel algorithms described in
the fork-join model, as well as how the underlying runtime system can
schedule task-parallel computations (which include fork-join
computations) efficiently.

Fork-join parallelism offers several important advantages:

- The fork-join programming model is a simple extension of the familiar
  serial programming model used in most of this book. To describe a
  fork-join parallel algorithm, the pseudocode in this book needs just
  three added keywords: parallel, spawn, and sync. Deleting these
  parallel keywords from the parallel pseudocode results in ordinary
  serial pseudocode for the same problem, which we call the “serial
  projection” of the parallel algorithm.
- The underlying task-parallel model provides a theoretically clean way
  to quantify parallelism based on the notions of “work” and “span.”
- Spawning allows many divide-and-conquer algorithms to be parallelized
  naturally. Moreover, just as serial divide-and-conquer algorithms lend
  themselves to analysis using recurrences, so do parallel algorithms in
  the fork-join model.
- The fork-join programming model is faithful to how multicore
  programming has been evolving in practice. A growing number of
  multicore environments support one variant or another of fork-join
  parallel programming, including Cilk [290, 291, 383, 396],
  Habanero-Java [466], the Java Fork-Join Framework [279], OpenMP [81],
  Task Parallel Library [289], Threading Building Blocks [376], and X10
  [82].

Section 26.1 introduces parallel pseudocode, shows how the execution of
a task-parallel computation can be modeled as a directed acyclic graph,
and presents the metrics of work, span, and parallelism, which you can
use to analyze parallel algorithms. Section 26.2 investigates how to
multiply matrices in parallel, and Section 26.3 tackles the tougher
problem of designing an efficient parallel merge sort.

26.1    The basics of fork-join parallelism

Our exploration of parallel programming begins with the problem of
computing Fibonacci numbers recursively in parallel. We’ll look at a
straightforward serial Fibonacci calculation, which, although
inefficient, serves as a good illustration of how to express parallelism
in pseudocode.

Recall that the Fibonacci numbers are defined by equation (3.31) on page
69:

[art]

To calculate the nth Fibonacci number recursively, you could use the
ordinary serial algorithm in the procedure FIB on the facing page. You
would not really want to compute large Fibonacci numbers this way,
because this computation does needless repeated work, but parallelizing
it can be instructive.

FIB (n)

  --- ----------------------
  1   if n ≤ 1
  2   return n
  3   else x = FIB (n − 1)
  4   y = FIB (n − 2)
  5   return x + y
  --- ----------------------

To analyze this algorithm, let T (n) denote the running time of FIB (n).
Since FIB (n) contains two recursive calls plus a constant amount of
extra work, we obtain the recurrence

T (n) = T (n − 1) + T (n − 2) + Θ(1).

This recurrence has solution T (n) = Θ(F_(n)), which we can establish by
using the substitution method (see Section 4.3). To show that T (n) =
O(F_(n)), we’ll adopt the inductive hypothesis that T (n) ≤ aF_(n) − b,
where a > 1 and b > 0 are constants. Substituting, we obtain

  ------- --- ----------------------------------------
  T (n)   ≤   (aF_(n−1) − b) + (aF_(n−2) − b) + Θ(1)
          =   a(F_(n−1) + F_(n−2)) − 2b + Θ(1)
          ≤   aF_(n) − b,
  ------- --- ----------------------------------------

if we choose b large enough to dominate the upper-bound constant in the
Θ(1) term. We can then choose a large enough to upper-bound the Θ(1)
base case for small n. To show that T (n) = Ω(F_(n)), we use the
inductive hypothesis T (n) ≥ aF_(n) − b. Substituting and following
reasoning similar to the asymptotic upper-bound argument, we establish
this hypothesis by choosing b smaller than the lower-bound constant in
the Θ(1) term and a small enough to lower-bound the Θ(1) base case for
small n. Theorem 3.1 on page 56 then establishes that T (n) = Θ(F_(n)),
as desired. Since F_(n) = Θ(ϕ^(n)), where [art] is the golden ratio, by
equation (3.34) on page 69, it follows that

[art]

Thus this procedure is a particularly slow way to compute Fibonacci
numbers, since it runs in exponential time. (See Problem 31-3 on page
954 for faster ways.)

Let’s see why the algorithm is inefficient. Figure 26.1 shows the tree
of recursive procedure instances created when computing F₆ with the FIB
procedure. The call to FIB(6) recursively calls FIB(5) and then FIB(4).
But, the call to FIB(5) also results in a call to FIB(4). Both instances
of FIB(4) return the same result (F₄ = 3). Since the FIB procedure does
not memoize (recall the definition of “memoize” from page 368), the
second call to FIB(4) replicates the work that the first call performs,
which is wasteful.

[art]

Figure 26.1 The invocation tree for FIB(6). Each node in the tree
represents a procedure instance whose children are the procedure
instances it calls during its execution. Since each instance of FIB with
the same argument does the same work to produce the same result, the
inefficiency of this algorithm for computing the Fibonacci numbers can
be seen by the vast number of repeated calls to compute the same thing.
The portion of the tree shaded blue appears in task-parallel form in
Figure 26.2.

Although the FIB procedure is a poor way to compute Fibonacci numbers,
it can help us warm up to parallelism concepts. Perhaps the most basic
concept is to understand is that if two parallel tasks operate on
entirely different data, then—absent other interference—they each
produce the same outcomes when executed at the same time as when they
run serially one after the other. Within FIB (n), for example, the two
recursive calls in line 3 to FIB (n − 1) and in line 4 to FIB (n − 2)
can safely execute in parallel because the computation performed by one
in no way affects the other.

Parallel keywords

The P-FIB procedure on the next page computes Fibonacci numbers, but
using the parallel keywords spawn and sync to indicate parallelism in
the pseudocode.

If the keywords spawn and sync are deleted from P-FIB, the resulting
pseudocode text is identical to FIB (other than renaming the procedure
in the header and in the two recursive calls). We define the serial
projection¹ of a parallel algorithm to be the serial algorithm that
results from ignoring the parallel directives, which in this case can be
done by omitting the keywords spawn and sync. For parallel for loops,
which we’ll see later on, we omit the keyword parallel. Indeed, our
parallel pseudocode possesses the elegant property that its serial
projection is always ordinary serial pseudocode to solve the same
problem.

P-FIB (n)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | if n ≤ 1                                                        |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2 | return n                                                        |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | else x = spawn P-FIB (n − 1)   | // don’t wait for subroutine   |
|   |                                | to return                      |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4 | y = P-FIB (n − 2)              | // in parallel with spawned    |
|   |                                | subroutine                     |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 5 | sync                           | // wait for spawned subroutine |
|   |                                | to finish                      |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 6 | return x + y                                                    |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

Semantics of parallel keywords

Spawning occurs when the keyword spawn precedes a procedure call, as in
line 3 of P-FIB. The semantics of a spawn differs from an ordinary
procedure call in that the procedure instance that executes the
spawn—the parent—may continue to execute in parallel with the spawned
subroutine—its child—instead of waiting for the child to finish, as
would happen in a serial execution. In this case, while the spawned
child is computing P-FIB (n − 1), the parent may go on to compute P-FIB
(n−2) in line 4 in parallel with the spawned child. Since the P-FIB
procedure is recursive, these two subroutine calls themselves create
nested parallelism, as do their children, thereby creating a potentially
vast tree of subcomputations, all executing in parallel.

The keyword spawn does not say, however, that a procedure must execute
in parallel with its spawned children, only that it may. The parallel
keywords express the logical parallelism of the computation, indicating
which parts of the computation may proceed in parallel. At runtime, it
is up to a scheduler to determine which subcomputations actually run in
parallel by assigning them to available processors as the computation
unfolds. We’ll discuss the theory behind task-parallel schedulers
shortly (on page 759).

A procedure cannot safely use the values returned by its spawned
children until after it executes a sync statement, as in line 5. The
keyword sync indicates that the procedure must wait as necessary for all
its spawned children to finish before proceeding to the statement after
the sync—the “join” of a fork-join parallel computation. The P-FIB
procedure requires a sync before the return statement in line 6 to avoid
the anomaly that would occur if x and y were summed before P-FIB (n − 1)
had finished and its return value had been assigned to x. In addition to
explicit join synchronization provided by the sync statement, it is
convenient to assume that every procedure executes a sync implicitly
before it returns, thus ensuring that all children finish before their
parent finishes.

A graph model for parallel execution

It helps to view the execution of a parallel computation—the dynamic
stream of runtime instructions executed by processors under the
direction of a parallel program—as a directed acyclic graph G = (V, E),
called a (parallel) trace.² Conceptually, the vertices in V are executed
instructions, and the edges in E represent dependencies between
instructions, where (u, v) ∈ E means that the parallel program required
instruction u to execute before instruction v.

It’s sometimes inconvenient, especially if we want to focus on the
parallel structure of a computation, for a vertex of a trace to
represent only one executed instruction. Consequently, if a chain of
instructions contains no parallel or procedural control (no spawn, sync,
procedure call, or return—via either an explicit return statement or the
return that happens implicitly upon reaching the end of a procedure), we
group the entire chain into a single strand. As an example, Figure 26.2
shows the trace that results from computing P-FIB(4) in the portion of
Figure 26.1 shaded blue. Strands do not include instructions that
involve parallel or procedural control. These control dependencies must
be represented as edges in the trace.

When a parent procedure calls a child, the trace contains an edge (u, v)
from the strand u in the parent that executes the call to the first
strand v of the spawned child, as illustrated in Figure 26.2 by the edge
from the orange strand in P-FIB(4) to the blue strand in P-FIB(2). When
the last strand v′ in the child returns, the trace contains an edge (v′,
u′) to the strand u′, where u′ is the successor strand of u in the
parent, as with the edge from the white strand in P-FIB(2) to the white
strand in P-FIB(4).

[art]

Figure 26.2 The trace of P-FIB(4) corresponding to the shaded portion of
Figure 26.1. Each circle represents one strand, with blue circles
representing any instructions executed in the part of the procedure
(instance) up to the spawn of P-FIB (n − 1) in line 3; orange circles
representing the instructions executed in the part of the procedure that
calls P-FIB (n − 2) in line 4 up to the sync in line 5, where it
suspends until the spawn of P-FIB (n − 1) returns; and white circles
representing the instructions executed in the part of the procedure
after the sync, where it sums x and y, up to the point where it returns
the result. Strands belonging to the same procedure are grouped into a
rounded rectangle, blue for spawned procedures and tan for called
procedures. Assuming that each strand takes unit time, the work is 17
time units, since there are 17 strands, and the span is 8 time units,
since the critical path—shown with blue edges—contains 8 strands.

When the parent spawns a child, however, the trace is a little
different. The edge (u, v) goes from parent to child as with a call,
such as the edge from the blue strand in P-FIB(4) to the blue strand in
P-FIB(3), but the trace contains another edge (u, u′) as well,
indicating that u’s successor strand u′ can continue to execute while v
is executing. The edge from the blue strand in P-FIB(4) to the orange
strand in P-FIB(4) illustrates one such edge. As with a call, there is
an edge from the last strand v′ in the child, but with a spawn, it no
longer goes to u’s successor. Instead, the edge is (v′, x), where x is
the strand immediately following the sync in the parent that ensures
that the child has finished, as with the edge from the white strand in
P-FIB(3) to the white strand in P-FIB(4).

You can figure out what parallel control created a particular trace. If
a strand has two successors, one of them must have been spawned, and if
a strand has multiple predecessors, the predecessors joined because of a
sync statement. Thus, in the general case, the set V forms the set of
strands, and the set E of directed edges represents dependencies between
strands induced by parallel and procedural control. If G contains a
directed path from strand u to strand v, we say that the two strands are
(logically) in series. If there is no path in G either from u to v or
from v to u, the strands are (logically) in parallel.

A fork-join parallel trace can be pictured as a dag of strands embedded
in an invocation tree of procedure instances. For example, Figure 26.1
shows the invocation tree for FIB(6), which also serves as the
invocation tree for P-FIB(6), the edges between procedure instances now
representing either calls or spawns. Figure 26.2 zooms in on the subtree
that is shaded blue, showing the strands that constitute each procedure
instance in P-FIB(4). All directed edges connecting strands run either
within a procedure or along undirected edges of the invocation tree in
Figure 26.1. (More general task-parallel traces that are not fork-join
traces may contain some directed edges that do not run along the
undirected tree edges.)

Our analyses generally assume that parallel algorithms execute on an
ideal parallel computer, which consists of a set of processors and a
sequentially consistent shared memory. To understand sequential
consistency, you first need to know that memory is accessed by load
instructions, which copy data from a location in the memory to a
register within a processor, and by store instructions, which copy data
from a processor register to a location in the memory. A single line of
pseudocode can entail several such instructions. For example, the line x
= y + z could result in load instructions to fetch each of y and z from
memory into a processor, an instruction to add them together inside the
processor, and a store instruction to place the result x back into
memory. In a parallel computer, several processors might need to load or
store at the same time. Sequential consistency means that even if
multiple processors attempt to access the memory simultaneously, the
shared memory behaves as if exactly one instruction from one of the
processors is executed at a time, even though the actual transfer of
data may happen at the same time. It is as if the instructions were
executed one at a time sequentially according to some global linear
order among all the processors that preserves the individual orders in
which each processor executes its own instructions.

For task-parallel computations, which are scheduled onto processors
automatically by a runtime system, the sequentially consistent shared
memory behaves as if a parallel computation’s executed instructions were
executed one by one in the order of a topological sort (see Section
20.4) of its trace. That is, you can reason about the execution by
imagining that the individual instructions (not generally the strands,
which may aggregate many instructions) are interleaved in some linear
order that preserves the partial order of the trace. Depending on
scheduling, the linear order could vary from one run of the program to
the next, but the behavior of any execution is always as if the
instructions executed serially in a linear order consistent with the
dependencies within the trace.

In addition to making assumptions about semantics, the ideal
parallel-computer model makes some performance assumptions.
Specifically, it assumes that each processor in the machine has equal
computing power, and it ignores the cost of scheduling. Although this
last assumption may sound optimistic, it turns out that for algorithms
with sufficient “parallelism” (a term we’ll define precisely a little
later), the overhead of scheduling is generally minimal in practice.

Performance measures

We can gauge the theoretical efficiency of a task-parallel algorithm
using work/span analysis, which is based on two metrics: “work” and
“span.” The work of a task-parallel computation is the total time to
execute the entire computation on one processor. In other words, the
work is the sum of the times taken by each of the strands. If each
strand takes unit time, the work is just the number of vertices in the
trace. The span is the fastest possible time to execute the computation
on an unlimited number of processors, which corresponds to the sum of
the times taken by the strands along a longest path in the trace, where
“longest” means that each strand is weighted by its execution time. Such
a longest path is called the critical path of the trace, and thus the
span is the weight of the longest (weighted) path in the trace. (Section
22.2, pages 617–619 shows how to find a critical path in a dag G = (V,
E) in Θ(V + E) time.) For a trace in which each strand takes unit time,
the span equals the number of strands on the critical path. For example,
the trace of Figure 26.2 has 17 vertices in all and 8 vertices on its
critical path, so that if each strand takes unit time, its work is 17
time units and its span is 8 time units.

The actual running time of a task-parallel computation depends not only
on its work and its span, but also on how many processors are available
and how the scheduler allocates strands to processors. To denote the
running time of a task-parallel computation on P processors, we
subscript by P. For example, we might denote the running time of an
algorithm on P processors by T_(P). The work is the running time on a
single processor, or T₁. The span is the running time if we could run
each strand on its own processor—in other words, if we had an unlimited
number of processors—and so we denote the span by T_(∞).

The work and span provide lower bounds on the running time T_(P) of a
task-parallel computation on P processors:

- In one step, an ideal parallel computer with P processors can do at
  most P units of work, and thus in T_(P) time, it can perform at most P
  T_(P) work. Since the total work to do is T₁, we have P T_(P) ≥ T₁.
  Dividing by P yields the work law:

  [art]

- A P-processor ideal parallel computer cannot run any faster than a
  machine with an unlimited number of processors. Looked at another way,
  a machine with an unlimited number of processors can emulate a
  P-processor machine by using just P of its processors. Thus, the span
  law follows:

  [art]

We define the speedup of a computation on P processors by the ratio
T₁/T_(P), which says how many times faster the computation runs on P
processors than on one processor. By the work law, we have T_(P) ≥ T₁/P,
which implies that T₁/T_(P) ≤ P. Thus, the speedup on a P-processor
ideal parallel computer can be at most P. When the speedup is linear in
the number of processors, that is, when T₁/T_(P) = Θ(P), the computation
exhibits linear speedup. Perfect linear speedup occurs when T₁/T_(P) =
P.

The ratio T₁/T_(∞) of the work to the span gives the parallelism of the
parallel computation. We can view the parallelism from three
perspectives. As a ratio, the parallelism denotes the average amount of
work that can be performed in parallel for each step along the critical
path. As an upper bound, the parallelism gives the maximum possible
speedup that can be achieved on any number of processors. Perhaps most
important, the parallelism provides a limit on the possibility of
attaining perfect linear speedup. Specifically, once the number of
processors exceeds the parallelism, the computation cannot possibly
achieve perfect linear speedup. To see this last point, suppose that P >
T₁/T_(∞), in which case the span law implies that the speedup satisfies
T₁/T_(P) ≤ T₁/T_(∞) < P. Moreover, if the number P of processors in the
ideal parallel computer greatly exceeds the parallelism—that is, if P ≫
T₁/T_(∞)—then T₁/T_(P) ≪ P, so that the speedup is much less than the
number of processors. In other words, if the number of processors
exceeds the parallelism, adding even more processors makes the speedup
less perfect.

As an example, consider the computation P-FIB(4) in Figure 26.2, and
assume that each strand takes unit time. Since the work is T₁ = 17 and
the span is T_(∞) = 8, the parallelism is T₁/T_(∞) = 17/8 = 2.125.
Consequently, achieving much more than double the performance is
impossible, no matter how many processors execute the computation. For
larger input sizes, however, we’ll see that P-FIB (n) exhibits
substantial parallelism.

We define the (parallel) slackness of a task-parallel computation
executed on an ideal parallel computer with P processors to be the ratio
(T₁/T_(∞))/P = T₁/(P T_(∞)), which is the factor by which the
parallelism of the computation exceeds the number of processors in the
machine. Restating the bounds on speedup, if the slackness is less than
1, perfect linear speedup is impossible, because T₁/(P T_(∞)) < 1 and
the span law imply that T₁/T_(P) ≤ T₁/T_(∞) < P. Indeed, as the
slackness decreases from 1 and approaches 0, the speedup of the
computation diverges further and further from perfect linear speedup. If
the slackness is less than 1, additional parallelism in an algorithm can
have a great impact on its execution efficiency. If the slackness is
greater than 1, however, the work per processor is the limiting
constraint. We’ll see that as the slackness increases from 1, a good
scheduler can achieve closer and closer to perfect linear speedup. But
once the slackness is much greater than 1, the advantage of additional
parallelism shows diminishing returns.

Scheduling

Good performance depends on more than just minimizing the work and span.
The strands must also be scheduled efficiently onto the processors of
the parallel machine. Our fork-join parallel-programming model provides
no way for a programmer to specify which strands to execute on which
processors. Instead, we rely on the runtime system’s scheduler to map
the dynamically unfolding computation to individual processors. In
practice, the scheduler maps the strands to static threads, and the
operating system schedules the threads on the processors themselves. But
this extra level of indirection is unnecessary for our understanding of
scheduling. We can just imagine that the scheduler maps strands to
processors directly.

A task-parallel scheduler must schedule the computation without knowing
in advance when procedures will be spawned or when they will finish—that
is, it must operate online. Moreover, a good scheduler operates in a
distributed fashion, where the threads implementing the scheduler
cooperate to load-balance the computation. Provably good online,
distributed schedulers exist, but analyzing them is complicated.
Instead, to keep our analysis simple, we’ll consider an online
centralized scheduler that knows the global state of the computation at
any moment.

In particular, we’ll analyze greedy schedulers, which assign as many
strands to processors as possible in each time step, never leaving a
processor idle if there is work that can be done. We’ll classify each
step of a greedy scheduler as follows:

- Complete step: At least P strands are ready to execute, meaning that
  all strands on which they depend have finished execution. A greedy
  scheduler assigns any P of the ready strands to the processors,
  completely utilizing all the processor resources.
- Incomplete step: Fewer than P strands are ready to execute. A greedy
  scheduler assigns each ready strand to its own processor, leaving some
  processors idle for the step, but executing all the ready strands.

The work law tells us that the fastest running time T_(P) that we can
hope for on P processors must be at least T₁/P. The span law tells us
that the fastest possible running time must be at least T_(∞). The
following theorem shows that greedy scheduling is provably good in that
it achieves the sum of these two lower bounds as an upper bound.

Theorem 26.1

On an ideal parallel computer with P processors, a greedy scheduler
executes a task-parallel computation with work T₁ and span T_(∞) in time

[art]

Proof   Without loss of generality, assume that each strand takes unit
time. (If necessary, replace each longer strand by a chain of unit-time
strands.) We’ll consider complete and incomplete steps separately.

In each complete step, the P processors together perform a total of P
work. Thus, if the number of complete steps is k, the total work
executing all the complete steps is kP. Since the greedy scheduler
doesn’t execute any strand more than once and only T₁ work needs to be
performed, it follows that kP ≤ T₁, from which we can conclude that the
number k of complete steps is at most T₁/P.

Now, let’s consider an incomplete step. Let G be the trace for the
entire computation, let G′ be the subtrace of G that has yet to be
executed at the start of the incomplete step, and let G″ be the subtrace
remaining to be executed after the incomplete step. Consider the set R
of strands that are ready at the beginning of the incomplete step, where
|R| < P. By definition, if a strand is ready, all its predecessors in
trace G have executed. Thus the predecessors of strands in R do not
belong to G′. A longest path in G′ must necessarily start at a strand in
R, since every other strand in G′ has a predecessor and thus could not
start a longest path. Because the greedy scheduler executes all ready
strands during the incomplete step, the strands of G″ are exactly those
in G′ minus the strands in R. Consequently, the length of a longest path
in G″ must be 1 less than the length of a longest path in G′. In other
words, every incomplete step decreases the span of the trace remaining
to be executed by 1. Hence, the number of incomplete steps can be at
most T_(∞).

Since each step is either complete or incomplete, the theorem follows.

▪

The following corollary shows that a greedy scheduler always performs
well.

Corollary 26.2

The running time T_(P) of any task-parallel computation scheduled by a
greedy scheduler on a P-processor ideal parallel computer is within a
factor of 2 of optimal.

Proof   Let T*_(P) be the running time produced by an optimal scheduler
on a machine with P processors, and let T₁ and T_(∞) be the work and
span of the computation, respectively. Since the work and span
laws—inequalities (26.2) and (26.3)—give [art], Theorem 26.1 implies
that

[art]

▪

The next corollary shows that, in fact, a greedy scheduler achieves
near-perfect linear speedup on any task-parallel computation as the
slackness grows.

Corollary 26.3

Let T_(P) be the running time of a task-parallel computation produced by
a greedy scheduler on an ideal parallel computer with P processors, and
let T₁ and T_(∞)be the work and span of the computation, respectively.
Then, if P ≪ T₁/T_(∞), or equivalently, the parallel slackness is much
greater than 1, we have T_(P) ≈ T₁/P, a speedup of approximately P.

Proof   If we suppose that P ≪ T₁/T_(∞), then it follows that T_(∞) ≪
T₁/P, and hence Theorem 26.1 gives T_(P) ≤ T₁/P + T_(∞) ≈ T₁/P. Since
the work law (26.2) dictates that T_(P) ≥ T₁/P, we conclude that T_(P) ≈
T₁/P, which is a speedup of T₁/T_(P) ≈ P.

▪

The ≪ symbol denotes “much less,” but how much is “much less”? As a rule
of thumb, a slackness of at least 10—that is, 10 times more parallelism
than processors—generally suffices to achieve good speedup. Then, the
span term in the greedy bound, inequality (26.4), is less than 10% of
the work-per-processor term, which is good enough for most engineering
situations. For example, if a computation runs on only 10 or 100
processors, it doesn’t make sense to value parallelism of, say
1,000,000, over parallelism of 10,000, even with the factor of 100
difference. As Problem 26-2 shows, sometimes reducing extreme
parallelism yields algorithms that are better with respect to other
concerns and which still scale up well on reasonable numbers of
processors.

Analyzing parallel algorithms

We now have all the tools we need to analyze parallel algorithms using
work/span analysis, allowing us to bound an algorithm’s running time on
any number of processors. Analyzing the work is relatively
straightforward, since it amounts to nothing more than analyzing the
running time of an ordinary serial algorithm, namely, the serial
projection of the parallel algorithm. You should already be familiar
with analyzing work, since that is what most of this textbook is about!
Analyzing the span is the new thing that parallelism engenders, but it’s
generally no harder once you get the hang of it. Let’s investigate the
basic ideas using the P-FIB program.

Analyzing the work T₁(n) of P-FIB (n) poses no hurdles, because we’ve
already done it. The serial projection of P-FIB is effectively the
original FIB procedure, and hence, we have T₁(n) = T (n) = Θ(ϕ^(n)) from
equation (26.1).

Figure 26.3 illustrates how to analyze the span. If two traces are
joined in series, their spans add to form the span of their composition,
whereas if they are joined in parallel, the span of their composition is
the maximum of the spans of the two traces. As it turns out, the trace
of any fork-join parallel computation can be built up from single
strands by series-parallel composition.

[art]

Figure 26.3 Series-parallel composition of parallel traces. (a) When two
traces are joined in series, the work of the composition is the sum of
their work, and the span of the composition is the sum of their spans.
(b) When two traces are joined in parallel, the work of the composition
remains the sum of their work, but the span of the composition is only
the maximum of their spans.

Armed with an understanding of series-parallel composition, we can
analyze the span of P-FIB (n). The spawned call to P-FIB (n − 1) in line
3 runs in parallel with the call to P-FIB (n − 2) in line 4. Hence, we
can express the span of P-FIB (n) as the recurrence

  ---------- --- -----------------------------------------
  T_(∞)(n)   =   max {T_(∞)(n − 1), T_(∞)(n − 2)} + Θ(1)
             =   T_(∞)(n − 1) + Θ(1),
  ---------- --- -----------------------------------------

which has solution T_(∞)(n) = Θ(n). (The second equality above follows
from the first because P-FIB (n − 1) uses P-FIB (n − 2) in its
computation, so that the span of P-FIB (n − 1) must be at least as large
as the span of P-FIB (n − 2).)

The parallelism of P-FIB (n) is T₁(n)/T_(∞)(n) = Θ(ϕ^(n)/n), which grows
dramatically as n gets large. Thus, Corollary 26.3 tells us that on even
the largest parallel computers, a modest value for n suffices to achieve
near perfect linear speedup for P-FIB (n), because this procedure
exhibits considerable parallel slackness.

Parallel loops

Many algorithms contain loops for which all the iterations can operate
in parallel. Although the spawn and sync keywords can be used to
parallelize such loops, it is more convenient to specify directly that
the iterations of such loops can run in parallel. Our pseudocode
provides this functionality via the parallel keyword, which precedes the
for keyword in a for loop statement.

As an example, consider the problem of multiplying a square n × n matrix
A = (a_(ij)) by an n-vector x = (x_(j)). The resulting n-vector y =
(y_(i)) is given by the equation

[art]

for i = 1, 2, … , n. The P-MAT-VEC procedure performs matrix-vector
multiplication (actually, y = y + Ax) by computing all the entries of y
in parallel. The parallel for keywords in line 1 of P-MAT-VEC indicate
that the n iterations of the loop body, which includes a serial for
loop, may be run in parallel. The initialization y = 0, if desired,
should be performed before calling the procedure (and can be done with a
parallel for loop).

P-MAT-VEC (A, x, y, n)

+---+-------------------------+------------------+
| 1 | parallel for i = 1 to n | // parallel loop |
+---+-------------------------+------------------+
| 2 | for j = 1 to n          | // serial loop   |
+---+-------------------------+------------------+
| 3 | y_(i) = y_(i) + a_(ij) x_(j)               |
+---+--------------------------------------------+

Compilers for fork-join parallel programs can implement parallel for
loops in terms of spawn and sync by using recursive spawning. For
example, for the parallel for loop in lines 1–3, a compiler can generate
the auxiliary subroutine P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE and call
P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y, n, 1, n) in the place where the loop would
be in the compiled code. As Figure 26.4 illustrates, this procedure
recursively spawns the first half of the iterations of the loop to
execute in parallel (line 5) with the second half of the iterations
(line 6) and then executes a sync (line 7), thereby creating a binary
tree of parallel execution. Each leaf represents a base case, which is
the serial for loop of lines 2–3.

P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y, n, i, i′)

+---+-------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | if i == i′              | // just one iteration to do?   |
+---+-------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | for j = 1 to n          | // mimic P-MAT-VEC serial loop |
+---+-------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | y_(i) = y_(i) + a_(ij) x_(j)                             |
+---+-------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4 | else mid = ⌊(i + i′)/2⌋ | // parallel divide-and-conquer |
+---+-------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 5 | spawn P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y, n, i, mid)           |
+---+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 6 | P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y, n, mid + 1, i′)            |
+---+----------------------------------------------------------+
| 7 | sync                                                     |
+---+----------------------------------------------------------+

To calculate the work T₁(n) of P-MAT-VEC on an n×n matrix, simply
compute the running time of its serial projection, which comes from
replacing the parallel for loop in line 1 with an ordinary for loop. The
running time of the resulting serial pseudocode is Θ(n²), which means
that T₁(n) = Θ(n²). This analysis seems to ignore the overhead for
recursive spawning in implementing the parallel loops, however. Indeed,
the overhead of recursive spawning does increase the work of a parallel
loop compared with that of its serial projection, but not
asymptotically. To see why, observe that since the tree of recursive
procedure instances is a full binary tree, the number of internal nodes
is one less than the number of leaves (see Exercise B.5-3 on page 1175).
Each internal node performs constant work to divide the iteration range,
and each leaf corresponds to a base case, which takes at least constant
time (Θ(n) time in this case). Thus, by amortizing the overhead of
recursive spawning over the work of the iterations in the leaves, we see
that the overall work increases by at most a constant factor.

[art]

Figure 26.4 A trace for the computation of P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y,
8, 1, 8). The two numbers within each rounded rectangle give the values
of the last two parameters (i and i′ in the procedure header) in the
invocation (spawn, in blue, or call, in tan) of the procedure. The blue
circles represent strands corresponding to the part of the procedure up
to the spawn of P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE in line 5. The orange circles
represent strands corresponding to the part of the procedure that calls
P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE in line 6 up to the sync in line 7, where it
suspends until the spawned subroutine in line 5 returns. The white
circles represent strands corresponding to the (negligible) part of the
procedure after the sync up to the point where it returns.

To reduce the overhead of recursive spawning, task-parallel platforms
sometimes coarsen the leaves of the recursion by executing several
iterations in a single leaf, either automatically or under programmer
control. This optimization comes at the expense of reducing the
parallelism. If the computation has sufficient parallel slackness,
however, near-perfect linear speedup won’t be sacrificed.

Although recursive spawning doesn’t affect the work of a parallel loop
asymptotically, we must take it into account when analyzing the span.
Consider a parallel loop with n iterations in which the ith iteration
has span iter_(∞)(i). Since the depth of recursion is logarithmic in the
number of iterations, the parallel loop’s span is

T_(∞)(n) = Θ(lg n) + max {iter_(∞)(i) : 1 ≤ i ≤ n}.

For example, let’s compute the span of the doubly nested loops in lines
1–3 of P-MAT-VEC. The span for the parallel for loop control is Θ(lg n).
For each iteration of the outer parallel loop, the inner serial for loop
contains n iterations of line 3. Since each iteration takes constant
time, the total span for the inner serial for loop is Θ(n), no matter
which iteration of the outer parallel for loop it’s in. Thus, taking the
maximum over all iterations of the outer loop and adding in the Θ(lg n)
for loop control yields an overall span of T_(∞)n = Θ(n) + Θ(lg n) =
Θ(n) for the procedure. Since the work is Θ(n²), the parallelism is
Θ(n²)/Θ(n) = Θ(n). (Exercise 26.1-7 asks you to provide an
implementation with even more parallelism.)

Race conditions

A parallel algorithm is deterministic if it always does the same thing
on the same input, no matter how the instructions are scheduled on the
multicore computer. It is nondeterministic if its behavior might vary
from run to run when the input is the same. A parallel algorithm that is
intended to be deterministic may nevertheless act nondeterministically,
however, if it contains a difficult-to-diagnose bug called a
“determinacy race.”

Famous race bugs include the Therac-25 radiation therapy machine, which
killed three people and injured several others, and the Northeast
Blackout of 2003, which left over 50 million people in the United States
without power. These pernicious bugs are notoriously hard to find. You
can run tests in the lab for days without a failure, only to discover
that your software sporadically crashes in the field, sometimes with
dire consequences.

A determinacy race occurs when two logically parallel instructions
access the same memory location and at least one of the instructions
modifies the value stored in the location. The toy procedure
RACE-EXAMPLE on the following page illustrates a determinacy race. After
initializing x to 0 in line 1, RACE-EXAMPLE creates two parallel
strands, each of which increments x in line 3. Although it might seem
that a call of RACE-EXAMPLE should always print the value 2 (its serial
projection certainly does), it could instead print the value 1. Let’s
see how this anomaly might occur.

When a processor increments x, the operation is not indivisible, but is
composed of a sequence of instructions:

[art]

Figure 26.5 Illustration of the determinacy race in RACE-EXAMPLE. (a) A
trace showing the dependencies among individual instructions. The
processor registers are r₁ and r₂. Instructions unrelated to the race,
such as the implementation of loop control, are omitted. (b) An
execution sequence that elicits the bug, showing the values of x in
memory and registers r₁ and r₂ for each step in the execution sequence.

RACE-EXAMPLE ( )

+---+--------------+---------------------+
| 1 | x = 0                              |
+---+------------------------------------+
| 2 | parallel for i = 1 to 2            |
+---+--------------+---------------------+
| 3 | x = x + 1    | // determinacy race |
+---+--------------+---------------------+
| 4 | print x                            |
+---+------------------------------------+

- Load x from memory into one of the processor’s registers.
- Increment the value in the register.
- Store the value in the register back into x in memory.

Figure 26.5(a) illustrates a trace representing the execution of
RACE-EXAMPLE, with the strands broken down to individual instructions.
Recall that since an ideal parallel computer supports sequential
consistency, you can view the parallel execution of a parallel algorithm
as an interleaving of instructions that respects the dependencies in the
trace. Part (b) of the figure shows the values in an execution of the
computation that elicits the anomaly. The value x is kept in memory, and
r₁ and r₂ are processor registers. In step 1, one of the processors sets
x to 0. In steps 2 and 3, processor 1 loads x from memory into its
register r₁ and increments it, producing the value 1 in r₁. At that
point, processor 2 comes into the picture, executing instructions 4–6.
Processor 2 loads x from memory into register r₂; increments it,
producing the value 1 in r₂; and then stores this value into x, setting
x to 1. Now, processor 1 resumes with step 7, storing the value 1 in r₁
into x, which leaves the value of x unchanged. Therefore, step 8 prints
the value 1, rather than the value 2 that the serial projection would
print.

Let’s recap what happened. By sequential consistency, the effect of the
parallel execution is as if the executed instructions of the two
processors are interleaved. If processor 1 executes all its instructions
before processor 2, a trivial interleaving, the value 2 is printed.
Conversely, if processor 2 executes all its instructions before
processor 1, the value 2 is still printed. When the instructions of the
two processors interleave nontrivially, however, it is possible, as in
this example execution, that one of the updates to x is lost, resulting
in the value 1 being printed.

Of course, many executions do not elicit the bug. That’s the problem
with determinacy races. Generally, most instruction orderings produce
correct results, such as any where the instructions on the left branch
execute before the instructions on the right branch, or vice versa. But
some orderings generate improper results when the instructions
interleave. Consequently, races can be extremely hard to test for. Your
program may fail, but you may be unable to reliably reproduce the
failure in subsequent tests, confounding your attempts to locate the bug
in your code and fix it. Task-parallel programming environments often
provide race-detection productivity tools to help you isolate race bugs.

Many parallel programs in the real world are intentionally
nondeterministic. They contain determinacy races, but they mitigate the
dangers of nondeterminism through the use of mutual-exclusion locks and
other methods of synchronization. For our purposes, however, we’ll
insist on an absence of determinacy races in the algorithms we develop.
Nondeterministic programs are indeed interesting, but nondeterministic
programming is a more advanced topic and unnecessary for a wide swath of
interesting parallel algorithms.

To ensure that algorithms are deterministic, any two strands that
operate in parallel should be mutually noninterfering: they only read,
and do not modify, any memory locations accessed by both of them.
Consequently, in a parallel for construct, such as the outer loop of
P-MAT-VEC, we want all the iterations of the body, including any code an
iteration executes in subroutines, to be mutually noninterfering. And
between a spawn and its corresponding sync, we want the code executed by
the spawned child and the code executed by the parent to be mutually
noninterfering, once again including invoked subroutines.

As an example of how easy it is to write code with unintentional races,
the P-MAT-VEC-WRONG procedure on the next page is a faulty parallel
implementation of matrix-vector multiplication that achieves a span of
Θ(lg n) by parallelizing the inner for loop. This procedure is
incorrect, unfortunately, due to determinacy races when updating y_(i)
in line 3, which executes in parallel for all n values of j.

Index variables of parallel for loops, such as i in line 1 and j in line
2, do not cause races between iterations. Conceptually, each iteration
of the loop creates an independent variable to hold the index of that
iteration during that iteration’s execution of the loop body. Even if
two parallel iterations both access the same index variable, they really
are accessing different variable instances—hence different memory
locations—and no race occurs.

P-MAT-VEC-WRONG (A, x, y, n)

+---+-----------------------------+---------------------+
| 1 | parallel for i = 1 to n                           |
+---+---------------------------------------------------+
| 2 | parallel for j = 1 to n                           |
+---+-----------------------------+---------------------+
| 3 | y_(i) = y_(i) + a_(ij)x_(j) | // determinacy race |
+---+-----------------------------+---------------------+

A parallel algorithm with races can sometimes be deterministic. As an
example, two parallel threads might store the same value into a shared
variable, and it wouldn’t matter which stored the value first. For
simplicity, however, we generally prefer code without determinacy races,
even if the races are benign. And good parallel programmers frown on
code with determinacy races that cause nondeterministic behavior, if
deterministic code that performs comparably is an option.

But nondeterministic code does have its place. For example, you can’t
implement a parallel hash table, a highly practical data structure,
without writing code containing determinacy races. Much research has
centered around how to extend the fork-join model to incorporate limited
“structured” nondeterminism while avoiding the full measure of
complications that arise when nondeterminism is completely unrestricted.

A chess lesson

To illustrate the power of work/span analysis, this section closes with
a true story that occurred during the development of one of the first
world-class parallel chess-playing programs [106] many years ago. The
timings below have been simplified for exposition.

The chess program was developed and tested on a 32-processor computer,
but it was designed to run on a supercomputer with 512 processors. Since
the supercomputer availability was limited and expensive, the developers
ran benchmarks on the small computer and extrapolated performance to the
large computer.

At one point, the developers incorporated an optimization into the
program that reduced its running time on an important benchmark on the
small machine from T₃₂ = 65 seconds to [art] seconds. Yet, the
developers used the work and span performance measures to conclude that
the optimized version, which was faster on 32 processors, would actually
be slower than the original version on the 512 processors of the large
machine. As a result, they abandoned the “optimization.”

Here is their work/span analysis. The original version of the program
had work T₁ = 2048 seconds and span T_(∞)= 1 second. Let’s treat
inequality (26.4) on page 760 as the equation T_(P) = T₁/P + T_(∞),
which we can use as an approximation to the running time on P
processors. Then indeed we have T₃₂ = 2048/32 + 1 = 65. With the
optimization, the work becomes T′₁ = 1024 seconds, and the span becomes
T′_(∞) = 8 seconds. Our approximation gives T′₃₂ = 1024/32 + 8 = 40.

The relative speeds of the two versions switch when we estimate their
running times on 512 processors, however. The first version has a
running time of T₅₁₂ = 2048/512+1 = 5 seconds, and the second version
runs in [art] seconds. The optimization that speeds up the program on 32
processors makes the program run for twice as long on 512 processors!
The optimized version’s span of 8, which is not the dominant term in the
running time on 32 processors, becomes the dominant term on 512
processors, nullifying the advantage from using more processors. The
optimization does not scale up.

The moral of the story is that work/span analysis, and measurements of
work and span, can be superior to measured running times alone in
extrapolating an algorithm’s scalability.

Exercises

26.1-1

What does a trace for the execution of a serial algorithm look like?

26.1-2

Suppose that line 4 of P-FIB spawns P-FIB (n − 2), rather than calling
it as is done in the pseudocode. How would the trace of P-FIB(4) in
Figure 26.2 change? What is the impact on the asymptotic work, span, and
parallelism?

26.1-3

Draw the trace that results from executing P-FIB(5). Assuming that each
strand in the computation takes unit time, what are the work, span, and
parallelism of the computation? Show how to schedule the trace on 3
processors using greedy scheduling by labeling each strand with the time
step in which it is executed.

26.1-4

Prove that a greedy scheduler achieves the following time bound, which
is slightly stronger than the bound proved in Theorem 26.1:

[art]

26.1-5

Construct a trace for which one execution by a greedy scheduler can take
nearly twice the time of another execution by a greedy scheduler on the
same number of processors. Describe how the two executions would
proceed.

26.1-6

Professor Karan measures her deterministic task-parallel algorithm on 4,
10, and 64 processors of an ideal parallel computer using a greedy
scheduler. She claims that the three runs yielded T₄ = 80 seconds, T₁₀ =
42 seconds, and T₆₄ = 10 seconds. Argue that the professor is either
lying or incompetent. (Hint: Use the work law (26.2), the span law
(26.3), and inequality (26.5) from Exercise 26.1-4.)

26.1-7

Give a parallel algorithm to multiply an n × n matrix by an n-vector
that achieves Θ(n²/lg n) parallelism while maintaining Θ(n²) work.

26.1-8

Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of the procedure P-TRANSPOSE,
which transposes an n × n matrix A in place.

P-TRANSPOSE (A, n)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   parallel for j = 2 to n
  2   parallel for i = 1 to j − 1
  3   exchange a_(ij) with a_(ji)
  --- -----------------------------

26.1-9

Suppose that instead of a parallel for loop in line 2, the P-TRANSPOSE
procedure in Exercise 26.1-8 had an ordinary for loop. Analyze the work,
span, and parallelism of the resulting algorithm.

26.1-10

For what number of processors do the two versions of the chess program
run equally fast, assuming that T_(P) = T₁/P + T_(∞)?

26.2    Parallel matrix multiplication

In this section, we’ll explore how to parallelize the three
matrix-multiplication algorithms from Sections 4.1 and 4.2. We’ll see
that each algorithm can be parallelized in a straightforward fashion
using either parallel loops or recursive spawning. We’ll analyze them
using work/span analysis, and we’ll see that each parallel algorithm
attains the same performance on one processor as its corresponding
serial algorithm, while scaling up to large numbers of processors.

A parallel algorithm for matrix multiplication using parallel loops

The first algorithm we’ll study is P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY, which simply
parallelizes the two outer loops in the procedure MATRIX-MULTIPLY on
page 81.

P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY (A, B, C, n)

  --- ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  1   parallel for i = 1 to n             // compute entries in each of n rows
  2   parallel for j = 1 to n             // compute n entries in row i
  3   for k = 1 to n                      
  4   c_(ij) = c_(ij) + a_(ik) · b_(kj)   // add in another term of equation (4.1)
  --- ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------------

Let’s analyze P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY. Since the serial projection of the
algorithm is just MATRIX-MULTIPLY, the work is the same as the running
time of MATRIX-MULTIPLY: T₁(n) = Θ(n³). The span is T_(∞)(n) = Θ(n),
because it follows a path down the tree of recursion for the parallel
for loop starting in line 1, then down the tree of recursion for the
parallel for loop starting in line 2, and then executes all n iterations
of the ordinary for loop starting in line 3, resulting in a total span
of Θ(lg n) + Θ(lg n) + Θ(n) = Θ(n). Thus the parallelism is Θ(n³)/Θ(n) =
Θ(n²). (Exercise 26.2-3 asks you to parallelize the inner loop to obtain
a parallelism of Θ(n³/lg n), which you cannot do straightforwardly using
parallel for, because you would create races.)

A parallel divide-and-conquer algorithm for matrix multiplication

Section 4.1 shows how to multiply n × n matrices serially in Θ(n³) time
using a divide-and-conquer strategy. Let’s see how to parallelize that
algorithm using recursive spawning instead of calls.

The serial MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE procedure on page 83 takes as input
three n × n matrices A, B, and C and performs the matrix calculation C =
C + A · B by recursively performing eight multiplications of n/2 × n/2
submatrices of A and B. The P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE procedure on the
following page implements the same divide-and-conquer strategy, but it
uses spawning to perform the eight multiplications in parallel. To avoid
determinacy races in updating the elements of C, it creates a temporary
matrix D to store four of the submatrix products. At the end, it adds C
and D together to produce the final result. (Problem 26-2 asks you to
eliminate the temporary matrix D at the expense of some parallelism.)

Lines 2–3 of P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE handle the base case of
multiplying 1 × 1 matrices. The remainder of the procedure deals with
the recursive case. Line 4 allocates a temporary matrix D, and lines 5–7
zero it. Line 8 partitions each of the four matrices A, B, C, and D into
n/2 × n/2 submatrices. (As with MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE on page 83,
we’re glossing over the subtle issue of how to use index calculations to
represent submatrix sections of a matrix.) The spawned recursive call in
line 9 sets C₁₁ = C₁₁ + A₁₁ · B₁₁, so that C₁₁ accumulates the first of
the two terms in equation (4.5) on page 82. Similarly, lines 10–12 cause
each of C₁₂, C₂₁, and C₂₂ in parallel to accumulate the first of the two
terms in equations (4.6)–(4.8), respectively. Line 13 sets the submatrix
D₁₁ to the submatrix product A₁₂ · B₂₁, so that D₁₁ equals the second of
the two terms in equation (4.5). Lines 14–16 set each of D₁₂, D₂₁, and
D₂₂ in parallel to the second of the two terms in equations (4.6)–(4.8),
respectively. The sync statement in line 17 ensures that all the spawned
submatrix products in lines 9–16 have been computed, after which the
doubly nested parallel for loops in lines 18–20 add the elements of D to
the corresponding elements of C.

P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE (A, B, C, n)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | if n == 1                     | // just one element in each   |
|     |                               | matrix?                       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | c₁₁ = c₁₁ + a₁₁ · b₁₁                                         |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   3 | return                                                        |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | let D be a new n × n matrix   | // temporary matrix           |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | parallel for i = 1 to n       | // set D = 0                  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   6 | parallel for j = 1 to n                                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   7 | d_(ij) = 0                                                    |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   8 | partition A, B, C, and D into n/2 × n/2 submatrices A₁₁, A₁₂, |
|     | A₂₁, A₂₂; B₁₁, B₁₂, B₂₁, B₂₂; C₁₁, C₁₂, C₂₁, C₂₂; and D₁₁,    |
|     | D₁₂, D₂₁, D₂₂; respectively                                   |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   9 | spawn P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE (A₁₁, B₁₁, C₁₁, n/2)        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10  | spawn P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE (A₁₁, B₁₂, C₁₂, n/2)        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11  | spawn P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE (A₂₁, B₁₁, C₂₁, n/2)        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12  | spawn P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE (A₂₁, B₁₂, C₂₂, n/2)        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13  | spawn P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE (A₁₂, B₂₁, D₁₁, n/2)        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14  | spawn P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE (A₁₂, B₂₂, D₁₂, n/2)        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15  | spawn P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE (A₂₂, B₂₁, D₂₁, n/2)        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16  | spawn P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE (A₂₂, B₂₂, D₂₂, n/2)        |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 17  | sync                          | // wait for spawned submatrix |
|     |                               | products                      |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 18  | parallel for i = 1 to n       | // update C = C + D           |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 19  | parallel for j = 1 to n                                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 20  | c_(ij) = c_(ij) + d_(ij)                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

Let’s analyze the P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE procedure. We start by
analyzing the work M₁(n), echoing the serial running-time analysis of
its progenitor MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE. The recursive case allocates
and zeros the temporary matrix D in Θ(n²) time, partitions in Θ(1) time,
performs eight recursive multiplications of n/2 × n/2 matrices, and
finishes up with the Θ(n²) work from adding two n×n matrices. Thus the
work outside the spawned recursive calls is Θ(n²), and the recurrence
for the work M₁(n) becomes

  ------- --- ------------------
  M₁(n)   =   8M₁(n/2) + Θ(n²)
          =   Θ(n³)
  ------- --- ------------------

by case 1 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1). Not surprisingly, the
work of this parallel algorithm is asymptotically the same as the
running time of the procedure MATRIX-MULTIPLY on page 81, with its
triply nested loops.

Let’s determine the span M_(∞)(n) of P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.
Because the eight parallel recursive spawns all execute on matrices of
the same size, the maximum span for any recursive spawn is just the span
of a single one of them, or M_(∞)(n/2). The span for the doubly nested
parallel for loops in lines 5–7 is Θ(lg n) because each loop control
adds Θ(lg n) to the constant span of line 7. Similarly, the doubly
nested parallel for loops in lines 18–20 add another Θ(lg n). Matrix
partitioning by index calculation has Θ(1) span, which is dominated by
the Θ(lg n) span of the nested loops. We obtain the recurrence

[art]

Since this recurrence falls under case 2 of the master theorem with k =
1, the solution is M_(∞)(n) = Θ(lg² n).

The parallelism of P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE is M₁(n)/M_(∞)(n) =
Θ(n³/lg²n), which is huge. (Problem 26-2 asks you to simplify this
parallel algorithm at the expense of just a little less parallelism.)

Parallelizing Strassen’s method

To parallelize Strassen’s algorithm, we can follow the same general
outline as on pages 86–87, but use spawning. You may find it helpful to
compare each step below with the corresponding step there. We’ll analyze
costs as we go along to develop recurrences T₁(n) and T_(∞)(n) for the
overall work and span, respectively.

1.  If n = 1, the matrices each contain a single element. Perform a
    single scalar multiplication and a single scalar addition, and
    return. Otherwise, partition the input matrices A and B and output
    matrix C into n/2 × n/2 submatrices, as in equation (4.2) on
    page 82. This step takes Θ(1) work and Θ(1) span by index
    calculation.
2.  Create n/2 × n/2 matrices S₁, S₂, … , S₁₀, each of which is the sum
    or difference of two submatrices from step 1. Create and zero the
    entries of seven n/2×n/2 matrices P₁, P₂, … , P₇ to hold seven
    n/2×n/2 matrix products. All 17 matrices can be created, and the
    P_(i) initialized, with doubly nested parallel for loops using Θ(n²)
    work and Θ(lg n) span.
3.  Using the submatrices from step 1 and the matrices S₁, S₂, … , S₁₀
    created in step 2, recursively spawn computations of each of the
    seven n/2 × n/2 matrix products P₁, P₂, … , P₇, taking 7T₁(n/2) work
    and T_(∞)(n/2) span.
4.  Update the four submatrices C₁₁, C₁₂, C₂₁, C₂₂ of the result matrix
    C by adding or subtracting various P_(i) matrices. Using doubly
    nested parallel for loops, computing all four submatrices takes
    Θ(n²) work and Θ(lg n) span.

Let’s analyze this algorithm. Since the serial projection is the same as
the original serial algorithm, the work is just the running time of the
serial projection, namely, Θ(n^(lg 7)). As we did with
P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, we can devise a recurrence for the span. In
this case, seven recursive calls execute in parallel, but since they all
operate on matrices of the same size, we obtain the same recurrence
(26.6) as we did for P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, with solution Θ(lg²
n). Thus the parallel version of Strassen’s method has parallelism
Θ(n^(lg 7)/lg² n), which is large. Although the parallelism is slightly
less than that of P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, that’s just because the
work is also less.

Exercises

26.2-1

Draw the trace for computing P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY on 2 × 2 matrices,
labeling how the vertices in your diagram correspond to strands in the
execution of the algorithm. Assuming that each strand executes in unit
time, analyze the work, span, and parallelism of this computation.

26.2-2

Repeat Exercise 26.2-1 for P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.

26.2-3

Give pseudocode for a parallel algorithm that multiplies two n × n
matrices with work Θ(n³) but span only Θ(lg n). Analyze your algorithm.

26.2-4

Give pseudocode for an efficient parallel algorithm that multiplies a p
× q matrix by a q × r matrix. Your algorithm should be highly parallel
even if any of p, q, and r equal 1. Analyze your algorithm.

26.2-5

Give pseudocode for an efficient parallel version of the Floyd-Warshall
algorithm (see Section 23.2), which computes shortest paths between all
pairs of vertices in an edge-weighted graph. Analyze your algorithm.

26.3    Parallel merge sort

We first saw serial merge sort in Section 2.3.1, and in Section 2.3.2 we
analyzed its running time and showed it to be Θ(n lg n). Because merge
sort already uses the divide-and-conquer method, it seems like a
terrific candidate for implementing using fork-join parallelism.

The procedure P-MERGE-SORT modifies merge sort to spawn the first
recursive call. Like its serial counterpart MERGE-SORT on page 39, the
P-MERGE-SORT procedure sorts the subarray A[p : r]. After the sync
statement in line 8 ensures that the two recursive spawns in lines 5 and
7 have finished, P-MERGE-SORT calls the P-MERGE procedure, a parallel
merging algorithm, which is on page 779, but you don’t need to bother
looking at it right now.

P-MERGE-SORT (A, p, r)

+-----+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   1 | if p ≥ r                  | // zero or one element?   |
+-----+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   2 | return                                                |
+-----+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   3 | q = ⌊(p + r)/2⌋           | // midpoint of A[p : r]   |
+-----+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   4 | // Recursively sort A[p : q] in parallel.             |
+-----+-------------------------------------------------------+
|   5 | spawn P-MERGE-SORT (A, p, q)                          |
+-----+-------------------------------------------------------+
|   6 | // Recursively sort A[q + 1 : r] in parallel.         |
+-----+-------------------------------------------------------+
|   7 | spawn P-MERGE-SORT (A, q + 1, r)                      |
+-----+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   8 | sync                      | // wait for spawns        |
+-----+---------------------------+---------------------------+
|   9 | // Merge A[p : q] and A[q + 1 : r] into A[p : r].     |
+-----+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 10  | P-MERGE (A, p, q, r)                                  |
+-----+-------------------------------------------------------+

First, let’s use work/span analysis to get some intuition for why we
need a parallel merge procedure. After all, it may seem as though there
should be plenty of parallelism just by parallelizing MERGE-SORT without
worrying about parallelizing the merge. But what would happen if the
call to P-MERGE in line 10 of P-MERGE-SORT were replaced by a call to
the serial MERGE procedure on page 36? Let’s call the pseudocode so
modified P-NAIVE-MERGE-SORT.

Let T₁(n) be the (worst-case) work of P-NAIVE-MERGE-SORT on an n-element
subarray, where n = r −p + 1 is the number of elements in A[p : r], and
let T_(∞)(n) be the span. Because MERGE is serial with running time
Θ(n), both its work and span are Θ(n). Since the serial projection of
P-NAIVE-MERGE-SORT is exactly MERGE-SORT, its work is T₁(n) = Θ(n lg n).
The two recursive calls in lines 5 and 7 run in parallel, and so its
span is given by the recurrence

  ---------- --- -------------------
  T_(∞)(n)   =   T_(∞)(n/2) + Θ(n)
             =   Θ(n),
  ---------- --- -------------------

by case 1 of the master theorem. Thus the parallelism of
P-NAIVE-MERGE-SORT is T₁(n)/T_(∞)(n) = Θ(lg n), which is an unimpressive
amount of parallelism. To sort a million elements, for example, since lg
10⁶ ≈ 20, it might achieve linear speedup on a few processors, but it
would not scale up to dozens of processors.

The parallelism bottleneck in P-NAIVE-MERGE-SORT is plainly the MERGE
procedure. If we asymptotically reduce the span of merging, the master
theorem dictates that the span of parallel merge sort will also get
smaller. When you look at the pseudocode for MERGE, it may seem that
merging is inherently serial, but it’s not. We can fashion a parallel
merging algorithm. The goal is to reduce the span of parallel merging
asymptotically, but if we want an efficient parallel algorithm, we must
ensure that the Θ(n) bound on work doesn’t increase.

Figure 26.6 depicts the divide-and-conquer strategy that we’ll use in
P-MERGE. The heart of the algorithm is a recursive auxiliary procedure
P-MERGE-AUX that merges two sorted subarrays of an array A into a
subarray of another array B in parallel. Specifically, P-MERGE-AUX
merges A[p₁ : r₁] and A[p₂ : r₂] into subarray B[p₃ : r₃], where r₃ =
p₃ + (r₁ − p₁ + 1) + (r₂ − p₂ + 1) − 1 = p₃ + (r₁ − p₁) + (r₂ − p₂) + 1.

The key idea of the recursive merging algorithm in P-MERGE-AUX is to
split each of the two sorted subarrays of A around a pivot x, such that
all the elements in the lower part of each subarray are at most x and
all the elements in the upper part of each subarray are at least x. The
procedure can then recurse in parallel on two subtasks: merging the two
lower parts, and merging the two upper parts. The trick is to find a
pivot x so that the recursion is not too lopsided. We don’t want a
situation such as that in QUICKSORT on page 183, where bad partitioning
elements lead to a dramatic loss of asymptotic efficiency. We could opt
to partition around a random element, as RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT on page
192 does, but because the input subarrays are sorted, P-MERGE-AUX can
quickly determine a pivot that always works well.

Specifically, the recursive merging algorithm picks the pivot x as the
middle element of the larger of the two input subarrays, which we can
assume without loss of generality is A[p₁ : r₁], since otherwise, the
two subarrays can just switch roles. That is, x = A[q₁], where q₁ =
⌊(p₁ + r₁)/2⌋. Because A[p₁ : r₁] is sorted, x is a median of the
subarray elements: every element in A[p₁ : q₁ − 1] is no more than x,
and every element in A[q₁ + 1 : r₁] is no less than x. Then the
algorithm finds the “split point” q₂ in the smaller subarray A[p₂ : r₂]
such that all the elements in A[p₂ : q₂−1] (if any) are at most x and
all the elements in A[q₂ : r₂] (if any) are at least x. Intuitively, the
subarray A[p₂ : r₂] would still be sorted if x were inserted between
A[q₂−1] and A[q₂] (although the algorithm doesn’t do that). Since A[p₂ :
r₂] is sorted, a minor variant of binary search (see Exercise 2.3-6)
with x as the search key can find the split point q₂ in Θ(lg n) time in
the worst case. As we’ll see when we get to the analysis, even if x
splits A[p₂ : r₂] badly—x is either smaller than all the subarray
elements or larger—we’ll still have at least 1/4 of the elements in each
of the two recursive merges. Thus the larger of the recursive merges
operates on at most 3/4 elements, and the recursion is guaranteed to
bottom out after Θ(lg n) recursive calls.

[art]

Figure 26.6 The idea behind P-MERGE-AUX, which merges two sorted
subarrays A[p₁ : r₁] and A[p₂ : r₂] into the subarray B[p₃ : r₃] in
parallel. Letting x = A[q₁] (shown in yellow) be a median of A[p₁ : r₁]
and q₂ be a place in A[p₂ : r₂] such that x would fall between A[q₂ − 1]
and A[q₂], every element in the subarrays A[p₁ : q₁ − 1] and A[p₂ : q₂ −
1] (shown in orange) is at most x, and every element in the subarrays
A[q₁ + 1 : r₁] and A[q₂ + 1 : r₂] (shown in blue) is at least x. To
merge, compute the index q₃ where x belongs in B[p₃ : r₃], copy x into
B[q₃], and then recursively merge A[p₁ : q₁ − 1] with A[p₂ : q₂ − 1]
into B[p₃ : q₃ − 1] and A[q₁ + 1 : r₁] with A[q₂ : r₂] into B[q₃ + 1 :
r₃].

Now let’s put these ideas into pseudocode. We start with the serial
procedure FIND-SPLIT-POINT (A, p, r, x) on the next page, which takes as
input a sorted subarray A[p : r] and a key x. The procedure returns a
split point of A[p : r]: an index q in the range p ≤ q ≤ r + 1 such that
all the elements in A[p : q − 1] (if any) are at most x and all the
elements in A[q : r] (if any) are at least x.

The FIND-SPLIT-POINT procedure uses binary search to find the split
point. Lines 1 and 2 establish the range of indices for the search. Each
time through the while loop, line 5 compares the middle element of the
range with the search key x, and lines 6 and 7 narrow the search range
to either the lower half or the upper half of the subarray, depending on
the result of the test. In the end, after the range has been narrowed to
a single index, line 8 returns that index as the split point.

FIND-SPLIT-POINT (A, p, r, x)

+---+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 1 | low = p                | // low end of search range            |
+---+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 2 | high = r + 1           | // high end of search range           |
+---+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 3 | while low < high       | // more than one element?             |
+---+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 4 | mid = ⌊(low + high)/2⌋ | // midpoint of range                  |
+---+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 5 | if x ≤ A[mid]          | // is answer q ≤ mid?                 |
+---+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 6 | high = mid             | // narrow search to A[low : mid]      |
+---+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 7 | else low = mid + 1     | // narrow search to A[mid + 1 : high] |
+---+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 8 | return low                                                     |
+---+----------------------------------------------------------------+

Because FIND-SPLIT-POINT contains no parallelism, its span is just its
serial running time, which is also its work. On a subarray A[p : r] of
size n = r − p + 1, each iteration of the while loop halves the search
range, which means that the loop terminates after Θ(lg n) iterations.
Since each iteration takes constant time, the algorithm runs in Θ(lg n)
(worst-case) time. Thus the procedure has work and span Θ(lg n).

Let’s now look at the pseudocode for the parallel merging procedure
P-MERGE on the next page. Most of the pseudocode is devoted to the
recursive procedure P-MERGE-AUX. The procedure P-MERGE itself is just a
“wrapper” that sets up for P-MERGE-AUX. It allocates a new array B[p :
r] to hold the output of P-MERGE-AUX in line 1. It then calls
P-MERGE-AUX in line 2, passing the indices of the two subarrays to be
merged and providing B as the output destination of the merged result,
starting at index p. After P-MERGE-AUX returns, lines 3–4 perform a
parallel copy of the output B[p : r] into the subarray A[p : r], which
is where P-MERGE-SORT expects it.

The P-MERGE-AUX procedure is the interesting part of the algorithm.
Let’s start by understanding the parameters of this recursive parallel
procedure. The input array A and the four indices p₁, r₁, p₂, r₂ specify
the subarrays A[p₁ : r₁] and A[p₂ : r₂] to be merged. The array B and
the index p₃ indicate that the merged result should be stored into B[p₃
: r₃], where r₃ = p₃ + (r₁ − p₁)+ (r₂ − p₂)+ 1, as we saw earlier. The
end index r₃ of the output subarray is not needed by the pseudocode, but
it helps conceptually to name the end index, as in the comment in line
13.

The procedure begins by checking the base case of the recursion and
doing some bookkeeping to simplify the rest of the pseudocode. Lines 1
and 2 test whether the two subarrays are both empty, in which case the
procedure returns. Line 3 checks whether the first subarray contains
fewer elements than the second subarray. Since the number of elements in
the first subarray is r₁ − p₁ + 1 and the number in the second subarray
is r₂ − p₂ + 1, the test omits the two “+1’s.” If the first subarray is
the smaller of the two, lines 4 and 5 switch the roles of the subarrays
so that A[p₁, r₁] refers to the larger subarray for the balance of the
procedure.

P-MERGE (A, p, q, r)

+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   1            | let B[p : r] be a new    | // allocate scratch      |
|                | array                    | array                    |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   2            | P-MERGE-AUX (A, p, q,    | // merge from A into B   |
|                | q + 1, r, B, p)          |                          |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   3            | parallel for i = p to r  | // copy B back to A in   |
|                |                          | parallel                 |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   4            | A[i] = B[i]                                         |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| P-MERGE-AUX (A, p₁, r₁, p₂, r₂, B, p₃)                               |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   1            | if p₁ > r₁ and p₂ > r₂   | // are both subarrays    |
|                |                          | empty?                   |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   2            | return                                              |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   3            | if r₁ − p₁ < r₂ − p₂     | // second subarray       |
|                |                          | bigger?                  |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   4            | exchange p₁ with p₂      | // swap subarray roles   |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   5            | exchange r₁ with r₂                                 |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   6            | q₁ = ⌊(p₁ + r₁)/2⌋       | // midpoint of A[p₁ :    |
|                |                          | r₁]                      |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   7            | x = A[q₁]                | // median of A[p₁ : r₁]  |
|                |                          | is pivot x               |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   8            | q₂ = FIND-SPLIT-POINT    | // split A[p₂ : r₂]      |
|                | (A, p₂, r₂, x)           | around x                 |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
|   9            | q₃ = p₃ + (q₁ − p₁) +    | // where x belongs in B  |
|                | (q₂ − p₂)                | …                        |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| 10             | B[q₃] = x                | // … put it there        |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| 11             | // Recursively merge A[p₁ : q₁ − 1] and A[p₂ : q₂ − |
|                | 1] into B[p₃ : q₃ − 1].                             |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 12             | spawn P-MERGE-AUX (A, p₁, q₁ − 1, p₂, q₂ − 1, B,    |
|                | p₃)                                                 |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 13             | // Recursively merge A[q₁ + 1 : r₁] and A[q₂ : r₂]  |
|                | into B[q₃ + 1 : r₃].                                |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 14             | spawn P-MERGE-AUX (A, q₁ + 1, r₁, q₂, r₂, B, q₃ +   |
|                | 1)                                                  |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| 15             | sync                     | // wait for spawns       |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+

We’re now at the crux of P-MERGE-AUX: implementing the parallel
divide-and-conquer strategy. As we continue our pseudocode walk, you may
find it helpful to refer again to Figure 26.6.

First the divide step. Line 6 computes the midpoint q₁ of A[p₁ : r₁],
which indexes a median x = A[q₁] of this subarray to be used as the
pivot, and line 7 determines x itself. Next, line 8 uses the
FIND-SPLIT-POINT procedure to find the index q₂ in A[p₂ : r₂] such that
all elements in A[p₂ : q₂ − 1] are at most x and all the elements in
A[q₂ : r₂] are at least x. Line 9 computes the index q₃ of the element
that divides the output subarray B[p₃ : r₃] into B[p₃ : q₃ − 1] and
B[q₃ + 1 : r₃], and then line 10 puts x directly into B[q₃], which is
where it belongs in the output.

Next is the conquer step, which is where the parallel recursion occurs.
Lines 12 and 14 each spawn P-MERGE-AUX to recursively merge from A into
B, the first to merge the smaller elements and the second to merge the
larger elements. The sync statement in line 15 ensures that the
subproblems finish before the procedure returns.

There is no combine step, as B[p : r] already contains the correct
sorted output.

Work/span analysis of parallel merging

Let’s first analyze the worst-case span T_(∞)(n) of P-MERGE-AUX on input
subarrays that together contain a total of n elements. The call to
FIND-SPLIT-POINT in line 8 contributes Θ(lg n) to the span in the worst
case, and the procedure performs at most a constant amount of additional
serial work outside of the two recursive spawns in lines 12 and 14.

Because the two recursive spawns operate logically in parallel, only one
of them contributes to the overall worst-case span. We claimed earlier
that neither recursive invocation ever operates on more than 3n/4
elements. Let’s see why. Let n₁ = r₁ − p₁ + 1 and n₂ = r₂ − p₂ + 1,
where n = n₁ + n₂, be the sizes of the two subarrays when line 6 starts
executing, that is, after we have established that n₂ ≤ n₁ by swapping
the roles of the two subarrays, if necessary. Since the pivot x is a
median of of A[p₁ : r₁], in the worst case, a recursive merge involves
at most n₁/2 elements of A[p₁ : r₁], but it might involve all n₂ of the
elements of A[p₂ : r₂]. Thus we can bound the number of elements
involved in a recursive invocation of P-MERGE-AUX by

  ----------- --- -------------------------------
  n₁/2 + n₂   =   (2n₁ + 4n₂)/4
              ≤   (3n₁ + 3n₂)/4 (since n₂ ≤ n₁)
              =   3n/4,
  ----------- --- -------------------------------

proving the claim.

The worst-case span of P-MERGE-AUX can therefore be described by the
following recurrence:

[art]

Because this recurrence falls under case 2 of the master theorem with k
= 1, its solution is T_(∞)(n) = Θ(lg ² n).

Now let’s verify that the work T₁(n) of P-MERGE-AUX on n elements is
linear. A lower bound of Ω(n) is straightforward, since each of the n
elements is copied from array A to array B. We’ll show that T₁(n) = O(n)
by deriving a recurrence for the worst-case work. The binary search in
line 8 costs Θ(lg n) in the worst case, which dominates the other work
outside of the recursive spawns. For the recursive spawns, observe that
although lines 12 and 14 might merge different numbers of elements, the
two recursive spawns together merge at most n − 1 elements (since x =
A[q] is not merged). Moreover, as we saw when analyzing the span, a
recursive spawn operates on at most 3n/4 elements. We therefore obtain
the recurrence

[art]

where α lies in the range 1/4 ≤ α ≤ 3/4. The value of α can vary from
one recursive invocation to another.

We’ll use the substitution method (see Section 4.3) to prove that the
above recurrence (26.8) has solution T₁(n) = O(n). (You could also use
the Akra-Bazzi method from Section 4.7.) Assume that T₁(n) ≤ c₁n − c₂ lg
n for some positive constants c₁ and c₂. Using the properties of
logarithms on pages 66–67—in particular, to deduce that lg α + lg(1 − α)
= −Θ(1)—substitution yields

  ------- --- ---------------------------------------------------------------
  T₁(n)   ≤   (c₁αn − c₂ lg(αn)) + (c₁(1 − α)n − c₂ lg((1 − α)n)) + Θ(lg n)
          =   c₁(α + (1 − α))n − c₂(lg(αn) + lg((1 − α)n)) + Θ(lg n)
          =   c₁n − c₂(lg α + lg n + lg(1 − α) + lg n) + Θ(lg n)
          =   c₁n − c₂ lg n − c₂(lg n + lg α + lg(1 − α)) + Θ(lg n)
          =   c₁n − c₂ lg n − c₂(lg n − Θ(1)) + Θ(lg n)
          ≤   c₁n − c₂ lg n,
  ------- --- ---------------------------------------------------------------

if we choose c₂ large enough that the c₂(lg n − Θ(1)) term dominates the
Θ(lg n) term for sufficiently large n. Furthermore, we can choose c₁
large enough to satisfy the implied Θ(1) base cases of the recurrence,
completing the induction. The lower and upper bounds of Ω(n) and O(n)
give T₁(n) = Θ(n), asymptotically the same work as for serial merging.

The execution of the pseudocode in the P-MERGE procedure itself does not
add asymptotically to the work and span of P-MERGE-AUX. The parallel for
loop in lines 3–4 has Θ(lg n) span due to the loop control, and each
iteration runs in constant time. Thus the Θ(lg²n) span of P-MERGE-AUX
dominates, yielding Θ(lg²n) span overall for P-MERGE. The parallel for
loop contains Θ(n) work, matching the asymptotic work of P-MERGE-AUX and
yielding Θ(n) work overall for P-MERGE.

Analysis of parallel merge sort

The “heavy lifting” is done. Now that we have determined the work and
span of P-MERGE, we can analyze P-MERGE-SORT. Let T₁(n) and T_(∞)(n) be
the work and span, respectively, of P-MERGE-SORT on an array of n
elements. The call to P-MERGE in line 10 of P-MERGE-SORT dominates the
costs of lines 1–3, for both work and span. Thus we obtain the
recurrence

T₁(n) = 2T₁(n/2) + Θ(n)

for the work of P-MERGE-SORT, and we obtain the recurrence

T_(∞)(n) = T_(∞)(n/2) + Θ(lg² n)

for its span. The work recurrence has solution T₁(n) = Θ(n lg n) by case
2 of the master theorem with k = 0. The span recurrence has solution
T_(∞) (n) = Θ(lg³ n), also by case 2 of the master theorem, but with k =
2.

Parallel merging gives P-MERGE-SORT a parallelism advantage over
P-NAIVE-MERGE-SORT. The parallelism of P-NAIVE-MERGE-SORT, which calls
the serial MERGE procedure, is only Θ(lg n). For P-MERGE-SORT, the
parallelism is

  ---------------- --- --------------------
  T₁(n)/T_(∞)(n)   =   Θ(n lg n)/Θ(lg³ n)
                   =   Θ(n/lg² n),
  ---------------- --- --------------------

which is much better, both in theory and in practice. A good
implementation in practice would sacrifice some parallelism by
coarsening the base case in order to reduce the constants hidden by the
asymptotic notation. For example, you could switch to an efficient
serial sort, perhaps quicksort, when the number of elements to be sorted
is sufficiently small.

Exercises

26.3-1

Explain how to coarsen the base case of P-MERGE.

26.3-2

Instead of finding a median element in the larger subarray, as P-MERGE
does, suppose that the merge procedure finds a median of all the
elements in the two sorted subarrays using the result of Exercise
9.3-10. Give pseudocode for an efficient parallel merging procedure that
uses this median-finding procedure. Analyze your algorithm.

26.3-3

Give an efficient parallel algorithm for partitioning an array around a
pivot, as is done by the PARTITION procedure on page 184. You need not
partition the array in place. Make your algorithm as parallel as
possible. Analyze your algorithm. (Hint: You might need an auxiliary
array and might need to make more than one pass over the input
elements.)

26.3-4

Give a parallel version of FFT on page 890. Make your implementation as
parallel as possible. Analyze your algorithm.

★ 26.3-5

Show how to parallelize SELECT from Section 9.3. Make your
implementation as parallel as possible. Analyze your algorithm.

Problems

26-1     Implementing parallel loops using recursive spawning

Consider the parallel procedure SUM-ARRAYS for performing pairwise
addition on n-element arrays A[1 : n] and B[1 : n], storing the sums in
C [1 : n].

SUM-ARRAYS (A, B, C, n)

  --- -------------------------
  1   parallel for i = 1 to n
  2   C [i] = A[i] + B[i]
  --- -------------------------

a. Rewrite the parallel loop in SUM-ARRAYS using recursive spawning in
the manner of P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE. Analyze the parallelism.

Consider another implementation of the parallel loop in SUM-ARRAYS given
by the procedure SUM-ARRAYS′, where the value grain-size must be
specified.

SUM-ARRAYS′(A, B, C, n)

+------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| 1          | grain-size = ?           | // to be determined      |
+------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| 2          | r = ⌈n/grain-size⌉                                  |
+------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3          | for k = 0 to r − 1                                  |
+------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4          | spawn ADD-SUBARRAY (A, B, C, k · grain-size + 1,    |
+------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|            | min {(k + 1) · grain-size, n})                      |
+------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5          | sync                                                |
+------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| ADD-SUBARRAY (A, B, C, i, j)                                     |
+------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1          | for k = i to j                                      |
+------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2          | C [k] = A[k] + B[k]                                 |
+------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

b. Suppose that you set grain-size = 1. What is the resulting
parallelism?

c. Give a formula for the span of SUM-ARRAYS′ in terms of n and
grain-size. Derive the best value for grain-size to maximize
parallelism.

26-2     Avoiding a temporary matrix in recursive matrix multiplication

The P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE procedure on page 772 must allocate a
temporary matrix D of size n × n, which can adversely affect the
constants hidden by the Θ-notation. The procedure has high parallelism,
however: Θ(n³/log² n). For example, ignoring the constants in the
Θ-notation, the parallelism for multiplying 1000 × 1000 matrices comes
to approximately 1000³/10² = 10⁷, since lg 1000 ≈ 10. Most parallel
computers have far fewer than 10 million processors.

a. Parallelize MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE without using temporary
matrices so that it retains its Θ(n³) work. (Hint: Spawn the recursive
calls, but insert a sync in a judicious location to avoid races.)

b. Give and solve recurrences for the work and span of your
implementation.

c. Analyze the parallelism of your implementation. Ignoring the
constants in the Θ-notation, estimate the parallelism on 1000 × 1000
matrices. Compare with the parallelism of P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE,
and discuss whether the trade-off would be worthwhile.

26-3     Parallel matrix algorithms

Before attempting this problem, it may be helpful to read Chapter 28.

a. Parallelize the LU-DECOMPOSITION procedure on page 827 by giving
pseudocode for a parallel version of this algorithm. Make your
implementation as parallel as possible, and analyze its work, span, and
parallelism.

b. Do the same for LUP-DECOMPOSITION on page 830.

c. Do the same for LUP-SOLVE on page 824.

d. Using equation (28.14) on page 835, write pseudocode for a parallel
algorithm to invert a symmetric positive-definite matrix. Make your
implementation as parallel as possible, and analyze its work, span, and
parallelism.

26-4     Parallel reductions and scan (prefix) computations

A ⊗-reduction of an array x[1 : n], where ⊗ is an associative operator,
is the value y = x[1] ⊗ x[2] ⊗ ⋯ ⊗ x[n]. The REDUCE procedure computes
the ⊗-reduction of a subarray x[i : j] serially.

REDUCE (x, i, j)

  --- --------------------
  1   y = x[i]
  2   for k = i + 1 to j
  3   y = y ⊗ x[k]
  4   return y
  --- --------------------

a. Design and analyze a parallel algorithm P-REDUCE that uses recursive
spawning to perform the same function with Θ(n) work and Θ(lg n) span.

A related problem is that of computing a ⊗-scan, sometimes called a
⊗-prefix computation, on an array x[1 : n], where ⊗ is once again an
associative operator. The ⊗-scan, implemented by the serial procedure
SCAN, produces the array y[1 : n] given by

  ------ --- --------------------------------
  y[1]   =   x[1],
  y[2]   =   x[1] ⊗ x[2],
  y[3]   =   x[1] ⊗ x[2] ⊗ x[3],
         ⋮   
  y[n]   =   x[1] ⊗ x[2] ⊗ x[3] ⊗ ⋯ ⊗ x[n],
  ------ --- --------------------------------

that is, all prefixes of the array x “summed” using the ⊗ operator.

SCAN (x, n)

  --- -----------------------------
  1   let y[1 : n] be a new array
  2   y[1] = x[1]
  3   for i = 2 to n
  4   y[i] = y[i − 1] ⊗ 1 ⊗ x[i]
  5   return y
  --- -----------------------------

Parallelizing SCAN is not straightforward. For example, simply changing
the for loop to a parallel for loop would create races, since each
iteration of the loop body depends on the previous iteration. The
procedures P-SCAN-1 and P-SCAN-1-AUX perform the ⊗-scan in parallel,
albeit inefficiently.

P-SCAN-1(x, n)

+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 1             | let y[1] : n be a new array |
+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 2             | P-SCAN-1-AUX (x, y, 1, n)   |
+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 3             | return y                    |
+---------------+-----------------------------+
| P-SCAN-1-AUX (x, y, i, j)                   |
+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 1             | parallel for l = i to j     |
+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 2             | y[l] = P-REDUCE (x, 1, l)   |
+---------------+-----------------------------+

b. Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of P-SCAN-1.

The procedures P-SCAN-2 and P-SCAN-2-AUX use recursive spawning to
perform a more efficient ⊗-scan.

P-SCAN-2(x, n)

+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 1             | let y[1] : n be a new array     |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 2             | P-SCAN-2-AUX (x, y, 1, n)       |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 3             | return y                        |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| P-SCAN-2-AUX (x, y, i, j)                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 1             | if i == j                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 2             | y[i] = x[i]                     |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 3             | else k = ⌊(i + j)/2⌋            |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 4             | spawn P-SCAN-2-AUX (x, y, i, k) |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 5             | P-SCAN-2-AUX (x, y, k + 1, j)   |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 6             | sync                            |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 7             | parallel for l = k + 1 to j     |
+---------------+---------------------------------+
| 8             | y[l] = y[k] ⊗ y[l]              |
+---------------+---------------------------------+

c. Argue that P-SCAN-2 is correct, and analyze its work, span, and
parallelism.

To improve on both P-SCAN-1 and P-SCAN-2, perform the ⊗-scan in two
distinct passes over the data. The first pass gathers the terms for
various contiguous subarrays of x into a temporary array t, and the
second pass uses the terms in t to compute the final result y. The
pseudocode in the procedures P-SCAN-3, P-SCAN-UP, and P-SCAN-DOWN on the
facing page implements this strategy, but certain expressions have been
omitted.

d. Fill in the three missing expressions in line 8 of P-SCAN-UP and
lines 5 and 6 of P-SCAN-DOWN. Argue that with the expressions you
supplied, P-SCAN-3 is correct. (Hint: Prove that the value v passed to
P-SCAN-DOWN (v, x, t, y, i, j) satisfies v = x[1] ⊗ x[2] ⊗ ⋯ ⊗ x[i −
1].)

e. Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of P-SCAN-3.

f. Describe how to rewrite P-SCAN-3 so that it doesn’t require the use
of the temporary array t.

★ g. Give an algorithm P-SCAN-4(x, n) for a scan that operates in place.
It should place its output in x and require only constant auxiliary
storage.

h. Describe an efficient parallel algorithm that uses a +-scan to
determine whether a string of parentheses is well formed. For example,
the string ( ( ) ( ) ) ( ) is well formed, but the string ( ( ) ) ) ( (
) is not. (Hint: Interpret ( as a 1 and ) as a −1, and then perform a
+-scan.)

P-SCAN-3(x, n)

+-----------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
| 1         | let y[1] : n and t[1 : n] be new    |                  |
|           | arrays                              |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2         | y[1] = x[1]                         |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3         | if n > 1                            |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4         | P-SCAN-UP (x, t, 2, n)              |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5         | P-SCAN-DOWN (x[1], x, t, y, 2, n)   |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6         | return y                            |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| P-SCAN-UP (x, t, i, j)                                             |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1         | if i == j                           |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2         | return x[i]                         |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3         | else                                |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4         | k = ⌊(i + j)/2⌋                     |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5         | t[k] = spawn P-SCAN-UP (x, t, i, k) |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6         | right = P-SCAN-UP (x, t, k + 1, j)  |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7         | sync                                |                  |
+-----------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
| 8         | return ____      | // fill in the   |                  |
|           |                  | blank            |                  |
+-----------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
| P-SCAN-DOWN (v, x, t, y, i, j)                                     |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1         | if i == j                           |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2         | y[i] = v ⊗ x[i]                     |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3         | else                                |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4         | k = ⌊(i + j)/2⌋                     |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5         | spawn P-SCAN-DOWN (____, x, t, y,   | // fill in the   |
|           | i, k)                               | blank            |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6         | P-SCAN-DOWN (____, x, t, y, k + 1,  | // fill in the   |
|           | j)                                  | blank            |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7         | sync                                |                  |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------+

26-5     Parallelizing a simple stencil calculation

Computational science is replete with algorithms that require the
entries of an array to be filled in with values that depend on the
values of certain already computed neighboring entries, along with other
information that does not change over the course of the computation. The
pattern of neighboring entries does not change during the computation
and is called a stencil. For example, Section 14.4 presents a stencil
algorithm to compute a longest common subsequence, where the value in
entry c[i, j] depends only on the values in c[i − 1, j], c[i, j − 1],
and c[i − 1, j − 1], as well as the elements x_(i) and y_(j) within the
two sequences given as inputs. The input sequences are fixed, but the
algorithm fills in the two-dimensional array c so that it computes entry
c[i, j] after computing all three entries c[i − 1, j], c[i, j − 1], and
c[i − 1, j − 1].

This problem examines how to use recursive spawning to parallelize a
simple stencil calculation on an n × n array A in which the value placed
into entry A[i, j] depends only on values in A[i′, j′], where i′ ≤ i and
j′ ≤ j (and of course, i′ ≠ i or j′ ≠ j). In other words, the value in
an entry depends only on values in entries that are above it and/or to
its left, along with static information outside of the array.
Furthermore, we assume throughout this problem that once the entries
upon which A[i, j] depends have been filled in, the entry A[i, j] can be
computed in Θ(1) time (as in the LCS-LENGTH procedure of Section 14.4).

Partition the n × n array A into four n/2 × n/2 subarrays as follows:

[art]

You can immediately fill in subarray A₁₁ recursively, since it does not
depend on the entries in the other three subarrays. Once the computation
of A₁₁ finishes, you can fill in A₁₂ and A₂₁ recursively in parallel,
because although they both depend on A₁₁, they do not depend on each
other. Finally, you can fill in A₂₂ recursively.

a. Give parallel pseudocode that performs this simple stencil
calculation using a divide-and-conquer algorithm SIMPLE-STENCIL based on
the decomposition (26.9) and the discussion above. (Don’t worry about
the details of the base case, which depends on the specific stencil.)
Give and solve recurrences for the work and span of this algorithm in
terms of n. What is the parallelism?

b. Modify your solution to part (a) to divide an n × n array into nine
n/3 × n/3 subarrays, again recursing with as much parallelism as
possible. Analyze this algorithm. How much more or less parallelism does
this algorithm have compared with the algorithm from part (a)?

c. Generalize your solutions to parts (a) and (b) as follows. Choose an
integer b ≥ 2. Divide an n × n array into b² subarrays, each of size n/b
× n/b, recursing with as much parallelism as possible. In terms of n and
b, what are the work, span, and parallelism of your algorithm? Argue
that, using this approach, the parallelism must be o(n) for any choice
of b ≥ 2. (Hint: For this argument, show that the exponent of n in the
parallelism is strictly less than 1 for any choice of b ≥ 2.)

d. Give pseudocode for a parallel algorithm for this simple stencil
calculation that achieves Θ(n/lg n) parallelism. Argue using notions of
work and span that the problem has Θ(n) inherent parallelism.
Unfortunately, simple fork-join parallelism does not let you achieve
this maximal parallelism.

26-6     Randomized parallel algorithms

Like serial algorithms, parallel algorithms can employ random-number
generators. This problem explores how to adapt the measures of work,
span, and parallelism to handle the expected behavior of randomized
task-parallel algorithms. It also asks you to design and analyze a
parallel algorithm for randomized quicksort.

a. Explain how to modify the work law (26.2), span law (26.3), and
greedy scheduler bound (26.4) to work with expectations when T_(P), T₁,
and T_(∞)are all random variables.

b. Consider a randomized parallel algorithm for which 1% of the time, T₁
= 10⁴ and T_(10,000) = 1, but for the remaining 99% of the time, T₁ =
T_(10,000) = 10⁹. Argue that the speedup of a randomized parallel
algorithm should be defined as E[T₁]/E[T_(P)], rather than E[T₁/T_(P)].

c. Argue that the parallelism of a randomized task-parallel algorithm
should be defined as the ratio E[T₁]/E[T_(∞)].

d. Parallelize the RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT algorithm on page 192 by using
recursive spawning to produce P-RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT. (Do not
parallelize RANDOMIZED-PARTITION.)

e. Analyze your parallel algorithm for randomized quicksort. (Hint:
Review the analysis of RANDOMIZED-SELECT on page 230.)

f. Parallelize RANDOMIZED-SELECT on page 230. Make your implementation
as parallel as possible. Analyze your algorithm. (Hint: Use the
partitioning algorithm from Exercise 26.3-3.)

Chapter notes

Parallel computers and algorithmic models for parallel programming have
been around in various forms for years. Prior editions of this book
included material on sorting networks and the PRAM (Parallel
Random-Access Machine) model. The data-parallel model [58, 217] is
another popular algorithmic programming model, which features operations
on vectors and matrices as primitives. The notion of sequential
consistency is due to Lamport [275].

Graham [197] and Brent [71] showed that there exist schedulers achieving
the bound of Theorem 26.1. Eager, Zahorjan, and Lazowska [129] showed
that any greedy scheduler achieves this bound and proposed the
methodology of using work and span (although not by those names) to
analyze parallel algorithms. Blelloch [57] developed an algorithmic
programming model based on work and span (which he called “depth”) for
data-parallel programming. Blumofe and Leiserson [63] gave a distributed
scheduling algorithm for task-parallel computations based on randomized
“work-stealing” and showed that it achieves the bound E[T_(P)] ≤ T₁/P +
O(T_(∞)). Arora, Blumofe, and Plaxton [20] and Blelloch, Gibbons, and
Matias [61] also provided provably good algorithms for scheduling
task-parallel computations. The recent literature contains many
algorithms and strategies for scheduling parallel programs.

The parallel pseudocode and programming model were influenced by Cilk
[290, 291, 383, 396]. The open-source project OpenCilk
(www.opencilk.org) provides Cilk programming as an extension to the C
and C++ programming languages. All of the parallel algorithms in this
chapter can be coded straightforwardly in Cilk.

Concerns about nondeterministic parallel programs were expressed by Lee
[281] and Bocchino, Adve, Adve, and Snir [64]. The algorithms literature
contains many algorithmic strategies (see, for example, [60, 85, 118,
140, 160, 282, 283, 412, 461]) for detecting races and extending the
fork-join model to avoid or safely embrace various kinds of
nondeterminism. Blelloch, Fineman, Gibbons, and Shun [59] showed that
deterministic parallel algorithms can often be as fast as, or even
faster than, their nondeterministic counterparts.

Several of the parallel algorithms in this chapter appeared in
unpublished lecture notes by C. E. Leiserson and H. Prokop and were
originally implemented in Cilk. The parallel merge-sorting algorithm was
inspired by an algorithm due to Akl [12].

¹ In mathematics, a projection is an idempotent function, that is, a
function f such that f ○ f = f. In this case, the function f maps the
set P of fork-join programs to the set P_(S) ⊂ P of serial programs,
which are themselves fork-join programs with no parallelism. For a
fork-join program x ∈ P, since we have f (f (x)) = f (x), the serial
projection, as we have defined it, is indeed a mathematical projection.

² Also called a computation dag in the literature.

27        Online Algorithms

Most problems described in this book have assumed that the entire input
was available before the algorithm executes. In many situations,
however, the input becomes available not in advance, but only as the
algorithm executes. This idea was implicit in much of the discussion of
data structures in Part III. The reason that you want to design, for
example, a data structure that can handle n INSERT, DELETE, and SEARCH
operations in O(lg n) time per operation is most likely because you are
going to receive n such operation requests without knowing in advance
what operations will be coming. This idea was also implicit in amortized
analysis in Chapter 16, where we saw how to maintain a table that can
grow or shrink in response to a sequence of insertion and deletion
operations, yet with a constant amortized cost per operation.

An online algorithm receives its input progressively over time, rather
than having the entire input available at the start, as in an offline
algorithm. Online algorithms pertain to many situations in which
information arrives gradually. A stock trader must make decisions today,
without knowing what the prices will be tomorrow, yet wants to achieve
good returns. A computer system must schedule arriving jobs without
knowing what work will need to be done in the future. A store must
decide when to order more inventory without knowing what the future
demand will be. A driver for a ride-hailing service must decide whether
to pick up a fare without knowing who will request rides in the future.
In each of these situations, and many more, algorithmic decisions must
be made without knowledge of the future.

There are several approaches for dealing with unknown future inputs. One
approach is to form a probabilistic model of future inputs and design an
algorithm that assumes future inputs conform to the model. This
technique is common, for example, in the field of queuing theory, and it
is also related to machine learning. Of course, you might not be able to
develop a workable probabilistic model, or even if you can, some inputs
might not conform to it. This chapter takes a different approach.
Instead of assuming anything about the future input, we employ a
conservative strategy of limiting how poor a solution any input can
entail.

This chapter, therefore, adopts a worst-case approach, designing online
algorithms that guarantee the quality of the solution for all possible
future inputs. We’ll analyze online algorithms by comparing the solution
produced by the online algorithm with a solution produced by an optimal
algorithm that knows the future inputs, and taking a worst-case ratio
over all possible instances. We call this methodology competitive
analysis. We’ll use a similar approach when we study approximation
algorithms in Chapter 35, where we’ll compare the solution returned by
an algorithm that might be suboptimal with the value of the optimal
solution, and determine a worst-case ratio over all possible instances.

We start with a “toy” problem: deciding between whether to take the
elevator or the stairs. This problem will introduce the basic
methodology of thinking about online algorithms and how to analyze them
via competitive analysis. We will then look at two problems that use
competitive analysis. The first is how to maintain a search list so that
the access time is not too large, and the second is about strategies for
deciding which cache blocks to evict from a cache or other kind of fast
computer memory.

27.1    Waiting for an elevator

Our first example of an online algorithm models a problem that you
likely have encountered yourself: whether you should wait for an
elevator to arrive or just take the stairs. Suppose that you enter a
building and wish to visit an office that is k floors up. You have two
choices: walk up the stairs or take the elevator. Let’s assume, for
convenience, that you can climb the stairs at the rate of one floor per
minute. The elevator travels much faster than you can climb the stairs:
it can ascend all k floors in just one minute. Your dilemma is that you
do not know how long it will take for the elevator to arrive at the
ground floor and pick you up. Should you take the elevator or the
stairs? How do you decide?

Let’s analyze the problem. Taking the stairs takes k minutes, no matter
what. Suppose you know that the elevator takes at most B − 1 minutes to
arrive for some value of B that is considerably higher than k. (The
elevator could be going up when you call for it and then stop at several
floors on its way down.) To keep things simple, let’s also assume that
the number of minutes for the elevator to arrive is an integer.
Therefore, waiting for the elevator and taking it k floors up takes
anywhere from one minute (if the elevator is already at the ground
floor) to (B − 1) + 1 = B minutes (the worst case). Although you know B
and k, you don’t know how long the elevator will take to arrive this
time. You can use competitive analysis to inform your decision regarding
whether to take the stairs or elevator. In the spirit of competitive
analysis, you want to be sure that, no matter what the future brings
(i.e., how long the elevator takes to arrive), you will not wait much
longer than a seer who knows when the elevator will arrive.

Let us first consider what the seer would do. If the seer knows that the
elevator is going to arrive in at most k − 1 minutes, the seer waits for
the elevator, and otherwise, the seer takes the stairs. Letting m denote
the number of minutes it takes for the elevator to arrive at the ground
floor, we can express the time that the seer spends as the function

[art]

We typically evaluate online algorithms by their competitive ratio. Let
U denote the set (universe) of all possible inputs, and consider some
input I ∈ U. For a minimization problem, such as the
stairs-versus-elevator problem, if an online algorithm A produces a
solution with value A(I) on input I and the solution from an algorithm F
that knows the future has value F(I) on the same input, then the
competitive ratio of algorithm A is

max {A(I)/F(I) : I ∈ U}.

If an online algorithm has a competitive ratio of c, we say that it is
c-competitive. The competitive ratio is always at least 1, so that we
want an online algorithm with a competitive ratio as close to 1 as
possible.

In the stairs-versus-elevator problem, the only input is the time for
the elevator to arrive. Algorithm F knows this information, but an
online algorithm has to make a decision without knowing when the
elevator will arrive. Consider the algorithm “always take the stairs,”
which always takes exactly k minutes. Using equation (27.1), the
competitive ratio is

[art]

Enumerating the terms in equation (27.2) gives the competitive ratio as

[art]

so that the competitive ratio is k. The maximum is achieved when the
elevator arrives immediately. In this case, taking the stairs requires k
minutes, but the optimal solution takes just 1 minute.

Now let’s consider the opposite approach: “always take the elevator.” If
it takes m minutes for the elevator to arrive at the ground floor, then
this algorithm will always take m + 1 minutes. Thus the competitive
ratio becomes

max {(m + 1)/t(m) : 0 ≤ m ≤ B − 1},

which we can again enumerate as

[art]

Now the maximum is achieved when the elevator takes B − 1 minutes to
arrive, compared with the optimal approach of taking the stairs, which
requires k minutes.

Hence, the algorithm “always take the stairs” has competitive ratio k,
and the algorithm “always take the elevator” has competitive ratio B/k.
Because we prefer the algorithm with smaller competitive ratio, if k =
10 and B = 300, we prefer “always take the stairs,” with competitive
ratio 10, over “always take the elevator,” with competitive ratio 30.
Taking the stairs is not always better, or necessarily more often
better. It’s just that taking the stairs guards better against the
worst-case future.

These two approaches of always taking the stairs and always taking the
elevator are extreme solutions, however. Instead, you can “hedge your
bets” and guard even better against a worst-case future. In particular,
you can wait for the elevator for a while, and then if it doesn’t
arrive, take the stairs. How long is “a while”? Let’s say that “a while”
is k minutes. Then the time h(m) required by this hedging strategy, as a
function of the number m of minutes before the elevator arrives, is

[art]

In the second case, h(m) = 2k because you wait for k minutes and then
climb the stairs for k minutes. The competitive ratio is now

max {h(m)/t(m) : 0 ≤ m ≤ B − 1}.

Enumerating this ratio yields

[art]

The competitive ratio is now independent of k and B.

This example illustrates a common philosophy in online algorithms: we
want an algorithm that guards against any possible worst case.
Initially, waiting for the elevator guards against the case when the
elevator arrives quickly, but eventually switching to the stairs guards
against the case when the elevator takes a long time to arrive.

Exercises

27.1-1

Suppose that when hedging your bets, you wait for p minutes, instead of
for k minutes, before taking the stairs. What is the competitive ratio
as a function of p and k? How should you choose p to minimize the
competitive ratio?

27.1-2

Imagine that you decide to take up downhill skiing. Suppose that a pair
of skis costs r dollars to rent for a day and b dollars to buy, where
b > r. If you knew in advance how many days you would ever ski, your
decision whether to rent or buy would be easy. If you’ll ski for at
least ⌈b/r⌉ days, then you should buy skis, and otherwise you should
rent. This strategy minimizes the total that you ever spend. In reality,
you don’t know in advance how many days you’ll eventually ski. Even
after you have skied several times, you still don’t know how many more
times you’ll ever ski. Yet you don’t want to waste your money. Give and
analyze an algorithm that has a competitive ratio of 2, that is, an
algorithm guaranteeing that, no matter how many times you ski, you never
spend more than twice what you would have spent if you knew from the
outset how many times you’ll ski.

27.1-3

In “concentration solitaire,” a game for one person, you have n pairs of
matching cards. The backs of the cards are all the same, but the fronts
contain pictures of animals. One pair has pictures of aardvarks, one
pair has pictures of bears, one pair has pictures of camels, and so on.
At the start of the game, the cards are all placed face down. In each
round, you can turn two cards face up to reveal their pictures. If the
pictures match, then you remove that pair from the game. If they don’t
match, then you turn both of them over, hiding their pictures once
again. The game ends when you have removed all n pairs, and your score
is how many rounds you needed to do so. Suppose that you can remember
the picture on every card that you have seen. Give an algorithm to play
concentration solitaire that has a competitive ratio of 2.

27.2    Maintaining a search list

The next example of an online algorithm pertains to maintaining the
order of elements in a linked list, as in Section 10.2. This problem
often arises in practice for hash tables when collisions are resolved by
chaining (see Section 11.2), since each slot contains a linked list.
Reordering the linked list of elements in each slot of the hash table
can boost the performance of searches measurably.

The list-maintenance problem can be set up as follows. You are given a
list L of n elements {x₁, x₂, … , x_(n)}. We’ll assume that the list is
doubly linked, although the algorithms and analysis work just as well
for singly linked lists. Denote the position of element x_(i) in the
list L by r_(L)(x_(i)), where 1 ≤ r_(L)(x_(i)) ≤ n. Calling
LIST-SEARCH(L, x_(i)) on page 260 thus takes Θ(r_(L)(x_(i))) time.

If you know in advance something about the distribution of search
requests, then it makes sense to arrange the list ahead of time to put
the more frequently searched elements closer to the front, which
minimizes the total cost (see Exercise 27.2-1). If instead you don’t
know anything about the search sequence, then no matter how you arrange
the list, it is possible that every search is for whatever element
appears at the tail of the list. The total searching time would then be
Θ(nm), where m is the number of searches.

If you notice patterns in the access sequence or you observe differences
in the frequencies in which elements are accessed, then you might want
to rearrange the list as you perform searches. For example, if you
discover that every search is for a particular element, you could move
that element to the front of the list. In general, you could rearrange
the list after each call to LIST-SEARCH. But how would you do so without
knowing the future? After all, no matter how you move elements around,
every search could be for the last element.

But it turns out that some search sequences are “easier” than others.
Rather than just evaluate performance on the worst-case sequence, let’s
compare a reorganization scheme with whatever an optimal offline
algorithm would do if it knew the search sequence in advance. That way,
if the sequence is fundamentally hard, the optimal offline algorithm
will also find it hard, but if the sequence is easy, we can hope to do
reasonably well.

To ease analysis, we’ll drop the asymptotic notation and say that the
cost is just i to search for the ith element in the list. Let’s also
assume that the only way to reorder the elements in the list is by
swapping two adjacent elements in the list. Because the list is doubly
linked, each swap incurs a cost of 1. Thus, for example, a search for
the sixth element followed by moving it forward two places (entailing
two swaps) incurs a total cost 8. The goal is to minimize the total cost
of calls to LIST-SEARCH plus the total number of swaps performed.

The online algorithm that we’ll explore is MOVE-TO-FRONT(L, x). This
procedure first searches for x in the doubly linked list L, and then it
moves x to the front of the list.¹ If x is located at position r =
r_(L)(x) before the call, MOVE-TO-FRONT swaps x with the element in
position r − 1, then with the element in position r − 2, and so on,
until it finally swaps x with the element in position 1. Thus if the
call MOVE-TO-FRONT(L, 8) executes on the list L = 〈5, 3, 12, 4, 8, 9,
22〉, the list becomes 〈8, 5, 3, 12, 4, 9, 22〉. The call
MOVE-TO-FRONT(L, k) costs 2r_(L)(k) − 1: it costs r_(L)(k) to search for
k, and it costs 1 for each of the r_(L)(k) − 1 swaps that move k to the
front of the list.

[art]

Figure 27.1 The costs incurred by the procedures FORESEE and
MOVE-TO-FRONT when searching for the elements 5, 3, 4, and 4, starting
with the list L = 〈1, 2, 3, 4, 5〉. If FORESEE instead moved 3 to the
front after the search for 5, the cumulative cost would not change, nor
would the cumulative cost change if 4 moved to the second position after
the search for 5.

We’ll see that MOVE-TO-FRONT has a competitive ratio of 4. Let’s think
about what this means. MOVE-TO-FRONT performs a series of operations on
a doubly linked list, accumulating cost. For comparison, suppose that
there is an algorithm FORESEE that knows the future. Like MOVE-TO-FRONT,
it also searches the list and moves elements around, but after each call
it optimally rearranges the list for the future. (There may be more than
one optimal order.) Thus FORESEE and MOVE-TO-FRONT maintain different
lists of the same elements.

Consider the example shown in Figure 27.1. Starting with the list 〈1,
2, 3, 4, 5〉, four searches occur, for the elements 5, 3, 4, and 4. The
hypothetical procedure FORESEE, after searching for 3, moves 4 to the
front of the list, knowing that a search for 4 is imminent. It thus
incurs a swap cost of 3 upon its second call, after which no further
swap costs accrue. MOVE-TO-FRONT incurs swap costs in each step, moving
the found element to the front. In this example, MOVE-TO-FRONT has a
higher cost in each step, but that is not necessarily always the case.

The key to proving the competitive bound is to show that at any point,
the total cost of MOVE-TO-FRONT is not much higher than that of FORESEE.
Surprisingly, we can determine a bound on the costs incurred by
MOVE-TO-FRONT relative to FORESEE even though MOVE-TO-FRONT cannot see
the future.

If we compare any particular step, MOVE-TO-FRONT and FORESEE may be
operating on very different lists and do very different things. If we
focus on the search for 4 above, we observe that FORESEE actually moves
it to the front of the list early, paying to move the element to the
front before it is accessed. To capture this concept, we use the idea of
an inversion: a pair of elements, say a and b, in which a appears before
b in one list, but b appears before a in another list. For two lists L
and L′, let I(L, L′), called the inversion count, denote the number of
inversions between the two lists, that is, the number of pairs of
elements whose order differs in the two lists. For example, with lists L
= 〈5,3,1,4,2〉 and L′ = 〈3,1,2,4,5〉, then out of the [art] pairs,
exactly five of them—(1, 5), (2, 4), (2, 5), (3, 5), (4, 5)—are
inversions, since these pairs, and only these pairs, appear in different
orders in the two lists. Thus the inversion count is I(L, L′) = 5.

In order to analyze the algorithm, we define the following notation. Let
[art] be the list maintained by MOVE-TO-FRONT immediately after the ith
search, and similarly, let [art] be FORESEE’s list immediately after the
ith search. Let [art] and [art] be the costs incurred by MOVE-TO-FRONT
and FORESEE on their ith calls, respectively. We don’t know how many
swaps FORESEE performs in its ith call, but we’ll denote that number by
t_(i). Therefore, if the ith operation is a search for element x, then

[art]

In order to compare these costs more carefully, let’s break down the
elements into subsets, depending on their positions in the two lists
before the ith search, relative to the element x being searched for in
the ith search. We define three sets:

BB = {elements before x in both [art] and [art]},

BA = {elements before x in [art] but after x in [art]},

AB = {elements after x in [art] but before x in [art]}.

We can now relate the position of element x in [art] and [art] to the
sizes of these sets:

[art]

When a swap occurs in one of the lists, it changes the relative
positions of the two elements involved, which in turn changes the
inversion count. Suppose that elements x and y are swapped in some list.
Then the only possible difference in the inversion count between this
list and any other list depends on whether (x, y) is an inversion. In
fact, the inversion count of (x, y) with respect to any other list must
change. If (x, y) is an inversion before the swap, it no longer is
afterward, and vice versa. Therefore, if two consecutive elements x and
y swap positions in a list L, then for any other list L′, the value of
the inversion count I(L, L′) either increases by 1 or decreases by 1.

As we compare MOVE-TO-FRONT and FORESEE searching and modifying their
lists, we’ll think about MOVE-TO-FRONT executing on its list for the ith
time and then FORESEE executing on its list for the ith time. After
MOVE-TO-FRONT has executed for the ith time and before FORESEE has
executed for the ith time, we’ll compare [art] (the inversion count
immediately before the ith call of MOVE-TO-FRONT) with [art] (the
inversion count after the ith call of MOVE-TO-FRONT but before the ith
call of FORESEE). We’ll concern ourselves later with what FORESEE does.

Let us analyze what happens to the inversion count after executing the
ith call of MOVE-TO-FRONT, and suppose that it searches for element x.
More precisely, we’ll compute [art], the change in the inversion count,
which gives a rough idea of how much MOVE-TO-FRONT’s list becomes more
or less like FORESEE’s list. After searching, MOVE-TO-FRONT performs a
series of swaps with each of the elements on the list [art] that
precedes x. Using the notation above, the number of such swaps is |BB| +
|BA|. Bearing in mind that the list [art] has yet to be changed by the
ith call of FORESEE, let’s see how the inversion count changes.

Consider a swap with an element y ∈ BB. Before the swap, y precedes x in
both [art] and [art]. After the swap, x precedes y in [art], and [art]
does not change. Therefore, the inversion count increases by 1 for each
element in BB. Now consider a swap with an element z ∈ BA. Before the
swap, z precedes x in [art] but x precedes z in [art]. After the swap, x
precedes z in both lists. Therefore, the inversion count decreases by 1
for each element in BA. Thus altogether, the inversion count increases
by

[art]

We have laid the groundwork needed to analyze MOVE-TO-FRONT.

Theorem 27.1

Algorithm MOVE-TO-FRONT has a competitive ratio of 4.

Proof   The proof uses a potential function, as described in Chapter 16
on amortized analysis. The value Φ_(i) of the potential function after
the ith calls of MOVE-TO-FRONT and FORESEE depends on the inversion
count:

[art]

(Intuitively, the factor of 2 embodies the notion that each inversion
represents a cost of 2 for MOVE-TO-FRONT relative to FORESEE: 1 for
searching and 1 for swapping.) By equation (27.7), after the ith call of
MOVE-TO-FRONT, but before the ith call of FORESEE, the potential
increases by 2(|BB| − |BA|). Since the inversion count of the two lists
is nonnegative, we have Φ_(i) ≥ 0 for all i ≥ 0. Assuming that
MOVE-TO-FRONT and FORESEE start with the same list, the initial
potential Φ₀ is 0, so that Φ_(i) ≥ Φ₀ for all i.

Drawing from equation (16.2) on page 456, the amortized cost [art] of
the ith MOVE-TO-FRONT operation is

[art]

where [art], the actual cost of the ith MOVE-TO-FRONT operation, is
given by equation (27.3):

[art]

Now, let’s consider the potential change Φ_(i) − Φ_(i−1). Since both
L^(M) and L^(F) change, let’s consider the changes to one list at a
time. Recall that when MOVE-TO-FRONT moves element x to the front, it
increases the potential by exactly 2(|BB| − |BA|). We now consider how
the optimal algorithm FORESEE changes its list L^(F): it performs t_(i)
swaps. Each swap performed by FORESEE either increases or decreases the
potential by 2, and thus the increase in potential by FORESEE in the ith
call can be at most 2t_(i). We therefore have

[art]

We now finish the proof as in Chapter 16 by showing that the total
amortized cost provides an upper bound on the total actual cost, because
the initial potential function is 0 and the potential function is always
nonnegative. By equation (16.3) on page 456, for any sequence of m
MOVE-TO-FRONT operations, we have

[art]

Therefore, we have

[art]

Thus the total cost of the m MOVE-TO-FRONT operations is at most 4 times
the total cost of the m FORESEE operations, so MOVE-TO-FRONT is
4-competitive.

▪

Isn’t it amazing that we can compare MOVE-TO-FRONT with the optimal
algorithm FORESEE when we have no idea of the swaps that FORESEE makes?
We were able to relate the performance of MOVE-TO-FRONT to the optimal
algorithm by capturing how particular properties (swaps in this case)
must evolve relative to the optimal algorithm, without actually knowing
the optimal algorithm.

The online algorithm MOVE-TO-FRONT has a competitive ratio of 4: on any
input sequence, it incurs a cost at most 4 times that of any other
algorithm. On a particular input sequence, it could cost much less than
4 times the optimal algorithm, perhaps even matching the optimal
algorithm.

Exercises

27.2-1

You are given a set S = {x₁, x₂, … , x_(n)} of n elements, and you wish
to make a static list L (no rearranging once the list is created)
containing the elements of S that is good for searching. Suppose that
you have a probability distribution, where p(x_(i)) is the probability
that a given search searches for element x_(i). Argue that the expected
cost for m searches is

[art]

Prove that this sum is minimized when the elements of L are sorted in
decreasing order with respect to p(x_(i)).

27.2-2

Professor Carnac claims that since FORESEE is an optimal algorithm that
knows the future, then at each step it must incur no more cost than
MOVE-TO-FRONT. Either prove that Professor Carnac is correct or provide
a counterexample.

27.2-3

Another way to maintain a linked list for efficient searching is for
each element to maintain a frequency count: the number of times that the
element has been searched for. The idea is to rearrange list elements
after searches so that the list is always sorted by decreasing frequency
count, from largest to smallest. Either show that this algorithm is
O(1)-competitive, or prove that it is not.

27.2-4

The model in this section charged a cost of 1 for each swap. We can
consider an alternative cost model in which, after accessing x, you can
move x anywhere earlier in the list, and there is no cost for doing so.
The only cost is the cost of the actual accesses. Show that
MOVE-TO-FRONT is 2-competitive in this cost model, assuming that the
number requests is sufficiently large. (Hint: Use the potential function
[art].)

27.3    Online caching

In Section 15.4, we studied the caching problem, in which blocks of data
from the main memory of a computer are stored in the cache: a small but
faster memory. In that section, we studied the offline version of the
problem, in which we assumed that we knew the sequence of memory
requests in advance, and we designed an algorithm to minimize the number
of cache misses. In almost all computer systems, caching is, in fact, an
online problem. We do not generally know the series of cache requests in
advance; they are presented to the algorithm only as the requests for
blocks are actually made. To gain a better understanding of this more
realistic scenario, we analyze online algorithms for caching. We will
first see that all deterministic online algorithms for caching have a
lower bound of Ω(k) for the competitive ratio, where k is the size of
the cache. We will then present an algorithm with a competitive ratio of
Θ(n), where the input size is n, and one with a competitive ratio of
O(k), which matches the lower bound. We will end by showing how to use
randomization to design an algorithm with a much better competitive
ratio of Θ(lg k). We will also discuss the assumptions that underlie
randomized online algorithms, via the notion of an adversary, such as we
saw in Chapter 11 and will see in Chapter 31.

You can find the terminology used to describe the caching problem in
Section 15.4, which you might wish to review before proceeding.

27.3.1    Deterministic caching algorithms

In the caching problem, the input comprises a sequence of n memory
requests, for data in blocks b₁, b₂, … , b_(n), in that order. The
blocks requested are not necessarily distinct: each block may appear
multiple times within the request sequence. After block b_(i) is
requested, it resides in a cache that can hold up to k blocks, where k
is a fixed cache size. We assume that n > k, since otherwise we are
assured that the cache can hold all the requested blocks at once. When a
block b_(i) is requested, if it is already in the cache, then a cache
hit occurs and the cache remains unchanged. If b_(i) is not in the
cache, then a cache miss occurs. If the cache contains fewer than k
blocks upon a cache miss, block b_(i) is placed into the cache, which
now contains one block more than before. If a cache miss occurs with an
already full cache, however, some block must be evicted from the cache
before b_(i) can enter. Thus, a caching algorithm must decide which
block to evict from the cache upon a cache miss when the cache is full.
The goal is to minimize the number of cache misses over the entire
request sequence. The caching algorithms considered in this chapter
differ only in which block they decide to evict upon a cache miss. We do
not consider abilities such as prefetching, in which a block is brought
into the cache before an upcoming request in order to avert a future
cache miss.

There are many online caching policies to determine which block to
evict, including the following:

- First-in, first-out (FIFO): evict the block that has been in the cache
  the longest time.
- Last-in, first-out (LIFO): evict the block that has been in the cache
  the shortest time.
- Least Recently Used (LRU): evict the block whose last use is furthest
  in the past.
- Least Frequently Used (LFU): evict the block that has been accessed
  the fewest times, breaking ties by choosing the block that has been in
  the cache the longest.

To analyze these algorithms, we assume that the cache starts out empty,
so that no evictions occur during the first k requests. We wish to
compare the performance of an online algorithm to an optimal offline
algorithm that knows the future requests. As we will soon see, all these
deterministic online algorithms have a lower bound of Ω(k) for their
competitive ratio. Some deterministic algorithms also have a competitive
ratio with an O(k) upper bound, but some other deterministic algorithms
are considerably worse, having a competitive ratio of Θ(n/k).

We now proceed to analyze the LIFO and LRU policies. In addition to
assuming that n > k, we will assume that at least k distinct blocks are
requested. Otherwise, the cache never fills up and no blocks are
evicted, so that all algorithms exhibit the same behavior. We begin by
showing that LIFO has a large competitive ratio.

Theorem 27.2

LIFO has a competitive ratio of Θ(n/k) for the online caching problem
with n requests and a cache of size k.

Proof   We first show a lower bound of Ω(n/k). Suppose that the input
consists of k + 1 blocks, numbered 1, 2, … , k + 1, and the request
sequence is

1, 2, 3, 4, … , k, k + 1, k, k + 1, k, k + 1, … ,

where after the initial 1, 2, … , k, k + 1, the remainder of the
sequence alternates between k and k + 1, with a total of n requests. The
sequence ends on block k if n and k are either both even or both odd,
and otherwise, the sequence ends on block k+1. That is, b_(i) = i for i
= 1, 2, … k−1, b_(i) = k+1 for i = k+1, k+3, … and b_(i) = k for i = k,
k + 2, …. How many blocks does LIFO evict? After the first k requests
(which are considered to be cache misses), the cache is filled with
blocks 1, 2, … , k. The (k + 1)st request, which is for block k + 1,
causes block k to be evicted. The (k + 2)nd request, which is for block
k, forces block k + 1 to be evicted, since that block was just placed
into the cache. This behavior continues, alternately evicting blocks k
and k+1 for the remaining requests. LIFO, therefore, suffers a cache
miss on every one of the n requests.

The optimal offline algorithm knows the entire sequence of requests in
advance. Upon the first request of block k + 1, it just evicts any block
except block k, and then it never evicts another block. Thus, the
optimal offline algorithm evicts only once. Since the first k requests
are considered cache misses, the total number of cache misses is k + 1.
The competitive ratio, therefore, is n/(k + 1), or Ω(n/k).

For the upper bound, observe that on any input of size n, any caching
algorithm incurs at most n cache misses. Because the input contains at
least k distinct blocks, any caching algorithm, including the optimal
offline algorithm, must incur at least k cache misses. Therefore, LIFO
has a competitive ratio of O(n/k).

▪

We call such a competitive ratio unbounded, because it grows with the
input size. Exercise 27.3-2 asks you to show that LFU also has an
unbounded competitive ratio.

FIFO and LRU have a much better competitive ratio of Θ(k). There is a
big difference between competitive ratios of Θ(n/k) and Θ(k). The cache
size k is independent of the input sequence and does not grow as more
requests arrive over time. A competitive ratio that depends on n, on the
other hand, does grow with the size of the input sequence and thus can
get quite large. It is preferable to use an algorithm with a competitive
ratio that does not grow with the input sequence’s size, when possible.

We now show that LRU has a competitive ratio of Θ(k), first showing the
upper bound.

Theorem 27.3

LRU has a competitive ratio of O(k) for the online caching problem with
n requests and a cache of size k.

Proof   To analyze LRU, we will divide the sequence of requests into
epochs. Epoch 1 begins with the first request. Epoch i, for i > 1,
begins upon encountering the (k + 1)st distinct request since the
beginning of epoch i − 1. Consider the following example of requests
with k = 3:

[art]

The first k = 3 distinct requests are for blocks 1, 2 and 5, so epoch 2
begins with the first request for block 4. In epoch 2, the first 3
distinct requests are for blocks 4, 1, and 2. Requests for these blocks
recur until the request for block 3, and with this request epoch 3
begins. Thus, this example has four epochs:

[art]

Now we consider the behavior of LRU. In each epoch, the first time a
request for a particular block appears, it may cause a cache miss, but
subsequent requests for that block within the epoch cannot cause a cache
miss, since the block is now one of the k most recently used. For
example, in epoch 2, the first request for block 4 causes a cache miss,
but the subsequent requests for block 4 do not. (Exercise 27.3-1 asks
you to show the contents of the cache after each request.) In epoch 3,
requests for blocks 3 and 5 cause cache misses, but the request for
block 4 does not, because it was recently accessed in epoch 2. Since
only the first request for a block within an epoch can cause a cache
miss and the cache holds k blocks, each epoch incurs at most k cache
misses.

Now consider the behavior of the optimal algorithm. The first request in
each epoch must cause a cache miss, even for an optimal algorithm. The
miss occurs because, by the definition of an epoch, there must have been
k other blocks accessed since the last access to this block.

Since, for each epoch, the optimal algorithm incurs at least one miss
and LRU incurs at most k, the competitive ratio is at most k/1 = O(k).

▪

Exercise 27.3-3 asks you to show that FIFO also has a competitive ratio
of O(k).

We could show lower bounds of Ω(k) on LRU and FIFO, but in fact, we can
make a much stronger statement: any deterministic online caching
algorithm must have a competitive ratio of Ω(k). The proof relies on an
adversary who knows the online algorithm being used and can tailor the
future requests to cause the online algorithm to incur more cache misses
than the optimal offline algorithm.

Consider a scenario in which the cache has size k and the set of
possible blocks to request is {1, 2, … , k + 1}. The first k requests
are for blocks 1, 2, … , k, so that both the adversary and the
deterministic online algorithm place these blocks into the cache. The
next request is for block k + 1. In order to make room in the cache for
block k + 1, the online algorithm evicts some block b₁ from the cache.
The adversary, knowing that the online algorithm has just evicted block
b₁, makes the next request be for b₁, so that the online algorithm must
evict some other block b₂ to clear room in the cache for b₁. As you
might have guessed, the adversary makes the next request be for block
b₂, so that the online algorithm evicts some other block b₃ to make room
for b₂. The online algorithm and the adversary continue in this manner.
The online algorithm incurs a cache miss on every request and therefore
incurs n cache misses over the n requests.

Now let’s consider an optimal offline algorithm, which knows the future.
As discussed in Section 15.4, this algorithm is known as
furthest-in-future, and it always evicts the block whose next request is
furthest in the future. Since there are only k + 1 unique blocks, when
furthest-in-future evicts a block, we know that it will not be accessed
during at least the next k requests. Thus, after the first k cache
misses, the optimal algorithm incurs a cache miss at most once every k
requests. Therefore, the number of cache misses over n requests is at
most k + n/k.

Since the deterministic online algorithm incurs n cache misses and the
optimal offline algorithm incurs at most k + n/k cache misses, the
competitive ratio is at least

[art]

For n ≥ k², the above expression is at least

[art]

Thus, for sufficiently long request sequences, we have shown the
following:

Theorem 27.4

Any deterministic online algorithm for caching with a cache size of k
has competitive ratio Ω(k).

▪

Although we can analyze the common caching strategies from the point of
view of competitive analysis, the results are somewhat unsatisfying.
Yes, we can distinguish between algorithms with a competitive ratio of
Θ(k) and those with unbounded competitive ratios. In the end, however,
all of these competitive ratios are rather high. The online algorithms
we have seen so far are deterministic, and it is this property that the
adversary is able to exploit.

27.3.2    Randomized caching algorithms

If we don’t limit ourselves to deterministic online algorithms, we can
use randomization to develop an online caching algorithm with a
significantly smaller competitive ratio. Before describing the
algorithm, let’s discuss randomization in online algorithms in general.
Recall that we analyze online algorithms with respect to an adversary
who knows the online algorithm and can design requests knowing the
decisions made by the online algorithm. With randomization, we must ask
whether the adversary also knows the random choices made by the online
algorithm. An adversary who does not know the random choices is
oblivious, and an adversary who knows the random choices is
nonoblivious. Ideally, we prefer to design algorithms against a
nonoblivious adversary, as this adversary is stronger than an oblivious
one. Unfortunately, a nonoblivious adversary mitigates much of the power
of randomness, as an adversary who knows the outcome of random choices
typically can act as if the online algorithm is deterministic. The
oblivious adversary, on the other hand, does not know the random choices
of the online algorithm, and that is the adversary we typically use.

As a simple illustration of the difference between an oblivious and
nonoblivious adversary, imagine that you are flipping a fair coin n
times, and the adversary wants to know how many heads you flipped. A
nonoblivious adversary knows, after each flip, whether the coin came up
heads or tails, and hence knows how many heads you flipped. An oblivious
adversary, on the other hand, knows only that you are flipping a fair
coin n times. The oblivious adversary, therefore, can reason that the
number of heads follows a binomial distribution, so that the expected
number of heads is n/2 (by equation (C.41) on page 1199) and the
variance is n/4 (by equation (C.44) on page 1200). But the oblivious
adversary has no way of knowing exactly how many heads you actually
flipped.

Let’s return to caching. We’ll start with a deterministic algorithm and
then randomize it. The algorithm we’ll use is an approximation of LRU
called MARKING. Rather than “least recently used,” think of MARKING as
simply “recently used.” MARKING maintains a 1-bit attribute mark for
each block in the cache. Initially, all blocks in the cache are
unmarked. When a block is requested, if it is already in the cache, it
is marked. If the request is a cache miss, MARKING checks to see whether
there are any unmarked blocks in the cache. If all blocks are marked,
then they are all changed to unmarked. Now, regardless of whether all
blocks in the cache were marked when the request occurred, there is at
least one unmarked block in the cache, and so an arbitrary unmarked
block is evicted, and the requested block is placed into the cache and
marked.

How should the block to evict from among the unmarked blocks in the
cache be chosen? The procedure RANDOMIZED-MARKING on the next page shows
the process when the block is chosen randomly. The procedure takes as
input a block b being requested.

RANDOMIZED-MARKING(b)

  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------
  1   if block b resides in the cache,
  2   b.mark = 1
  3   else
  4   if all blocks b′ in the cache have b′.mark = 1
  5   unmark all blocks b′ in the cache, setting b′.mark = 0
  6   select an unmarked block u with u.mark = 0 uniformly at random
  7   evict block u
  8   place block b into the cache
  9   b.mark = 1
  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------

For the purpose of analysis, we say that a new epoch begins immediately
after each time line 5 executes. An epoch starts with no marked blocks
in the cache. The first time a block is requested during an epoch, the
number of marked blocks increases by 1, and any subsequent requests to
that block do not change the number of marked blocks. Therefore, the
number of marked blocks monotonically increases within an epoch. Under
this view, epochs are the same as in the proof of Theorem 27.3: with a
cache that holds k blocks, an epoch comprises requests for k distinct
blocks (possibly fewer for the final epoch), and the next epoch begins
upon a request for a block not in those k.

Because we are going to analyze a randomized algorithm, we will compute
the expected competitive ratio. Recall that for an input I, we denote
the solution value of an online algorithm A by A(I) and the solution
value of an optimal algorithm F by F(I). Online algorithm A has an
expected competitive ratio c if for all inputs I, we have

[art]

where the expectation is taken over the random choices made by A.

Although the deterministic MARKING algorithm has a competitive ratio of
Θ(k) (Theorem 27.4 provides the lower bound and see Exercise 27.3-4 for
the upper bound), RANDOMIZED-MARKING has a much smaller expected
competitive ratio, namely O(lg k). The key to the improved competitive
ratio is that the adversary cannot always make a request for a block
that is not in the cache, since an oblivious adversary does not know
which blocks are in the cache.

Theorem 27.5

RANDOMIZED-MARKING has an expected competitive ratio of O(lg k) for the
online caching problem with n requests and a cache of size k, against an
oblivious adversary.

Before proving Theorem 27.5, we prove a basic probabilistic fact.

Lemma 27.6

Suppose that a bag contains x + y balls: x − 1 blue balls, y white
balls, and 1 red ball. You repeatedly choose a ball at random and remove
it from the bag until you have chosen a total of m balls that are either
blue or red, where m ≤ x. You set aside each white ball you choose.
Then, one of the balls chosen is the red ball with probability m/x.

Proof   Choosing a white ball does not affect how many blue or red balls
are chosen in any way. Therefore, we can continue the analysis as if
there were no white balls and the bag contains just x − 1 blue balls and
1 red ball.

Let A be the event that the red ball is not chosen, and let A_(i) be the
event that the ith draw does not choose the red ball. By equation (C.22)
on page 1190, we have

[art]

The probability Pr{A₁} that the first ball is blue equals (x − 1)/x,
since initially there are x − 1 blue balls and 1 red ball. More
generally, we have

[art]

since the ith draw is from x − i blue balls and 1 red ball. Equations
(27.13) and (27.14) give

[art]

The right-hand side of equation (27.15) is a telescoping product,
similar to the telescoping series in equation (A.12) on page 1143. The
numerator of one term equals the denominator of the next, so that
everything except the first denominator and last numerator cancel, and
we obtain Pr{A} = (x − m)/x. Since we actually want to compute Pr{Ā} = 1
− Pr{A}, that is, the probability that the red ball is chosen, we get
Pr{Ā} = 1 − (x − m)/x = m/x.

▪

Now we can prove Theorem 27.5.

Proof   We’ll analyze RANDOMIZED-MARKING one epoch at a time. Within
epoch i, any request for a block b that is not the first request for
block b in epoch i must result in a cache hit, since after the first
request in epoch i, block b resides in the cache and is marked, so that
it cannot be evicted during the epoch. Therefore, since we are counting
cache misses, we’ll consider only the first request for each block
within each epoch, disregarding all other requests.

We can classify the requests in an epoch as either old or new. If block
b resides in the cache at the start of epoch i, each request for block b
during epoch i is an old request. Old requests in epoch i are for blocks
requested in epoch i − 1. If a request in epoch i is not old, it is a
new request, and it is for a block not requested in epoch i − 1. All
requests in epoch 1 are new. For example, let’s look again at the
request sequence in example (27.11):

  ------------ ------------------ --------- ----------------
  1, 2, 1, 5   4, 4, 1, 2, 4, 2   3, 4, 5   2, 2, 1, 2, 2.
  ------------ ------------------ --------- ----------------

Since we can disregard all requests for a block within an epoch other
than the first request, to analyze the cache behavior, we can view this
request sequence as just

  --------- --------- --------- -------
  1, 2, 5   4, 1, 2   3, 4, 5   2, 1.
  --------- --------- --------- -------

All three requests in epoch 1 are new. In epoch 2, the requests for
blocks 1 and 2 are old, but the request for block 4 is new. In epoch 3,
the request for block 4 is old, and the requests for blocks 3 and 5 are
new. Both requests in epoch 4 are new.

Within an epoch, each new request must cause a cache miss since, by
definition, the block is not already in the cache. An old request, on
the other hand, may or may not cause a cache miss. The old block is in
the cache at the beginning of the epoch, but other requests might cause
it to be evicted. Returning to our example, in epoch 2, the request for
block 4 must cause a cache miss, as this request is new. The request for
block 1, which is old, may or may not cause a cache miss. If block 1 was
evicted when block 4 was requested, then a cache miss occurs and block 1
must be brought back into the cache. If instead block 1 was not evicted
when block 4 was requested, then the request for block 1 results in a
cache hit. The request for block 2 could incur a cache miss under two
scenarios. One is if block 2 was evicted when block 4 was requested. The
other is if block 1 was evicted when block 4 was requested, and then
block 2 was evicted when block 1 was requested. We see that, within an
epoch, each ensuing old request has an increasing chance of causing a
cache miss.

Because we consider only the first request for each block within an
epoch, we assume that each epoch contains exactly k requests, and each
request within an epoch is for a unique block. (The last epoch might
contain fewer than k requests. If it does, just add dummy requests to
fill it out to k requests.) In epoch i, denote the number of new
requests by r_(i) ≥ 1 (an epoch must contain at least one new request),
so that the number of old requests is k − r_(i). As mentioned above, a
new request always incurs a cache miss.

Let us now focus on an arbitrary epoch i to obtain a bound on the
expected number of cache misses within that epoch. In particular, let’s
think about the jth old request within the epoch, where 1 ≤ j < k.
Denote by b_(ij) the block requested in the jth old request of epoch i,
and denote by n_(ij) and o_(ij) the number of new and old requests,
respectively, that occur within epoch i but before the jth old request.
Because j − 1 old requests occur before the jth old request, we have
o_(ij) = j − 1. We will show that the probability of a cache miss upon
the j th old request is n_(ij)/(k − o_(ij)), or n_(ij)/(k − j + 1).

Start by considering the first old request, for block b_(i,1). What is
the probability that this request causes a cache miss? It causes a cache
miss precisely when one of the n_(i,1) previous requests resulted in
b_(i,1) being evicted. We can determine the probability that b_(i,1) was
chosen for eviction by using Lemma 27.6: consider the k blocks in the
cache to be k balls, with block b_(i,1) as the red ball, the other k − 1
blocks as the k − 1 blue balls, and no white balls. Each of the n_(i,1)
requests chooses a block to evict with equal probability, corresponding
to drawing balls n_(i,1) times. Thus, we can apply Lemma 27.6 with x =
k, y = 0, and m = n_(i,1), deriving the probability of a cache miss upon
the first old request as n_(i,1)/k, which equals n_(ij)/(k − j + 1)
since j = 1.

In order to determine the probability of a cache miss for subsequent old
requests, we’ll need an additional observation. Let’s consider the
second old request, which is for block b_(i,2). This request causes a
cache miss precisely when one of the previous requests evicts b_(i,2).
Let’s consider two cases, based on the request for b_(i,1). In the first
case, suppose that the request for b_(i,1) did not cause an eviction,
because b_(i,1) was already in the cache. Then, the only way that
b_(i,2) could have been evicted is by one of the n_(i,2) new requests
that precedes it. What is the probability that this eviction happens?
There are n_(i,2) chances for b_(i,2) to be evicted, but we also know
that there is one block in the cache, namely b_(i,1), that is not
evicted. Thus, we can again apply Lemma 27.6, but with b_(i,1) as the
white ball, b_(i,2) as the red ball, the remaining blocks as the blue
balls, and drawing balls n_(i,2) times. Applying Lemma 27.6, with x = k
− 1, y = 1, and m = n_(i,2), we find that the probability of a cache
miss is n_(i,2)/(k − 1). In the second case, the request for b_(i,1)
does cause an eviction, which can happen only if one of the new requests
preceding the request for b_(i,1) evicts b_(i,1). Then, the request for
b_(i,1) brings b_(i,1) back into the cache and evicts some other block.
In this case, we know that of the new requests, one of them did not
result in b_(i,2) being evicted, since b_(i,1) was evicted. Therefore,
n_(i,2) − 1 new requests could evict b_(i,2), as could the request for
b_(i,1), so that the number of requests that could evict b_(i,2) is
n_(i,2). Each such request evicts a block chosen from among k − 1
blocks, since the request that resulted in evicting b_(i,1) did not also
cause b_(i,2) to be evicted. Therefore, we can apply Lemma 27.6, with x
= k − 1, y = 1, and m = n_(i,2), and get that the probability of a miss
is n_(i,2)/(k − 1). In both cases the probability is the same, and it
equals n_(ij)/(k − j + 1) since j = 2.

More generally, o_(ij) old requests occur before the jth old request.
Each of these prior old requests either caused an eviction or did not.
For those that caused an eviction, it is because they were evicted by a
previous request, and for those that did not cause an eviction, it is
because they were not evicted by any previous request. In either case,
we can decrease the number of blocks that the random process is choosing
from by 1 for each old request, and thus o_(ij) requests cannot cause
b_(ij) to be evicted. Therefore, we can use Lemma 27.6 to determine the
probability that b_(ij) was evicted by a previous request, with x = k −
o_(ij), y = o_(ij) and m = n_(ij). Thus, we have proven our claim that
the probability of a cache miss on the jth request for an old block is
n_(ij)/(k − o_(ij)), or n_(ij)/(k − j + 1). Since n_(ij) ≤ r_(i) (recall
that r_(i) is the number of new requests during epoch i), we have an
upper bound of r_(i)/(k − j + 1) on the probability that the jth old
request incurs a cache miss.

We can now compute the expected number of misses during epoch i using
indicator random variables, as introduced in Section 5.2. We define
indicator random variables

Y_(ij) = I{the jth old request in epoch i incurs a cache miss},

Z_(ij) = I{the j th new request in epoch i incurs a cache miss}.

We have Z_(ij) = 1 for j = 1, 2, … , r_(i), since every new request
results in a cache miss. Let X_(i) be the random variable denoting the
number of cache misses during epoch i, so that

[art]

and so

[art]

where H_(k) is the kth harmonic number.

To compute the expected total number of cache misses, we sum over all
epochs. Let p denote the number of epochs and X be the random variable
denoting the number of cache misses. Then, we have [art], so that

[art]

To complete the analysis, we need to understand the behavior of the
optimal offline algorithm. It could make a completely different set of
decisions from those made by RANDOMIZED-MARKING, and at any point its
cache may look nothing like the cache of the randomized algorithm. Yet,
we want to relate the number of cache misses of the optimal offline
algorithm to the value in inequality (27.17), in order to have a
competitive ratio that does not depend on [art]. Focusing on individual
epochs won’t suffice. At the beginning of any epoch, the offline
algorithm might have loaded the cache with exactly the blocks that will
be requested in that epoch. Therefore, we cannot take any one epoch in
isolation and claim that an offline algorithm must suffer any cache
misses during that epoch.

If we consider two consecutive epochs, however, we can better analyze
the optimal offline algorithm. Consider two consecutive epochs, i −1 and
i. Each contains k requests for k different blocks. (Recall our
assumption that all requests are first requests in an epoch.) Epoch i
contains r_(i) requests for new blocks, that is, blocks that were not
requested during epoch i − 1. Therefore, the number of distinct requests
during epochs i−1 and i is exactly k+r_(i). No matter what the cache
contents were at the beginning of epoch i − 1, after k + r_(i) distinct
requests, there must be at least r_(i) cache misses. There could be
more, but there is no way to have fewer. Letting m_(i) denote the number
of cache misses of the offline algorithm during epoch i, we have just
argued that

[art]

The total number of cache misses of the offline algorithm is

[art]

The justification m₁ = r₁ for the last equality follows because, by our
assumptions, the cache starts out empty and every request incurs a cache
miss in the first epoch, even for the optimal offline adversary.

To conclude the analysis, because we have an upper bound of [art] on the
expected number of cache misses for RANDOMIZED-MARKING and a lower bound
of [art] on the number of cache misses for the optimal offline
algorithm, the expected competitive ratio is at most

[art]

▪

Exercises

27.3-1

For the cache sequence (27.10), show the contents of the cache after
each request and count the number of cache misses. How many misses does
each epoch incur?

27.3-2

Show that LFU has a competitive ratio of Θ(n/k) for the online caching
problem with n requests and a cache of size k.

27.3-3

Show that FIFO has a competitive ratio of O(k) for the online caching
problem with n requests and a cache of size k.

27.3-4

Show that the deterministic MARKING algorithm has a competitive ratio of
O(k) for the online caching problem with n requests and a cache of size
k.

27.3-5

Theorem 27.4 shows that any deterministic online algorithm for caching
has a competitive ratio of Ω(k), where k is the cache size. One way in
which an algorithm might be able to perform better is to have some
ability to know what the next few requests will be. We say that an
algorithm is l-lookahead if it has the ability to look ahead at the next
l requests. Prove that for every constant l ≥ 0 and every cache size k
≥1, every deterministic l-lookahead algorithm has competitive ratio
Ω(k).

Problems

27-1     Cow-path problem

The Appalachian Trail (AT) is a marked hiking trail in the eastern
United States extending between Springer Mountain in Georgia and Mount
Katahdin in Maine. The trail is about 2,190 miles long. You decide that
you are going to hike the AT from Georgia to Maine and back. You plan to
learn more about algorithms while on the trail, and so you bring along
your copy of Introduction to Algorithms in your backpack.² You have
already read through this chapter before starting out. Because the
beauty of the trail distracts you, you forget about reading this book
until you have reached Maine and hiked halfway back to Georgia. At that
point, you decide that you have already seen the trail and want to
continue reading the rest of the book, starting with Chapter 28.
Unfortunately, you find that the book is no longer in your pack. You
must have left it somewhere along the trail, but you don’t know where.
It could be anywhere between Georgia and Maine. You want to find the
book, but now that you have learned something about online algorithms,
you want your algorithm for finding it to have a good competitive ratio.
That is, no matter where the book is, if its distance from you is x
miles away, you would like to be sure that you do not walk more than cx
miles to find it, for some constant c. You do not know x, though you may
assume that x ≥ 1.³

What algorithm should you use, and what constant c can you prove bounds
the total distance cx that you would have to walk? Your algorithm should
work for a trail of any length, not just the 2,190-mile-long AT.

27-2     Online scheduling to minimize average completion time

Problem 15-2 discusses scheduling to minimize average completion time on
one machine, without release times and preemption and with release times
and preemption. Now you will develop an online algorithm for
nonpreemptively scheduling a set of tasks with release times. Suppose
you are given a set S = {a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)} of tasks, where task a_(i)
has release time r_(i), before which it cannot start, and requires p_(i)
units of processing time to complete once it has started. You have one
computer on which to run the tasks. Tasks cannot be preempted, which is
to say that once started, a task must run to completion without
interruption. (See Problem 15-2 on page 446 for a more detailed
description of this problem.) Given a schedule, let C_(i) be the
completion time of task a_(i), that is, the time at which task a_(i)
completes processing. Your goal is to find a schedule that minimizes the
average completion time, that is, to minimize [art].

In the online version of this problem, you learn about task i only when
it arrives at its release time r_(i), and at that point, you know its
processing time p_(i). The offline version of this problem is NP-hard
(see Chapter 34), but you will develop a 2-competitive online algorithm.

a. Show that, if there are release times, scheduling by shortest
processing time (when the machine becomes idle, start the already
released task with the smallest processing time that has not yet run) is
not d-competitive for any constant d.

In order to develop an online algorithm, consider the preemptive version
of this problem, which is discussed in Problem 15-2(b). One way to
schedule is to run the tasks according to the shortest remaining
processing time (SRPT) order. That is, at any point, the machine is
running the available task with the smallest amount of remaining
processing time.

b. Explain how to run SRPT as an online algorithm.

c. Suppose that you run SRPT and obtain completion times [art]. Show
that

[art]

where the [art] are the completion times in an optimal nonpreemptive
schedule.

Consider the (offline) algorithm COMPLETION-TIME-SCHEDULE.

COMPLETION-TIME-SCHEDULE(S)

  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   compute an optimal schedule for the preemptive version of the problem
  2   renumber the tasks so that the completion times in the optimal preemptive schedule are ordered by their completion times [art] in SRPT order
  3   greedily schedule the tasks nonpreemptively in the renumbered order a₁, … , a_(n)
  4   let C₁, … , C_(n) be the completion times of renumbered tasks a₁, … , a_(n) in this nonpreemptive schedule
  5   return C₁, … , C_(n)
  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

d. Prove that [art] for i = 1, … , n.

e. Prove that [art] for i = 1, … , n.

f. Algorithm COMPLETION-TIME-SCHEDULE is an offline algorithm. Explain
how to modify it to produce an online algorithm.

g. Combine parts (c)–(f) to show that the online version of
COMPLETION-TIME-SCHEDULE is 2-competitive.

Chapter notes

Online algorithms are widely used in many domains. Some good overviews
include the textbook by Borodin and El-Yaniv [68], the collection of
surveys edited by Fiat and Woeginger [142], and the survey by Albers
[14].

The move-to-front heuristic from Section 27.2 was analyzed by Sleator
and Tarjan [416, 417] as part of their early work on amortized analysis.
This rule works quite well in practice.

Competitive analysis of online caching also originated with Sleator and
Tarjan [417]. The randomized marking algorithm was proposed and analyzed
by Fiat et al. [141]. Young [464] surveys online caching and paging
algorithms, and Buchbinder and Naor [76] survey primal-dual online
algorithms.

Specific types of online algorithms are described using other names.
Dynamic graph algorithms are online algorithms on graphs, where at each
step a vertex or edge undergoes modification. Typically a vertex or edge
is either inserted or deleted, or some associated property, such as edge
weight, changes. Some graph problems need to be solved again after each
change to the graph, and a good dynamic graph algorithm will not need to
solve from scratch. For example, edges are inserted and deleted, and
after each change to the graph, the minimum spanning tree is recomputed.
Exercise 21.2-8 asks such a question. Similar questions can be asked for
other graph algorithms, such as shortest paths, connectivity, or
matching. The first paper in this field is credited to Even and Shiloach
[138], who study how to maintain a shortest-path tree as edges are being
deleted from a graph. Since then hundreds of papers have been published.
Demetrescu et al. [110] survey early developments in dynamic graph
algorithms.

For massive data sets, the input data might be too large to store.
Streaming algorithms model this situation by requiring the memory used
by an algorithm to be significantly smaller than the input size. For
example, you may have a graph with n vertices and m edges with m ≫ n,
but the memory allowed may be only O(n). Or you may have n numbers, but
the memory allowed may only be O(lg n) or [art]. A streaming algorithm
is measured by the number of passes made over the data in addition to
the running time of the algorithm. McGregor [322] surveys streaming
algorithms for graphs and Muthukrishnan [341] surveys general streaming
algorithms.

¹ The path-compression heuristic in Section 19.3 resembles
MOVE-TO-FRONT, although it would be more accurately expressed as
“move-to-next-to-front.” Unlike MOVE-TO-FRONT in a doubly linked list,
path compression can relocate multiple elements to become
“next-to-front.”

² This book is heavy. We do not recommend that you carry it on a long
hike.

³ In case you’re wondering what this problem has to do with cows, some
papers about it frame the problem as a cow looking for a field in which
to graze.

28        Matrix Operations

Because operations on matrices lie at the heart of scientific computing,
efficient algorithms for working with matrices have many practical
applications. This chapter focuses on how to multiply matrices and solve
sets of simultaneous linear equations. Appendix D reviews the basics of
matrices.

Section 28.1 shows how to solve a set of linear equations using LUP
decompositions. Then, Section 28.2 explores the close relationship
between multiplying and inverting matrices. Finally, Section 28.3
discusses the important class of symmetric positive-definite matrices
and shows how to use them to find a least-squares solution to an
overdetermined set of linear equations.

One important issue that arises in practice is numerical stability.
Because actual computers have limits to how precisely they can represent
floating-point numbers, round-off errors in numerical computations may
become amplified over the course of a computation, leading to incorrect
results. Such computations are called numerically unstable. Although
we’ll briefly consider numerical stability on occasion, we won’t focus
on it in this chapter. We refer you to the excellent book by Higham
[216] for a thorough discussion of stability issues.

28.1    Solving systems of linear equations

Numerous applications need to solve sets of simultaneous linear
equations. A linear system can be cast as a matrix equation in which
each matrix or vector element belongs to a field, typically the real
numbers ℝ. This section discusses how to solve a system of linear
equations using a method called LUP decomposition.

The process starts with a set of linear equations in n unknowns x₁, x₂,
… , x_(n):

[art]

A solution to the equations (28.1) is a set of values for x₁, x₂, … ,
x_(n) that satisfy all of the equations simultaneously. In this section,
we treat only the case in which there are exactly n equations in n
unknowns.

Next, rewrite equations (28.1) as the matrix-vector equation

[art]

or, equivalently, letting A = (a_(ij)), x = (x_(i)), and b = (b_(i)), as

[art]

If A is nonsingular, it possesses an inverse A⁻¹, and

[art]

is the solution vector. We can prove that x is the unique solution to
equation (28.2) as follows. If there are two solutions, x and x′, then
Ax = Ax′ = b and, letting I denote an identity matrix,

  --- --- ----------
  x   =   Ix
      =   (A⁻¹A)x
      =   A⁻¹(Ax)
      =   A⁻¹(Ax′)
      =   (A⁻¹A)x′
      =   Ix′
      =   x′.
  --- --- ----------

This section focuses on the case in which A is nonsingular or,
equivalently (by Theorem D.1 on page 1220), the rank of A equals the
number n of unknowns. There are other possibilities, however, which
merit a brief discussion. If the number of equations is less than the
number n of unknowns—or, more generally, if the rank of A is less than
n—then the system is underdetermined. An underdetermined system
typically has infinitely many solutions, although it may have no
solutions at all if the equations are inconsistent. If the number of
equations exceeds the number n of unknowns, the system is
overdetermined, and there may not exist any solutions. Section 28.3
addresses the important problem of finding good approximate solutions to
overdetermined systems of linear equations.

Let’s return to the problem of solving the system Ax = b of n equations
in n unknowns. One option is to compute A⁻¹ and then, using equation
(28.3), multiply b by A⁻¹, yielding x = A⁻¹b. This approach suffers in
practice from numerical instability. Fortunately, another approach—LUP
decomposition—is numerically stable and has the further advantage of
being faster in practice.

Overview of LUP decomposition

The idea behind LUP decomposition is to find three n × n matrices L, U,
and P such that

[art]

where

- L is a unit lower-triangular matrix,
- U is an upper-triangular matrix, and
- P is a permutation matrix.

We call matrices L, U, and P satisfying equation (28.4) an LUP
decomposition of the matrix A. We’ll show that every nonsingular matrix
A possesses such a decomposition.

Computing an LUP decomposition for the matrix A has the advantage that
linear systems can be efficiently solved when they are triangular, as is
the case for both matrices L and U. If you have an LUP decomposition for
A, you can solve equation (28.2), Ax = b, by solving only triangular
linear systems, as follows. Multiply both sides of Ax = b by P, yielding
the equivalent equation PAx = Pb. By Exercise D.1-4 on page 1219,
multiplying both sides by a permutation matrix amounts to permuting the
equations (28.1). By the decomposition (28.4), substituting LU for PA
gives

LUx = Pb.

You can now solve this equation by solving two triangular linear
systems. Define y = Ux, where x is the desired solution vector. First,
solve the lower-triangular system

[art]

for the unknown vector y by a method called “forward substitution.”
Having solved for y, solve the upper-triangular system

[art]

for the unknown x by a method called “back substitution.” Why does this
process solve Ax = b? Because the permutation matrix P is invertible
(see Exercise D.2-3 on page 1223), multiplying both sides of equation
(28.4) by P ⁻¹ gives P⁻¹PA = P⁻¹LU, so that

[art]

Hence, the vector x that satisfies Ux = y is the solution to Ax = b:

  ---- --- -------- ----------------------
  Ax   =   P⁻¹LUx   (by equation (28.7))
       =   P⁻¹Ly    (by equation (28.6))
       =   P⁻¹Pb    (by equation (28.5))
       =   b.       
  ---- --- -------- ----------------------

The next step is to show how forward and back substitution work and then
attack the problem of computing the LUP decomposition itself.

Forward and back substitution

Forward substitution can solve the lower-triangular system (28.5) in
Θ(n²) time, given L, P, and b. An array π[1 : n] provides a more compact
format to represent the permutation P than an n × n matrix that is
mostly 0s. For i = 1, 2, … , n, the entry π[i] indicates that P_(i,π[i])
= 1 and P_(ij) = 0 for j ≠ π[i]. Thus, PA has a_(π[i],j) in row i and
column j, and Pb has b_(π[i]) as its ith element. Since L is unit
lower-triangular, the matrix equation Ly = Pb is equivalent to the n
equations

  -------------------------------------------- --- -----------
     y₁                                        =   b_(π[1]),
  l₂₁y₁ + y₂                                   =   b_(π[2]),
  l₃₁y₁ + l₃₂y₂ + y₃                           =   b_(π[3]),
                                               ⋮   
  l_(n1)y₁ + l_(n2)y₂ + l_(n3)y₃ + ⋯ + y_(n)   =   b_(π[n]).
  -------------------------------------------- --- -----------

The first equation gives y₁ = b_(π[1]) directly. Knowing the value of
y₁, you can substitute it into the second equation, yielding

y₂ = b_(π[2]) − l₂₁y₁.

Next, you can substitute both y₁ and y₂ into the third equation,
obtaining

y₃ = b_(π[3]) − (l₃₁y₁ + l₃₂y₂).

In general, you substitute y₁, y₂, … , y_(i−1) “forward” into the ith
equation to solve for y_(i):

[art]

Once you’ve solved for y, you can solve for x in equation (28.6) using
back substitution, which is similar to forward substitution. This time,
you solve the nth equation first and work backward to the first
equation. Like forward substitution, this process runs in Θ(n²) time.
Since U is upper-triangular, the matrix equation Ux = y is equivalent to
the n equations

  --------------------- ---------------------- ---------------------- ---------------- --- ----------
  u₁₁x₁ + u₁₂x₂ + ⋯ +   u_(1,n−2)x_(n−2) +     u_(1,n−1)x_(n−1) +     u_(1n)x_(n)      =   y₁,
  u₂₂x₂ + ⋯ +           u_(2,n−2)x_(n−2) +     u_(2,n−1)x_(n−1) +     u_(2n)x_(n)      =   y₂,
                                                                                       ⋮   
                        u_(n−2,n−2)x_(n−2) +   u_(n−2,n−1)x_(n−1) +   u_(n−2,n)x_(n)   =   y_(n−2),
                                               u_(n−1,n−1)x_(n−1) +   u_(n−1,n)x_(n)   =   y_(n−1),
                                                                      u_(n,n)x_(n)     =   y_(n).
  --------------------- ---------------------- ---------------------- ---------------- --- ----------

Thus, you can solve for x_(n), x_(n−1), … , x₁ successively as follows:

  --------- --- ----------------------------------------------------------------
  x_(n)     =   y_(n)/u_(n,n),
  x_(n−1)   =   (y_(n−1) − u_(n−1,n)x_(n))/u_(n−1,n−1),
  x_(n−2)   =   (y_(n−2) − (u_(n−2,n−1)x_(n−1) + u_(n−2,n)x_(n)))/u_(n−2,n−2,)
            ⋮   
  --------- --- ----------------------------------------------------------------

or, in general,

[art]

Given P, L, U, and b, the procedure LUP-SOLVE on the next page solves
for x by combining forward and back substitution. The permutation matrix
P is represented by the array π. The procedure first solves for y using
forward substitution in lines 2–3, and then it solves for x using
backward substitution in lines 4–5. Since the summation within each of
the for loops includes an implicit loop, the running time is Θ(n²).

As an example of these methods, consider the system of linear equations
defined by Ax = b, where

[art]

LUP-SOLVE(L, U, π, b, n)

  --- ----------------------------------------
  1   let x and y be new vectors of length n
  2   for i = 1 to n
  3   [art]
  4   for i = n downto 1
  5   [art]
  6   return x
  --- ----------------------------------------

and we want to solve for the unknown x. The LUP decomposition is

[art]

(You might want to verify that PA = LU.) Using forward substitution,
solve Ly = Pb for y:

[art]

obtaining

[art]

by computing first y₁, then y₂, and finally y₃. Then, using back
substitution, solve Ux = y for x:

[art]

thereby obtaining the desired answer

[art]

by computing first x₃, then x₂, and finally x₁.

Computing an LU decomposition

Given an LUP decomposition for a nonsingular matrix A, you can use
forward and back substitution to solve the system Ax = b of linear
equations. Now let’s see how to efficiently compute an LUP decomposition
for A. We start with the simpler case in which A is an n × n nonsingular
matrix and P is absent (or, equivalently, P = I_(n), the n × n identity
matrix), so that A = LU. We call the two matrices L and U an LU
decomposition of A.

To create an LU decomposition, we’ll use a process known as Gaussian
elimination. Start by subtracting multiples of the first equation from
the other equations in order to remove the first variable from those
equations. Then subtract multiples of the second equation from the third
and subsequent equations so that now the first and second variables are
removed from them. Continue this process until the system that remains
has an upper-triangular form—this is the matrix U. The matrix L
comprises the row multipliers that cause variables to be eliminated.

To implement this strategy, let’s start with a recursive formulation.
The input is an n × n nonsingular matrix A. If n = 1, then nothing needs
to be done: just choose L = I₁ and U = A. For n > 1, break A into four
parts:

[art]

where v = (a₂₁, a₃₁, … , a_(n1)) is a column (n−1)-vector, w^(T) = (a₁₂,
a₁₃, … , a_(1n))^(T) is a row (n − 1)-vector, and A′ is an (n − 1) × (n
− 1) matrix. Then, using matrix algebra (verify the equations by simply
multiplying through), factor A as

[art]

The 0s in the first and second matrices of equation (28.9) are row and
column (n − 1)-vectors, respectively. The term vw^(T)/a₁₁ is an (n − 1)
× (n − 1) matrix formed by taking the outer product of v and w and
dividing each element of the result by a₁₁. Thus it conforms in size to
the matrix A′ from which it is subtracted. The resulting (n − 1) × (n
− 1) matrix

[art]

is called the Schur complement of A with respect to a₁₁.

We claim that if A is nonsingular, then the Schur complement is
nonsingular, too. Why? Suppose that the Schur complement, which is (n
− 1) × (n − 1), is singular. Then by Theorem D.1, it has row rank
strictly less than n − 1. Because the bottom n − 1 entries in the first
column of the matrix

[art]

are all 0, the bottom n − 1 rows of this matrix must have row rank
strictly less than n − 1. The row rank of the entire matrix, therefore,
is strictly less than n. Applying Exercise D.2-8 on page 1223 to
equation (28.9), A has rank strictly less than n, and from Theorem D.1,
we derive the contradiction that A is singular.

Because the Schur complement is nonsingular, it, too, has an LU
decomposition, which we can find recursively. Let’s say that

A′ − vw^(T)/a₁₁ = L′U′,

where L′ is unit lower-triangular and U′ is upper-triangular. The LU
decomposition of A is then A = LU, with

[art]

as shown by

[art]

Because L′ is unit lower-triangular, so is L, and because U′ is
upper-triangular, so is U.

Of course, if a₁₁ = 0, this method doesn’t work, because it divides by
0. It also doesn’t work if the upper leftmost entry of the Schur
complement A′ − vw^(T)/a₁₁ is 0, since the next step of the recursion
will divide by it. The denominators in each step of LU decomposition are
called pivots, and they occupy the diagonal elements of the matrix U.
The permutation matrix P included in LUP decomposition provides a way to
avoid dividing by 0, as we’ll see below. Using permutations to avoid
division by 0 (or by small numbers, which can contribute to numerical
instability), is called pivoting.

An important class of matrices for which LU decomposition always works
correctly is the class of symmetric positive-definite matrices. Such
matrices require no pivoting to avoid dividing by 0 in the recursive
strategy outlined above. We will prove this result, as well as several
others, in Section 28.3.

The pseudocode in the procedure LU-DECOMPOSITION follows the recursive
strategy, except that an iteration loop replaces the recursion. (This
transformation is a standard optimization for a “tail-recursive”
procedure—one whose last operation is a recursive call to itself. See
Problem 7-5 on page 202.) The procedure initializes the matrix U with 0s
below the diagonal and matrix L with 1s on its diagonal and 0s above the
diagonal. Each iteration works on a square submatrix, using its upper
leftmost element as the pivot to compute the v and w vectors and the
Schur complement, which becomes the square submatrix worked on by the
next iteration.

LU-DECOMPOSITION(A, n)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | let L and U be new n × n matrices                             |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   2 | initialize U with 0s below the diagonal                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   3 | initialize L with 1s on the diagonal and 0s above the         |
|     | diagonal                                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   4 | for k = 1 to n                                                |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   5 | u_(kk) = a_(kk)                                               |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   6 | for i = k + 1 to n                                            |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   7 | l_(ik) = a_(ik)/a_(kk)        | // a_(ik) holds v_(i)         |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   8 | u_(ki) = a_(ki)               | // a_(ki) holds w_(i)         |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | for i = k + 1 to n            | // compute the Schur          |
|     |                               | complement …                  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10  | for j = k + 1 to n                                            |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 11  | a_(ij) = a_(ij) −             | // … and store it back into A |
|     | l_(ik)u_(kj)                  |                               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 12  | return L and U                                                |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

Each recursive step in the description above takes place in one
iteration of the outer for loop of lines 4–11. Within this loop, line 5
determines the pivot to be u_(kk) = a_(kk). The for loop in lines 6–8
(which does not execute when k = n) uses the v and w vectors to update L
and U. Line 7 determines the below-diagonal elements of L, storing
v_(i)/a_(kk) in l_(ik), and line 8 computes the above-diagonal elements
of U, storing w_(i) in u_(ki). Finally, lines 9–11 compute the elements
of the Schur complement and store them back into the matrix A. (There is
no need to divide by a_(kk) in line 11 because that already happened
when line 7 computed l_(ik).) Because line 11 is triply nested,
LU-DECOMPOSITION runs in Θ(n³) time.

Figure 28.1 illustrates the operation of LU-DECOMPOSITION. It shows a
standard optimization of the procedure that stores the significant
elements of L and U in place in the matrix A. Each element a_(ij)
corresponds to either l_(ij) (if i > j) or u_(ij) (if i ≤ j), so that
the matrix A holds both L and U when the procedure terminates. To obtain
the pseudocode for this optimization from the pseudocode for the
LU-DECOMPOSITION procedure, just replace each reference to l or u by a.
You can verify that this transformation preserves correctness.

[art]

Figure 28.1 The operation of LU-DECOMPOSITION. (a) The matrix A. (b) The
result of the first iteration of the outer for loop of lines 4–11. The
element a₁₁ = 2 highlighted in blue is the pivot, the tan column is
v/a₁₁, and the tan row is w^(T). The elements of U computed thus far are
above the horizontal line, and the elements of L are to the left of the
vertical line. The Schur complement matrix A′ − vw^(T)/a₁₁ occupies the
lower right. (c) The result of the next iteration of the outer for loop,
on the Schur complement matrix from part (b). The element a₂₂ = 4
highlighted in blue is the pivot, and the tan column and row are v/a₂₂
and w^(T) (in the partitioning of the Schur complement), respectively.
Lines divide the matrix into the elements of U computed so far (above),
the elements of L computed so far (left), and the new Schur complement
(lower right). (d) After the next iteration, the matrix A is factored.
The element 3 in the new Schur complement becomes part of U when the
recursion terminates.) (e) The factorization A = LU.

Computing an LUP decomposition

If the diagonal of the matrix given to LU-DECOMPOSITION contains any 0s,
then the procedure will attempt to divide by 0, which would cause
disaster. Even if the diagonal contains no 0s, but does have numbers
with small absolute values, dividing by such numbers can cause numerical
instabilities. Therefore, LUP decomposition pivots on entries with the
largest absolute values that it can find.

In LUP decomposition, the input is an n × n nonsingular matrix A, with a
goal of finding a permutation matrix P, a unit lower-triangular matrix
L, and an upper-triangular matrix U such that PA = LU. Before
partitioning the matrix A, as LU decomposition does, LUP decomposition
moves a nonzero element, say a_(k1), from somewhere in the first column
to the (1, 1) position of the matrix. For the greatest numerical
stability, LUP decomposition chooses the element in the first column
with the greatest absolute value as a_(k1). (The first column cannot
contain only 0s, for then A would be singular, because its determinant
would be 0, by Theorems D.4 and D.5 on page 1221.) In order to preserve
the set of equations, LUP decomposition exchanges row 1 with row k,
which is equivalent to multiplying A by a permutation matrix Q on the
left (Exercise D.1-4 on page 1219). Thus, the analog to equation (28.8)
expresses QA as

[art]

where v = (a₂₁, a₃₁, … , a_(n1)), except that a₁₁ replaces a_(k1); w^(T)
= (a_(k2), a_(k3), … , a_(kn))^(T); and A′ is an (n − 1) × (n − 1)
matrix. Since a_(k1) ≠ 0, the analog to equation (28.9) guarantees no
division by 0:

[art]

Just as in LU decomposition, if A is nonsingular, then the Schur
complement A′ − vw^(T)/a_(k1) is nonsingular, too. Therefore, you can
recursively find an LUP decomposition for it, with unit lower-triangular
matrix L′, upper-triangular matrix U′, and permutation matrix P′, such
that

P′(A′ − vw^(T)/a_(k1)) = L′U′.

Define

[art]

which is a permutation matrix, since it is the product of two
permutation matrices (Exercise D.1-4 on page 1219). This definition of P
gives

[art]

which yields the LUP decomposition. Because L′ is unit lower-triangular,
so is L, and because U′ is upper-triangular, so is U.

Notice that in this derivation, unlike the one for LU decomposition,
both the column vector v/a_(k1) and the Schur complement A′ −
vw^(T)/a_(k1) are multiplied by the permutation matrix P′. The procedure
LUP-DECOMPOSITION gives the pseudocode for LUP decomposition.

LUP-DECOMPOSITION(A, n)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | let π[1 : n] be a new array                                   |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   2 | for i = 1 to n                                                |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | π[i] = i                      | // initialize π to the        |
|     |                               | identity permutation          |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | for k = 1 to n                                                |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   5 | p = 0                                                         |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   6 | for i = k to n                | // find largest absolute      |
|     |                               | value in column k             |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   7 | if |a_(ik)| > p                                               |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   8 | p = |a_(ik)|                                                  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | k′ = i                        | // row number of the largest  |
|     |                               | found so far                  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10  | if p == 0                                                     |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11  | error “singular matrix”                                       |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12  | exchange π[k] with π[k′]                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13  | for i = 1 to n                                                |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 14  | exchange a_(ki) with a_(k′i)  | // exchange rows k and k′     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 15  | for i = k + 1 to n                                            |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16  | a_(ik) = a_(ik)/a_(kk)                                        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17  | for j = k + 1 to n                                            |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 18  | a_(ij) = a_(ij) −             | // compute L and U in place   |
|     | a_(ik)a_(kj)                  | in A                          |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+

Like LU-DECOMPOSITION, the LUP-DECOMPOSITION procedure replaces the
recursion with an iteration loop. As an improvement over a direct
implementation of the recursion, the procedure dynamically maintains the
permutation matrix P as an array π, where π[i] = j means that the ith
row of P contains a 1 in column j. The LUP-DECOMPOSITION procedure also
implements the improvement mentioned earlier, computing L and U in place
in the matrix A. Thus, when the procedure terminates,

[art]

Figure 28.2 illustrates how LUP-DECOMPOSITION factors a matrix. Lines
2–3 initialize the array π to represent the identity permutation. The
outer for loop of lines 4–18 implements the recursion, finding an LUP
decomposition of the (n − k + 1) × (n − k + 1) submatrix whose upper
left is in row k and column k. Each time through the outer loop, lines
5–9 determine the element a_(k′k) with the largest absolute value of
those in the current first column (column k) of the (n − k + 1) × (n −
k + 1) submatrix that the procedure is currently working on. If all
elements in the current first column are 0, lines 10–11 report that the
matrix is singular. To pivot, line 12 exchanges π[k′] with π[k], and
lines 13–14 exchange the kth and k′th rows of A, thereby making the
pivot element a_(kk). (The entire rows are swapped because in the
derivation of the method above, not only is A′ − vw^(T)/a_(k1)
multiplied by P′, but so is v/a_(k1).) Finally, the Schur complement is
computed by lines 15–18 in much the same way as it is computed by lines
6–11 of LU-DECOMPOSITION, except that here the operation is written to
work in place.

[art]

Figure 28.2 The operation of LUP-DECOMPOSITION. (a) The input matrix A
with the identity permutation of the rows in yellow on the left. The
first step of the algorithm determines that the element 5 highlighted in
blue in the third row is the pivot for the first column. (b) Rows 1 and
3 are swapped and the permutation is updated. The tan column and row
represent v and w^(T). (c) The vector v is replaced by v/5, and the
lower right of the matrix is updated with the Schur complement. Lines
divide the matrix into three regions: elements of U (above), elements of
L (left), and elements of the Schur complement (lower right). (d)–(f)
The second step. (g)–(i) The third step. No further changes occur on the
fourth (final) step. (j) The LUP decomposition PA = LU.

Because of its triply nested loop structure, LUP-DECOMPOSITION has a
running time of Θ(n³), which is the same as that of LU-DECOMPOSITION.
Thus, pivoting costs at most a constant factor in time.

Exercises

28.1-1

Solve the equation

[art]

by using forward substitution.

28.1-2

Find an LU decomposition of the matrix

[art]

28.1-3

Solve the equation

[art]

by using an LUP decomposition.

28.1-4

Describe the LUP decomposition of a diagonal matrix.

28.1-5

Describe the LUP decomposition of a permutation matrix, and prove that
it is unique.

28.1-6

Show that for all n ≥ 1, there exists a singular n × n matrix that has
an LU decomposition.

28.1-7

In LU-DECOMPOSITION, is it necessary to perform the outermost for loop
iteration when k = n? How about in LUP-DECOMPOSITION?

28.2    Inverting matrices

Although you can use equation (28.3) to solve a system of linear
equations by computing a matrix inverse, in practice you are better off
using more numerically stable techniques, such as LUP decomposition.
Sometimes, however, you really do need to compute a matrix inverse. This
section shows how to use LUP decomposition to compute a matrix inverse.
It also proves that matrix multiplication and computing the inverse of a
matrix are equivalently hard problems, in that (subject to technical
conditions) an algorithm for one can solve the other in the same
asymptotic running time. Thus, you can use Strassen’s algorithm (see
Section 4.2) for matrix multiplication to invert a matrix. Indeed,
Strassen’s original paper was motivated by the idea that a set of a
linear equations could be solved more quickly than by the usual method.

Computing a matrix inverse from an LUP decomposition

Suppose that you have an LUP decomposition of a matrix A in the form of
three matrices L, U, and P such that PA = LU. Using LUP-SOLVE, you can
solve an equation of the form Ax = b in Θ(n²) time. Since the LUP
decomposition depends on A but not b, you can run LUP-SOLVE on a second
set of equations of the form Ax = b′ in Θ(n²) additional time. In
general, once you have the LUP decomposition of A, you can solve, in
Θ(kn²) time, k versions of the equation Ax = b that differ only in the
vector b.

Let’s think of the equation

[art]

which defines the matrix X, the inverse of A, as a set of n distinct
equations of the form Ax = b. To be precise, let X_(i) denote the ith
column of X, and recall that the unit vector e_(i) is the ith column of
I_(n). You can then solve equation (28.11) for X by using the LUP
decomposition for A to solve each equation

AX_(i) = e_(i)

separately for X_(i). Once you have the LUP decomposition, you can
compute each of the n columns X_(i) in Θ(n²) time, and so you can
compute X from the LUP decomposition of A in Θ(n³) time. Since you find
the LUP decomposition of A in Θ(n³) time, you can compute the inverse
A⁻¹ of a matrix A in Θ(n³) time.

Matrix multiplication and matrix inversion

Now let’s see how the theoretical speedups obtained for matrix
multiplication translate to speedups for matrix inversion. In fact,
we’ll prove something stronger: matrix inversion is equivalent to matrix
multiplication, in the following sense. If M(n) denotes the time to
multiply two n × n matrices, then a nonsingular n × n matrix can be
inverted in O(M(n)) time. Moreover, if I(n) denotes the time to invert a
nonsingular n × n matrix, then two n × n matrices can be multiplied in
O(I(n)) time. We prove these results as two separate theorems.

Theorem 28.1 (Multiplication is no harder than inversion)

If an n × n matrix can be inverted in I(n) time, where I(n) = Ω(n²) and
I(n) satisfies the regularity condition I(3n) = O(I(n)), then two n × n
matrices can be multiplied in O(I(n)) time.

Proof   Let A and B be n × n matrices. To compute their product C = AB,
define the 3n × 3n matrix D by

[art]

The inverse of D is

[art]

and thus to compute the product AB, just take the upper right n × n
submatrix of D⁻¹.

Constructing matrix D takes Θ(n²) time, which is O(I(n)) from the
assumption that I(n) = Ω(n²), and inverting D takes O(I(3n)) = O(I(n))
time, by the regularity condition on I(n). We thus have M(n) = O(I(n)).

▪

Note that I(n) satisfies the regularity condition whenever I(n) =
Θ(n^(c) lg^(d)n) for any constants c > 0 and d ≥ 0.

The proof that matrix inversion is no harder than matrix multiplication
relies on some properties of symmetric positive-definite matrices proved
in Section 28.3.

Theorem 28.2 (Inversion is no harder than multiplication)

Suppose that two n × n real matrices can be multiplied in M(n) time,
where M(n) = Ω(n²) and M(n) satisfies the following two regularity
conditions:

1.  M(n + k) = O(M(n)) for any k in the range 0 ≤ k < n, and
2.  M(n/2) ≤ cM(n) for some constant c < 1/2.

Then the inverse of any real nonsingular n×n matrix can be computed in
O(M(n)) time.

Proof   Let A be an n × n matrix with real-valued entries that is
nonsingular. Assume that n is an exact power of 2 (i.e., n = 2^(l) for
some integer l); we’ll see at the end of the proof what to do if n is
not an exact power of 2.

For the moment, assume that the n × n matrix A is symmetric and
positive-definite. Partition each of A and its inverse A⁻¹ into four n/2
× n/2 submatrices:

[art]

Then, if we let

[art]

be the Schur complement of A with respect to B (we’ll see more about
this form of Schur complement in Section 28.3), we have

[art]

since AA⁻¹ = I_(n), as you can verify by performing the matrix
multiplication. Because A is symmetric and positive-definite, Lemmas
28.4 and 28.5 in Section 28.3 imply that B and S are both symmetric and
positive-definite. By Lemma 28.3 in Section 28.3, therefore, the
inverses B⁻¹ and S⁻¹ exist, and by Exercise D.2-6 on page 1223, B⁻¹ and
S⁻¹ are symmetric, so that (B⁻¹)^(T) = B⁻¹ and (S⁻¹)^(T) = S⁻¹.
Therefore, to compute the submatrices

  --- --- ------------------------
  R   =   B⁻¹ + B⁻¹C^(T)S⁻¹CB⁻¹,
  T   =   −B⁻¹C^(T)S⁻¹,
  U   =   −S⁻¹CB⁻¹, and
  V   =   S⁻¹
  --- --- ------------------------

of A⁻¹, do the following, where all matrices mentioned are n/2 × n/2:

1.  Form the submatrices B, C, C^(T), and D of A.
2.  Recursively compute the inverse B⁻¹ of B.
3.  Compute the matrix product W = CB⁻¹, and then compute its transpose
    W^(T), which equals B⁻¹C^(T) (by Exercise D.1-2 on page 1219 and
    (B⁻¹)^(T) = B⁻¹).
4.  Compute the matrix product X = WC^(T), which equals CB⁻¹C^(T), and
    then compute the matrix S = D − X = D − CB⁻¹C^(T).
5.  Recursively compute the inverse S⁻¹ of S.
6.  Compute the matrix product Y = S⁻¹W, which equals S⁻¹CB⁻¹, and then
    compute its transpose Y^(T), which equals B⁻¹C^(T)S⁻¹ (by Exercise
    D.1-2, (B⁻¹)^(T) = B⁻¹, and (S⁻¹)^(T) = S⁻¹).
7.  Compute the matrix product Z = W^(T)Y, which equals B⁻¹C^(T)S⁻¹CB⁻¹.
8.  Set R = B⁻¹ + Z.
9.  Set T = −Y^(T).
10. Set U = −Y.
11. Set V = S⁻¹.

Thus, to invert an n×n symmetric positive-definite matrix, invert two
n/2×n/2 matrices in steps 2 and 5; perform four multiplications of n/2 ×
n/2 matrices in steps 3, 4, 6, and 7; plus incur an additional cost of
O(n²) for extracting submatrices from A, inserting submatrices into A⁻¹,
and performing a constant number of additions, subtractions, and
transposes on n/2 × n/2 matrices. The running time is given by the
recurrence

[art]

The second line follows from the assumption that M(n) = Ω(n²) and from
the second regularity condition in the statement of the theorem, which
implies that 4M(n/2) < 2M(n). Because M(n) = Ω(n²), case 3 of the master
theorem (Theorem 4.1) applies to the recurrence (28.15), giving the
O(M(n)) result.

It remains to prove how to obtain the same asymptotic running time for
matrix multiplication as for matrix inversion when A is invertible but
not symmetric and positive-definite. The basic idea is that for any
nonsingular matrix A, the matrix A^(T)A is symmetric (by Exercise D.1-2)
and positive-definite (by Theorem D.6 on page 1222). The trick, then, is
to reduce the problem of inverting A to the problem of inverting A^(T)A.

The reduction is based on the observation that when A is an n × n
nonsingular matrix, we have

A⁻¹ = (A^(T)A)⁻¹A^(T),

since ((A^(T)A)⁻¹A^(T))A = (A^(T)A)⁻¹(A^(T)A) = I_(n) and a matrix
inverse is unique. Therefore, to compute A⁻¹, first multiply A^(T) by A
to obtain A^(T)A, then invert the symmetric positive-definite matrix
A^(T)A using the above divide-and-conquer algorithm, and finally
multiply the result by A^(T). Each of these three steps takes O(M(n))
time, and thus any nonsingular matrix with real entries can be inverted
in O(M(n)) time.

The above proof assumed that A is an n × n matrix, where n is an exact
power of 2. If n is not an exact power of 2, then let k < n be such that
n + k is an exact power of 2, and define the (n + k) × (n + k) matrix A′
as

[art]

Then the inverse of A′ is

[art]

Apply the method of the proof to A′ to compute the inverse of A′, and
take the first n rows and n columns of the result as the desired answer
A⁻¹. The first regularity condition on M(n) ensures that enlarging the
matrix in this way increases the running time by at most a constant
factor.

▪

The proof of Theorem 28.2 suggests how to solve the equation Ax = b by
using LU decomposition without pivoting, so long as A is nonsingular.
Let y = A^(T)b. Multiply both sides of the equation Ax = b by A^(T),
yielding (A^(T)A)x = A^(T)b = y. This transformation doesn’t affect the
solution x, since A^(T) is invertible. Because A^(T)A is symmetric
positive-definite, it can be factored by computing an LU decomposition.
Then, use forward and back substitution to solve for x in the equation
(A^(T)A)x = y. Although this method is theoretically correct, in
practice the procedure LUP-DECOMPOSITION works much better. LUP
decomposition requires fewer arithmetic operations by a constant factor,
and it has somewhat better numerical properties.

Exercises

28.2-1

Let M(n) be the time to multiply two n × n matrices, and let S(n) denote
the time required to square an n × n matrix. Show that multiplying and
squaring matrices have essentially the same difficulty: an M(n)-time
matrix-multiplication algorithm implies an O(M(n))-time squaring
algorithm, and an S(n)-time squaring algorithm implies an O(S(n))-time
matrix-multiplication algorithm.

28.2-2

Let M(n) be the time to multiply two n × n matrices. Show that an
M(n)-time matrix-multiplication algorithm implies an O(M(n))-time
LUP-decomposition algorithm. (The LUP decomposition your method produces
need not be the same as the result produced by the LUP-DECOMPOSITION
procedure.)

28.2-3

Let M(n) be the time to multiply two n × n boolean matrices, and let
T(n) be the time to find the transitive closure of an n × n boolean
matrix. (See Section 23.2.) Show that an M(n)-time boolean
matrix-multiplication algorithm implies an O(M(n) lg n)-time
transitive-closure algorithm, and a T(n)-time transitive-closure
algorithm implies an O(T (n))-time boolean matrix-multiplication
algorithm.

28.2-4

Does the matrix-inversion algorithm based on Theorem 28.2 work when
matrix elements are drawn from the field of integers modulo 2? Explain.

★ 28.2-5

Generalize the matrix-inversion algorithm of Theorem 28.2 to handle
matrices of complex numbers, and prove that your generalization works
correctly. (Hint: Instead of the transpose of A, use the conjugate
transpose A*, which you obtain from the transpose of A by replacing
every entry with its complex conjugate. Instead of symmetric matrices,
consider Hermitian matrices, which are matrices A such that A = A*.)

28.3    Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squares
approximation

Symmetric positive-definite matrices have many interesting and desirable
properties. An n × n matrix A is symmetric positive-definite if A =
A^(T)(A is symmetric) and x^(T)Ax > 0 for all n-vectors x ≠ 0 (A is
positive-definite). Symmetric positive-definite matrices are
nonsingular, and an LU decomposition on them will not divide by 0. This
section proves these and several other important properties of symmetric
positive-definite matrices. We’ll also see an interesting application to
curve fitting by a least-squares approximation.

The first property we prove is perhaps the most basic.

Lemma 28.3

Any positive-definite matrix is nonsingular.

Proof   Suppose that a matrix A is singular. Then by Corollary D.3 on
page 1221, there exists a nonzero vector x such that Ax = 0. Hence,
x^(T)Ax = 0, and A cannot be positive-definite.

▪

The proof that an LU decomposition on a symmetric positive-definite
matrix A won’t divide by 0 is more involved. We begin by proving
properties about certain submatrices of A. Define the kth leading
submatrix of A to be the matrix A_(k) consisting of the intersection of
the first k rows and first k columns of A.

Lemma 28.4

If A is a symmetric positive-definite matrix, then every leading
submatrix of A is symmetric and positive-definite.

Proof   Since A is symmetric, each leading submatrix A_(k) is also
symmetric. We’ll prove that A_(k) is positive-definite by contradiction.
If A_(k) is not positive-definite, then there exists a k-vector x_(k) ≠
0 such that [art]. Let A be n × n, and

[art]

for submatrices B (which is (n−k)×k) and C (which is (n−k)×(n−k)).
Define the n-vector [art], where n − k 0s follow x_(k). Then we have

[art]

which contradicts A being positive-definite.

▪

We now turn to some essential properties of the Schur complement. Let A
be a symmetric positive-definite matrix, and let A_(k) be a leading k ×
k submatrix of A. Partition A once again according to equation (28.16).
Equation (28.10) generalizes to define the Schur complement S of A with
respect to A_(k) as

[art]

(By Lemma 28.4, A_(k) is symmetric and positive-definite, and therefore,
[art] exists by Lemma 28.3, and S is well defined.) The earlier
definition (28.10) of the Schur complement is consistent with equation
(28.17) by letting k = 1.

The next lemma shows that the Schur-complement matrices of symmetric
positive-definite matrices are themselves symmetric and
positive-definite. We used this result in Theorem 28.2, and its
corollary will help prove that LU decomposition works for symmetric
positive-definite matrices.

Lemma 28.5 (Schur complement lemma)

If A is a symmetric positive-definite matrix and A_(k) is a leading k ×
k submatrix of A, then the Schur complement S of A with respect to A_(k)
is symmetric and positive-definite.

Proof   Because A is symmetric, so is the submatrix C. By Exercise D.2-6
on page 1223, the product [art] is symmetric. Since C and [art] are
symmetric, then by Exercise D.1-1 on page 1219, so is S.

It remains to show that S is positive-definite. Consider the partition
of A given in equation (28.16). For any nonzero vector x, we have
x^(T)Ax > 0 by the assumption that A is positive-definite. Let the
subvectors y and z consist of the first k and last n − k elements in x,
respectively, and thus they are compatible with A_(k) and C,
respectively. Because [art] exists, we have

[art]

This last equation, which you can verify by multiplying through, amounts
to “completing the square” of the quadratic form. (See Exercise 28.3-2.)

Since x^(T)Ax > 0 holds for any nonzero x, pick any nonzero z and then
choose [art], which causes the first term in equation (28.18) to vanish,
leaving

[art]

as the value of the expression. For any z ≠ 0, we therefore have z^(T)Sz
= x^(T)Ax > 0, and thus S is positive-definite.

▪

Corollary 28.6

LU decomposition of a symmetric positive-definite matrix never causes a
division by 0.

Proof   Let A be an n × n symmetric positive-definite matrix. In fact,
we’ll prove a stronger result than the statement of the corollary: every
pivot is strictly positive. The first pivot is a₁₁. Let e₁ be the
length-n unit vector ( 1 0 0 ⋯ 0 )^(T), so that [art], which is positive
because e₁ is nonzero and A is positive definite. Since the first step
of LU decomposition produces the Schur complement of A with respect to
A₁ = (a₁₁), Lemma 28.5 implies by induction that all pivots are
positive.

▪

Least-squares approximation

One important application of symmetric positive-definite matrices arises
in fitting curves to given sets of data points. You are given a set of m
data points

(x₁, y₁), (x₂, y₂), … , (x_(m), y_(m)),

where you know that the y_(i) are subject to measurement errors. You
wish to determine a function F(x) such that the approximation errors

[art]

are small for i = 1, 2, … , m. The form of the function F depends on the
problem at hand. Let’s assume that it has the form of a linearly
weighted sum

[art]

where the number n of summands and the specific basis functions f_(j)
are chosen based on knowledge of the problem at hand. A common choice is
f_(j)(x) = x^(j−1), which means that

F(x) = c₁ + c₂x + c₃x² + ⋯ + c_(n)x^(n−1)

is a polynomial of degree n − 1 in x. Thus, if you are given m data
points (x₁, y₁), (x₂, y₂), … , (x_(m), y_(m)), you need to calculate n
coefficients c₁, c₂, … , c_(n) that minimize the approximation errors
η₁, η₂, … , η_(m).

By choosing n = m, you can calculate each y_(i) exactly in equation
(28.19). Such a high-degree polynomial F “fits the noise” as well as the
data, however, and generally gives poor results when used to predict y
for previously unseen values of x. It is usually better to choose n
significantly smaller than m and hope that by choosing the coefficients
c_(j) well, you can obtain a function F that finds the significant
patterns in the data points without paying undue attention to the noise.
Some theoretical principles exist for choosing n, but they are beyond
the scope of this text. In any case, once you choose a value of n that
is less than m, you end up with an overdetermined set of equations whose
solution you wish to approximate. Let’s see how to do so.

Let

[art]

denote the matrix of values of the basis functions at the given points,
that is, a_(ij) = f_(j)(x_(i)). Let c = (c_(k)) denote the desired
n-vector of coefficients. Then,

[art]

is the m-vector of “predicted values” for y. Thus,

η = Ac − y

is the m-vector of approximation errors.

To minimize approximation errors, let’s minimize the norm of the error
vector η, which gives a least-squares solution, since

[art]

Because

[art]

to minimize ∥η∥, differentiate ∥η∥² with respect to each c_(k) and then
set the result to 0:

[art]

The n equations (28.20) for k = 1, 2, … , n are equivalent to the single
matrix equation

(Ac − y)^(T) A = 0

or, equivalently (using Exercise D.1-2 on page 1219), to

A^(T)(Ac − y) = 0,

which implies

[art]

In statistics, equation (28.21) is called the normal equation. The
matrix A^(T)A is symmetric by Exercise D.1-2, and if A has full column
rank, then by Theorem D.6 on page 1222, A^(T)A is positive-definite as
well. Hence, (A^(T)A)⁻¹ exists, and the solution to equation (28.21) is

[art]

where the matrix A⁺ = ((A^(T)A)⁻¹A^(T)) is the pseudoinverse of the
matrix A. The pseudoinverse naturally generalizes the notion of a matrix
inverse to the case in which A is not square. (Compare equation (28.22)
as the approximate solution to Ac = y with the solution A⁻¹b as the
exact solution to Ax = b.)

As an example of producing a least-squares fit, suppose that you have
five data points

  ---------- --- ----------
  (x₁, y₁)   =   (−1, 2),
  (x₂, y₂)   =   (1, 1),
  (x₃, y₃)   =   (2, 1),
  (x₄, y₄)   =   (3, 0),
  (x₅, y₅)   =   (5, 3),
  ---------- --- ----------

shown as orange dots in Figure 28.3, and you want to fit these points
with a quadratic polynomial

F(x) = c₁ + c₂x + c₃x².

Start with the matrix of basis-function values

[art]

whose pseudoinverse is

[art]

Figure 28.3 The least-squares fit of a quadratic polynomial to the set
of five data points {(−1, 2), (1, 1), (2, 1), (3, 0), (5, 3)}. The
orange dots are the data points, and the blue dots are their estimated
values predicted by the polynomial F(x) = 1.2 − 0.757x + 0.214x², the
quadratic polynomial that minimizes the sum of the squared errors,
plotted in blue. Each orange line shows the error for one data point.

[art]

Multiplying y by A⁺ gives the coefficient vector

[art]

which corresponds to the quadratic polynomial

F(x) = 1.200 − 0.757x + 0.214x²

as the closest-fitting quadratic to the given data, in a least-squares
sense.

As a practical matter, you would typically solve the normal equation
(28.21) by multiplying y by A^(T) and then finding an LU decomposition
of A^(T)A. If A has full rank, the matrix A^(T)A is guaranteed to be
nonsingular, because it is symmetric and positive-definite. (See
Exercise D.1-2 and Theorem D.6.)

[art]

Figure 28.4 A least-squares fit of a curve of the form

c₁ + c₂x + c₃x² + c₄ sin(2πx) + c₅ cos(2πx)

for the carbon-dioxide concentrations measured in Mauna Loa, Hawaii from
1990¹ to 2019, where x is the number of years elapsed since 1990. This
curve is the famous “Keeling curve,” illustrating curve-fitting to
nonpolynomial formulas. The sine and cosine terms allow modeling of
seasonal variations in CO₂ concentrations. The red curve shows the
measured CO₂ concentrations. The best fit, shown in black, has the form

352.83 + 1.39x + 0.02x² + 2.83 sin(2πx) − 0.94 cos(2πx).

We close this section with an example in Figure 28.4, illustrating that
a curve can also fit a nonpolynomial function. The curve confirms one
aspect of climate change: that carbon dioxide (CO₂) concentrations have
steadily increased over a period of 29 years. Linear and quadratic terms
model the annual increase, and sine and cosine terms model seasonal
variations.

Exercises

28.3-1

Prove that every diagonal element of a symmetric positive-definite
matrix is positive.

28.3-2

Let [art] be a 2 × 2 symmetric positive-definite matrix. Prove that its
determinant ac − b² is positive by “completing the square” in a manner
similar to that used in the proof of Lemma 28.5.

28.3-3

Prove that the maximum element in a symmetric positive-definite matrix
lies on the diagonal.

28.3-4

Prove that the determinant of each leading submatrix of a symmetric
positive-definite matrix is positive.

28.3-5

Let A_(k) denote the kth leading submatrix of a symmetric
positive-definite matrix A. Prove that det(A_(k))/det(A_(k−1)) is the
kth pivot during LU decomposition, where, by convention, det(A₀) = 1.

28.3-6

Find the function of the form

F(x) = c₁ + c₂x lg x + c₃e^(x)

that is the best least-squares fit to the data points

(1, 1), (2, 1), (3, 3), (4, 8).

28.3-7

Show that the pseudoinverse A⁺ satisfies the following four equations:

  ----------- --- ------
  AA⁺A        =   A,
  A⁺AA⁺       =   A⁺,
  (AA⁺)^(T)   =   AA⁺,
  (A⁺A)^(T)   =   A⁺A.
  ----------- --- ------

Problems

28-1     Tridiagonal systems of linear equations

Consider the tridiagonal matrix

[art]

a. Find an LU decomposition of A.

b. Solve the equation Ax = ( 1 1 1 1 1 )^(T) by using forward and back
substitution.

c. Find the inverse of A.

d. Show how to solve the equation Ax = b for any n × n symmetric
positive-definite, tridiagonal matrix A and any n-vector b in O(n) time
by performing an LU decomposition. Argue that any method based on
forming A⁻¹ is asymptotically more expensive in the worst case.

e. Show how to solve the equation Ax = b for any n × n nonsingular,
tridiagonal matrix A and any n-vector b in O(n) time by performing an
LUP decomposition.

28-2     Splines

A practical method for interpolating a set of points with a curve is to
use cubic splines. You are given a set {(x_(i), y_(i)) : i = 0, 1, … ,
n} of n + 1 point-value pairs, where x₀ < x₁ < ⋯ < x_(n). Your goal is
to fit a piecewise-cubic curve (spline) f(x) to the points. That is, the
curve f(x) is made up of n cubic polynomials f_(i)(x) = a_(i) + b_(i)x +
c_(i)x² + d_(i)x³ for i = 0, 1, … , n − 1, where if x falls in the range
x_(i) ≤ x ≤ x_(i+1), then the value of the curve is given by f(x) =
f_(i)(x − x_(i)). The points x_(i) at which the cubic polynomials are
“pasted” together are called knots. For simplicity, assume that x_(i) =
i for i = 0, 1, … , n.

To ensure continuity of f(x), require that

  ------------ --- ---------- --- ---------
  f(x_(i))     =   f_(i)(0)   =   y_(i),
  f(x_(i+1))   =   f_(i)(1)   =   y_(i+1)
  ------------ --- ---------- --- ---------

for i = 0, 1, … , n − 1. To ensure that f(x) is sufficiently smooth,
also require the first derivative to be continuous at each knot:

[art]

for i = 0, 1, … , n − 2.

a. Suppose that for i = 0, 1, … , n, in addition to the point-value
pairs {(x_(i), y_(i))}, you are also given the first derivative D_(i) =
f′(x_(i)) at each knot. Express each coefficient a_(i), b_(i), c_(i),
and d_(i) in terms of the values y_(i), y_(i+1), D_(i), and D_(i+1).
(Remember that x_(i) = i.) How quickly can you compute the 4n
coefficients from the point-value pairs and first derivatives?

The question remains of how to choose the first derivatives of f(x) at
the knots. One method is to require the second derivatives to be
continuous at the knots:

[art]

for i = 0, 1, … , n−2. At the first and last knots, assume that [art]
and [art]. These assumptions make f(x) a natural cubic spline.

b. Use the continuity constraints on the second derivative to show that
for i = 1, 2, … , n − 1,

[art]

c. Show that

[art]

d. Rewrite equations (28.23)–(28.25) as a matrix equation involving the
vector D = (D₀ D₁ D₂ ⋯ D_(n))^(T) of unknowns. What attributes does the
matrix in your equation have?

e. Argue that a natural cubic spline can interpolate a set of n + 1
point-value pairs in O(n) time (see Problem 28-1).

f. Show how to determine a natural cubic spline that interpolates a set
of n + 1 points (x_(i), y_(i)) satisfying x₀ < x₁ < ⋯ < x_(n), even when
x_(i) is not necessarily equal to i. What matrix equation must your
method solve, and how quickly does your algorithm run?

Chapter notes

Many excellent texts describe numerical and scientific computation in
much greater detail than we have room for here. The following are
especially readable: George and Liu [180], Golub and Van Loan [192],
Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery [365, 366], and Strang [422,
423].

Golub and Van Loan [192] discuss numerical stability. They show why
det(A) is not necessarily a good indicator of the stability of a matrix
A, proposing instead to use ∥A∥_(∞) ∥A⁻¹∥_(∞), where [art]. They also
address the question of how to compute this value without actually
computing A⁻¹.

Gaussian elimination, upon which the LU and LUP decompositions are
based, was the first systematic method for solving linear systems of
equations. It was also one of the earliest numerical algorithms.
Although it was known earlier, its discovery is commonly attributed to
C. F. Gauss (1777–1855). In his famous paper [424], Strassen showed that
an n×n matrix can be inverted in O(n^(lg 7)) time. Winograd [460]
originally proved that matrix multiplication is no harder than matrix
inversion, and the converse is due to Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5].

Another important matrix decomposition is the singular value
decomposition, or SVD. The SVD factors an m × n matrix A into [art],
where Σ is an m×n matrix with nonzero values only on the diagonal, Q₁ is
m×m with mutually orthonormal columns, and Q₂ is n × n, also with
mutually orthonormal columns. Two vectors are orthonormal if their inner
product is 0 and each vector has a norm of 1. The books by Strang [422,
423] and Golub and Van Loan [192] contain good treatments of the SVD.

Strang [423] has an excellent presentation of symmetric
positive-definite matrices and of linear algebra in general.

¹ The year in which Introduction to Algorithms was first published.

29        Linear Programming

Many problems take the form of maximizing or minimizing an objective,
given limited resources and competing constraints. If you can specify
the objective as a linear function of certain variables, and if you can
specify the constraints on resources as equalities or inequalities on
those variables, then you have a linear-programming problem. Linear
programs arise in a variety of practical applications. We begin by
studying an application in electoral politics.

A political problem

Suppose that you are a politician trying to win an election. Your
district has three different types of areas—urban, suburban, and rural.
These areas have, respectively, 100,000, 200,000, and 50,000 registered
voters. Although not all the registered voters actually go to the polls,
you decide that to govern effectively, you would like at least half the
registered voters in each of the three regions to vote for you. You are
honorable and would never consider supporting policies you don’t believe
in. You realize, however, that certain issues may be more effective in
winning votes in certain places. Your primary issues are preparing for a
zombie apocalypse, equipping sharks with lasers, building highways for
flying cars, and allowing dolphins to vote.

According to your campaign staff’s research, you can estimate how many
votes you win or lose from each population segment by spending $1,000 on
advertising on each issue. This information appears in the table of
Figure 29.1. In this table, each entry indicates the number of thousands
of either urban, suburban, or rural voters who would be won over by
spending $1,000 on advertising in support of a particular issue.
Negative entries denote votes that would be lost. Your task is to figure
out the minimum amount of money that you need to spend in order to win
50,000 urban votes, 100,000 suburban votes, and 25,000 rural votes.

You could, by trial and error, devise a strategy that wins the required
number of votes, but the strategy you come up with might not be the
least expensive one. For example, you could devote $20,000 of
advertising to preparing for a zombie apocalypse, $0 to equipping sharks
with lasers, $4,000 to building highways for flying cars, and $9,000 to
allowing dolphins to vote. In this case, you would win (20 · −2) + (0 ·
8) + (4 · 0) + (9 · 10) = 50 thousand urban votes, (20 · 5) + (0 · 2) +
(4 · 0) + (9 · 0) = 100 thousand suburban votes, and (20 · 3) + (0 ·
−5) + (4 · 10) + (9 · −2) = 82 thousand rural votes. You would win the
exact number of votes desired in the urban and suburban areas and more
than enough votes in the rural area. (In fact, according to your model,
in the rural area you would receive more votes than there are voters.)
In order to garner these votes, you would have paid for 20 + 0 + 4 + 9 =
33 thousand dollars of advertising.

[art]

Figure 29.1 The effects of policies on voters. Each entry describes the
number of thousands of urban, suburban, or rural voters who could be won
over by spending $1,000 on advertising support of a policy on a
particular issue. Negative entries denote votes that would be lost.

It’s natural to wonder whether this strategy is the best possible. That
is, can you achieve your goals while spending less on advertising?
Additional trial and error might help you to answer this question, but a
better approach is to formulate (or model) this question mathematically.

The first step is to decide what decisions you have to make and to
introduce variables that capture these decisions. Since you have four
decisions, you introduce four decision variables:

- x₁ is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on
  preparing for a zombie apocalypse,
- x₂ is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on
  equipping sharks with lasers,
- x₃ is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on
  building highways for flying cars, and
- x₄ is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on
  allowing dolphins to vote.

You then think about constraints, which are limits, or restrictions, on
the values that the decision variables can take. You can write the
requirement that you win at least 50,000 urban votes as

[art]

Similarly, you can write the requirements that you win at least 100,000
suburban votes and 25,000 rural votes as

[art]

and

[art]

Any setting of the variables x₁, x₂, x₃, x₄ that satisfies inequalities
(29.1)–(29.3) yields a strategy that wins a sufficient number of each
type of vote.

Finally, you think about your objective, which is the quantity that you
wish to either minimize or maximize. In order to keep costs as small as
possible, you would like to minimize the amount spent on advertising.
That is, you want to minimize the expression

[art]

Although negative advertising often occurs in political campaigns, there
is no such thing as negative-cost advertising. Consequently, you require
that

[art]

Combining inequalities (29.1)–(29.3) and (29.5) with the objective of
minimizing (29.4) produces what is known as a “linear program.” We can
format this problem tabularly as

[art]

subject to

[art]

The solution to this linear program yields your optimal strategy.

The remainder of this chapter covers how to formulate linear programs
and is an introduction to modeling in general. Modeling refers to the
general process of converting a problem into a mathematical form
amenable to solution by an algorithm. Section 29.1 discusses briefly the
algorithmic aspects of linear programming, although it does not include
the details of a linear-programming algorithm. Throughout this book, we
have seen ways to model problems, such as by shortest paths and
connectivity in a graph. When modeling a problem as a linear program,
you go through the steps used in this political example—identifying the
decision variables, specifying the constraints, and formulating the
objective function. In order to model a problem as a linear program, the
constraints and objectives must be linear. In Section 29.2, we will see
several other examples of modeling via linear programs. Section 29.3
discusses duality, an important concept in linear programming and other
optimization algorithms.

29.1    Linear programming formulations and algorithms

Linear programs take a particular form, which we will examine in this
section. Multiple algorithms have been developed to solve linear
programs. Some run in polynomial time, some do not, but they are all too
complicated to show here. Instead, we will give an example that
demonstrates some ideas behind the simplex algorithm, which is currently
the most commonly deployed solution method.

General linear programs

In the general linear-programming problem, we wish to optimize a linear
function subject to a set of linear inequalities. Given a set of real
numbers a₁, a₂, … , a_(n) and a set of variables x₁, x₂, … , x_(n), we
define a linear function f on those variables by

[art]

If b is a real number and f is a linear function, then the equation

f(x₁, x₂, … , x_(n)) = b

is a linear equality and the inequalities

f(x₁, x₂, … , x_(n)) ≤ b and f(x₁, x₂, … , x_(n)) ≥ b

are linear inequalities. We use the general term linear constraints to
denote either linear equalities or linear inequalities. Linear
programming does not allow strict inequalities. Formally, a
linear-programming problem is the problem of either minimizing or
maximizing a linear function subject to a finite set of linear
constraints. If minimizing, we call the linear program a minimization
linear program, and if maximizing, we call the linear program a
maximization linear program.

In order to discuss linear-programming algorithms and properties, it
will be helpful to use a standard notation for the input. By convention,
a maximization linear program takes as input n real numbers c₁, c₂, … ,
c_(n); m real numbers b₁, b₂, … , b_(m); and mn real numbers a_(ij) for
i = 1, 2, … , m and j = 1, 2, … , n.

The goal is to find n real numbers x₁, x₂, … , x_(n) that

[art]

subject to

[art]

We call expression (29.11) the objective function and the n + m
inequalities in lines (29.12) and (29.13) the constraints. The n
constraints in line (29.13) are the nonnegativity constraints. It can
sometimes be more convenient to express a linear program in a more
compact form. If we create an m × n matrix A = (a_(ij)), an m-vector b =
(b_(i)), an n-vector c = (c_(j)), and an n-vector x = (x_(j)), then we
can rewrite the linear program defined in (29.11)–(29.13) as

[art]

subject to

[art]

In line (29.14), c^(T)x is the inner product of two n-vectors. In
inequality (29.15), Ax is the m-vector that is the product of an m × n
matrix and an n-vector, and in inequality (29.16), x ≥ 0 means that each
entry of the vector x must be nonnegative. We call this representation
the standard form for a linear program, and we adopt the convention that
A, b, and c always have the dimensions given above.

The standard form above may not naturally correspond to real-life
situations you are trying to model. For example, you might have equality
constraints or variables that can take on negative values. Exercises
29.1-6 and 29.1-7 ask you to show how to convert any linear program into
this standard form.

We now introduce terminology to describe solutions to linear programs.
We denote a particular setting of the values in a variable, say x, by
putting a bar over the variable name: x. If x satisfies all the
constraints, then it is a feasible solution, but if it fails to satisfy
at least one constraint, then it is an infeasible solution. We say that
a solution x has objective value c^(T)x. A feasible solution x whose
objective value is maximum over all feasible solutions is an optimal
solution, and we call its objective value c^(T)x the optimal objective
value. If a linear program has no feasible solutions, we say that the
linear program is infeasible, and otherwise, it is feasible. The set of
points that satisfy all the constraints is the feasible region. If a
linear program has some feasible solutions but does not have a finite
optimal objective value, then the feasible region is unbounded and so is
the linear program. Exercise 29.1-5 asks you to show that a linear
program can have a finite optimal objective value even if the feasible
region is unbounded.

One of the reasons for the power and popularity of linear programming is
that linear programs can, in general, be solved efficiently. There are
two classes of algorithms, known as ellipsoid algorithms and
interior-point algorithms, that solve linear programs in polynomial
time. In addition, the simplex algorithm is widely used. Although it
does not run in polynomial time in the worst case, it tends to perform
well in practice.

We will not give a detailed algorithm for linear programming, but will
discuss a few important ideas. First, we will give an example of using a
geometric procedure to solve a two-variable linear program. Although
this example does not immediately generalize to an efficient algorithm
for larger problems, it introduces some important concepts for linear
programming and for optimization in general.

A two-variable linear program

Let us first consider the following linear program with two variables:

[art]

subject to

[art]

Figure 29.2(a) graphs the constraints in the (x₁, x₂)-Cartesian
coordinate system. The feasible region in the two-dimensional space
(highlighted in blue in the figure) is convex.¹ Conceptually, you could
evaluate the objective function x₁ + x₂ at each point in the feasible
region, and then identify a point that has the maximum objective value
as an optimal solution. For this example (and for most linear programs),
however, the feasible region contains an infinite number of points, and
so to solve this linear program, you need an efficient way to find a
point that achieves the maximum objective value without explicitly
evaluating the objective function at every point in the feasible region.

In two dimensions, you can optimize via a graphical procedure. The set
of points for which x₁ + x₂ = z, for any z, is a line with a slope of
−1. Plotting x₁ + x₂ = 0 produces the line with slope −1 through the
origin, as in Figure 29.2(b). The intersection of this line and the
feasible region is the set of feasible solutions that have an objective
value of 0. In this case, that intersection of the line with the
feasible region is the single point (0, 0). More generally, for any
value z, the intersection of the line x₁ + x₂ = z and the feasible
region is the set of feasible solutions that have objective value z.
Figure 29.2(b) shows the lines x₁ + x₂ = 0, x₁ + x₂ = 4, and x₁ + x₂ =
8. Because the feasible region in Figure 29.2 is bounded, there must be
some maximum value z for which the intersection of the line x₁ + x₂ = z
and the feasible region is nonempty. Any point in the feasible region
that maximizes x₁ + x₂ is an optimal solution to the linear program,
which in this case is the vertex of the feasible region at x₁ = 2 and x₂
= 6, with objective value 8.

[art]

Figure 29.2 (a) The linear program given in (29.18)–(29.21). Each
constraint is represented by a line and a direction. The intersection of
the constraints, which is the feasible region, is highlighted in blue.
(b) The red lines show, respectively, the points for which the objective
value is 0, 4, and 8. The optimal solution to the linear program is x₁ =
2 and x₂ = 6 with objective value 8.

It is no accident that an optimal solution to the linear program occurs
at a vertex of the feasible region. The maximum value of z for which the
line x₁ + x₂ = z intersects the feasible region must be on the boundary
of the feasible region, and thus the intersection of this line with the
boundary of the feasible region is either a single vertex or a line
segment. If the intersection is a single vertex, then there is just one
optimal solution, and it is that vertex. If the intersection is a line
segment, every point on that line segment must have the same objective
value. In particular, both endpoints of the line segment are optimal
solutions. Since each endpoint of a line segment is a vertex, there is
an optimal solution at a vertex in this case as well.

Although you cannot easily graph linear programs with more than two
variables, the same intuition holds. If you have three variables, then
each constraint corresponds to a half-space in three-dimensional space.
The intersection of these half-spaces forms the feasible region. The set
of points for which the objective function obtains a given value z is
now a plane (assuming no degenerate conditions). If all coefficients of
the objective function are nonnegative, and if the origin is a feasible
solution to the linear program, then as you move this plane away from
the origin, in a direction normal to the objective function, you find
points of increasing objective value. (If the origin is not feasible or
if some coefficients in the objective function are negative, the
intuitive picture becomes slightly more complicated.) As in two
dimensions, because the feasible region is convex, the set of points
that achieve the optimal objective value must include a vertex of the
feasible region. Similarly, if you have n variables, each constraint
defines a half-space in n-dimensional space. We call the feasible region
formed by the intersection of these half-spaces a simplex. The objective
function is now a hyperplane and, because of convexity, an optimal
solution still occurs at a vertex of the simplex. Any algorithm for
linear programming must also identify linear programs that have no
solutions, as well as linear programs that have no finite optimal
solution.

The simplex algorithm takes as input a linear program and returns an
optimal solution. It starts at some vertex of the simplex and performs a
sequence of iterations. In each iteration, it moves along an edge of the
simplex from a current vertex to a neighboring vertex whose objective
value is no smaller than that of the current vertex (and usually is
larger.) The simplex algorithm terminates when it reaches a local
maximum, which is a vertex from which all neighboring vertices have a
smaller objective value. Because the feasible region is convex and the
objective function is linear, this local optimum is actually a global
optimum. In Section 29.3, we’ll see an important concept called
“duality,” which we’ll use to prove that the solution returned by the
simplex algorithm is indeed optimal.

The simplex algorithm, when implemented carefully, often solves general
linear programs quickly in practice. With some carefully contrived
inputs, however, the simplex algorithm can require exponential time. The
first polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming was the ellipsoid
algorithm, which runs slowly in practice. A second class of
polynomial-time algorithms are known as interior-point methods. In
contrast to the simplex algorithm, which moves along the exterior of the
feasible region and maintains a feasible solution that is a vertex of
the simplex at each iteration, these algorithms move through the
interior of the feasible region. The intermediate solutions, while
feasible, are not necessarily vertices of the simplex, but the final
solution is a vertex. For large inputs, interior-point algorithms can
run as fast as, and sometimes faster than, the simplex algorithm. The
chapter notes point you to more information about these algorithms.

If you add to a linear program the additional requirement that all
variables take on integer values, you have an integer linear program.
Exercise 34.5-3 on page 1098 asks you to show that just finding a
feasible solution to this problem is NP-hard. Since no polynomial-time
algorithms are known for any NP-hard problems, there is no known
polynomial-time algorithm for integer linear programming. In contrast, a
general linear-programming problem can be solved in polynomial time.

Exercises

29.1-1

Consider the linear program

minimize −2x₁ + 3x₂

subject to

  ---------- --- ----
  x₁ + x₂    =   7
  x₁ − 2x₂   ≤   4
  x₁         ≥   0.
  ---------- --- ----

Give three feasible solutions to this linear program. What is the
objective value of each one?

29.1-2

Consider the following linear program, which has a nonpositivity
constraint:

minimize 2x₁ + 7x₂ + x₃

subject to

  ---------- ------ --- ----
  x₁         − x₃   =   7
  3x₁ + x₂          ≥   24
             x₂     ≥   0
             x₃     ≤   0.
  ---------- ------ --- ----

Give three feasible solutions to this linear program. What is the
objective value of each one?

29.1-3

Show that the following linear program is infeasible:

maximize 3x₁ − 2x₂

subject to

  ------------ --- -----
  x₁ + x₂      ≤   2
  −2x₁ − 2x₂   ≤   −10
  x₁, x₂       ≥   0.
  ------------ --- -----

29.1-4

Show that the following linear program is unbounded:

maximize x₁ − x₂

subject to

  ----------- --- ----
  −2x₁ + x₂   ≤   −1
  −x₁ − 2x₂   ≤   −2
  x₁, x₂      ≥   0.
  ----------- --- ----

29.1-5

Give an example of a linear program for which the feasible region is not
bounded, but the optimal objective value is finite.

29.1-6

Sometimes, in a linear program, you need to convert constraints from one
form to another.

a. Show how to convert an equality constraint into an equivalent set of
inequalities. That is, given a constraint [art], give a set of
inequalities that will be satisfied if and only if [art],

b. Show how to convert an inequality constraint [art] into an equality
constraint and a nonnegativity constraint. You will need to introduce an
additional variable s, and use the constraint that s ≥ 0.

29.1-7

Explain how to convert a minimization linear program to an equivalent
maximization linear program, and argue that your new linear program is
equivalent to the original one.

29.1-8

In the political problem at the beginning of this chapter, there are
feasible solutions that correspond to winning more voters than there
actually are in the district. For example, you can set x₂ to 200, x₃ to
200, and x₁ = x₄ = 0. That solution is feasible, yet it seems to say
that you will win 400,000 suburban voters, even though there are only
200,000 actual suburban voters. What constraints can you add to the
linear program to ensure that you never seem to win more voters than
there actually are? Even if you don’t add these constraints, argue that
the optimal solution to this linear program can never win more voters
than there actually are in the district.

29.2    Formulating problems as linear programs

Linear programming has many applications. Any textbook on operations
research is filled with examples of linear programming, and linear
programming has become a standard tool taught to students in most
business schools. The election scenario is one typical example. Here are
two more examples:

- An airline wishes to schedule its flight crews. The Federal Aviation
  Administration imposes several constraints, such as limiting the
  number of consecutive hours that each crew member can work and
  insisting that a particular crew work only on one model of aircraft
  during each month. The airline wants to schedule crews on all of its
  flights using as few crew members as possible.
- An oil company wants to decide where to drill for oil. Siting a drill
  at a particular location has an associated cost and, based on
  geological surveys, an expected payoff of some number of barrels of
  oil. The company has a limited budget for locating new drills and
  wants to maximize the amount of oil it expects to find, given this
  budget.

Linear programs also model and solve graph and combinatorial problems,
such as those appearing in this book. We have already seen a special
case of linear programming used to solve systems of difference
constraints in Section 22.4. In this section, we’ll study how to
formulate several graph and network-flow problems as linear programs.
Section 35.4 uses linear programming as a tool to find an approximate
solution to another graph problem.

Perhaps the most important aspect of linear programming is to be able to
recognize when you can formulate a problem as a linear program. Once you
cast a problem as a polynomial-sized linear program, you can solve it in
polynomial time by the ellipsoid algorithm or interior-point methods.
Several linear-programming software packages can solve problems
efficiently, so that once the problem is in the form of a linear
program, such a package can solve it.

We’ll look at several concrete examples of linear-programming problems.
We start with two problems that we have already studied: the
single-source shortest-paths problem from Chapter 22 and the
maximum-flow problem from Chapter 24. We then describe the
minimum-cost-flow problem. (Although the minimum-cost-flow problem has a
polynomial-time algorithm that is not based on linear programming, we
won’t describe the algorithm.) Finally, we describe the
multicommodity-flow problem, for which the only known polynomial-time
algorithm is based on linear programming.

When we solved graph problems in Part VI, we used attribute notation,
such as v.d and (u, v).f. Linear programs typically use subscripted
variables rather than objects with attached attributes, however.
Therefore, when we express variables in linear programs, we indicate
vertices and edges through subscripts. For example, we denote the
shortest-path weight for vertex v not by v.d but by d_(v), and we denote
the flow from vertex u to vertex v not by (u, v).f but by f_(uv). For
quantities that are given as inputs to problems, such as edge weights or
capacities, we continue to use notations such as w(u, v) and c(u, v).

Shortest paths

We can formulate the single-source shortest-paths problem as a linear
program. We’ll focus on how to formulate the single-pair shortest-path
problem, leaving the extension to the more general single-source
shortest-paths problem as Exercise 29.2-2.

In the single-pair shortest-path problem, the input is a weighted,
directed graph G = (V, E), with weight function w : E → ℝ mapping edges
to real-valued weights, a source vertex s, and destination vertex t. The
goal is to compute the value d_(t), which is the weight of a shortest
path from s to t. To express this problem as a linear program, you need
to determine a set of variables and constraints that define when you
have a shortest path from s to t. The triangle inequality (Lemma 22.10
on page 633) gives d_(v) ≤ d_(u) + w(u, v) for each edge (u, v) ∈ E. The
source vertex initially receives a value d_(s) = 0, which never changes.
Thus the following linear program expresses the shortest-path weight
from s to t:

[art]

subject to

[art]

You might be surprised that this linear program maximizes an objective
function when it is supposed to compute shortest paths. Minimizing the
objective function would be a mistake, because when all the edge weights
are nonnegative, setting d_(v) = 0 for all v ∈ V (recall that a bar over
a variable name denotes a specific setting of the variable’s value)
would yield an optimal solution to the linear program without solving
the shortest-paths problem. Maximizing is the right thing to do because
an optimal solution to the shortest-paths problem sets each d_(v) to min
{d_(u) + w(u, v) : u ∈ V and (u, v) ∈ E}, so that d_(v) is the largest
value that is less than or equal to all of the values in the set
{d_(u) + w(u, v). Therefore, it makes sense to maximize d_(v) for all
vertices v on a shortest path from s to t subject to these constraints,
and maximizing d_(t) achieves this goal.

This linear program has |V| variables d_(v), one for each vertex v ∈ V.
It also has |E| + 1 constraints: one for each edge, plus the additional
constraint that the source vertex’s shortest-path weight always has the
value 0.

Maximum flow

Next, let’s express the maximum-flow problem as a linear program. Recall
that the input is a directed graph G = (V, E) in which each edge (u, v)
∈ E has a nonnegative capacity c(u, v) ≥ 0, and two distinguished
vertices: a source s and a sink t. As defined in Section 24.1, a flow is
a nonnegative real-valued function f : V × V → ℝ that satisfies the
capacity constraint and flow conservation. A maximum flow is a flow that
satisfies these constraints and maximizes the flow value, which is the
total flow coming out of the source minus the total flow into the
source. A flow, therefore, satisfies linear constraints, and the value
of a flow is a linear function. Recalling also that we assume that c(u,
v) = 0 if (u, v) ∉ E and that there are no antiparallel edges, the
maximum-flow problem can be expressed as a linear program:

[art]

subject to

[art]

This linear program has |V|² variables, corresponding to the flow
between each pair of vertices, and it has 2 |V|² + |V| − 2 constraints.

It is usually more efficient to solve a smaller-sized linear program.
The linear program in (29.25)–(29.28) has, for ease of notation, a flow
and capacity of 0 for each pair of vertices u, v with (u, v) ∉ E. It is
more efficient to rewrite the linear program so that it has O(V + E)
constraints. Exercise 29.2-4 asks you to do so.

Minimum-cost flow

In this section, we have used linear programming to solve problems for
which we already knew efficient algorithms. In fact, an efficient
algorithm designed specifically for a problem, such as Dijkstra’s
algorithm for the single-source shortest-paths problem, will often be
more efficient than linear programming, both in theory and in practice.

The real power of linear programming comes from the ability to solve new
problems. Recall the problem faced by the politician in the beginning of
this chapter. The problem of obtaining a sufficient number of votes,
while not spending too much money, is not solved by any of the
algorithms that we have studied in this book, yet it can be solved by
linear programming. Books abound with such real-world problems that
linear programming can solve. Linear programming is also particularly
useful for solving variants of problems for which we may not already
know of an efficient algorithm.

[art]

Figure 29.3 (a) An example of a minimum-cost-flow problem. Capacities
are denoted by c and costs by a. Vertex s is the source, and vertex t is
the sink. The goal is to send 4 units of flow from s to t. (b) A
solution to the minimum-cost flow problem in which 4 units of flow are
sent from s to t. For each edge, the flow and capacity are written as
flow/capacity.

Consider, for example, the following generalization of the maximum-flow
problem. Suppose that, in addition to a capacity c(u, v) for each edge
(u, v), you are given a real-valued cost a(u, v). As in the maximum-flow
problem, assume that c(u, v) = 0 if (u, v) ∉ E and that there are no
antiparallel edges. If you send f_(uv) units of flow over edge (u, v),
you incur a cost of a(u, v) · f_(uv). You are also given a flow demand
d. You wish to send d units of flow from s to t while minimizing the
total cost ∑_((u,v)∈E) a(u, v) · f_(uv) incurred by the flow. This
problem is known as the minimum-cost-flow problem.

Figure 29.3(a) shows an example of the minimum-cost-flow problem, with a
goal of sending 4 units of flow from s to t while incurring the minimum
total cost. Any particular legal flow, that is, a function f satisfying
constraints (29.26)–(29.28), incurs a total cost of ∑_((u,v)∈E) a(u, v)
· f_(uv). What is the particular 4-unit flow that minimizes this cost?
Figure 29.3(b) shows an optimal solution, with total cost
∑_((u,v)∈E) a(u, v) · f_(uv) = (2 · 2) + (5 · 2) + (3 · 1) + (7 · 1) +
(1 · 3) = 27.

There are polynomial-time algorithms specifically designed for the
minimum-cost-flow problem, but they are beyond the scope of this book.
The minimum-cost-flow problem can be expressed as a linear program,
however. The linear program looks similar to the one for the
maximum-flow problem with the additional constraint that the value of
the flow must be exactly d units, and with the new objective function of
minimizing the cost:

[art]

subject to

[art]

Multicommodity flow

As a final example, let’s consider another flow problem. Suppose that
the Lucky Puck company from Section 24.1 decides to diversify its
product line and ship not only hockey pucks, but also hockey sticks and
hockey helmets. Each piece of equipment is manufactured in its own
factory, has its own warehouse, and must be shipped, each day, from
factory to warehouse. The sticks are manufactured in Vancouver and are
needed in Saskatoon, and the helmets are manufactured in Edmonton and
must be shipped to Regina. The capacity of the shipping network does not
change, however, and the different items, or commodities, must share the
same network.

This example is an instance of a multicommodity-flow problem. The input
to this problem is once again a directed graph G = (V, E) in which each
edge (u, v) ∈ E has a nonnegative capacity c(u, v) ≥ 0. As in the
maximum-flow problem, implicitly assume that c(u, v) = 0 for (u, v) ∉ E
and that the graph has no antiparallel edges. In addition, there are k
different commodities, K₁, K₂, … , K_(k), with commodity i specified by
the triple K_(i) = (s_(i), t_(i), d_(i)). Here, vertex s_(i) is the
source of commodity i, vertex t_(i) is the sink of commodity i, and
d_(i) is the demand for commodity i, which is the desired flow value for
the commodity from s_(i) to t_(i). We define a flow for commodity i,
denoted by f_(i), (so that f_(iuv) is the flow of commodity i from
vertex u to vertex v) to be a real-valued function that satisfies the
flow-conservation and capacity constraints. We define f_(uv), the
aggregate flow, to be the sum of the various commodity flows, so that
[art]. The aggregate flow on edge (u, v) must be no more than the
capacity of edge (u, v). This problem has no objective function: the
question is to determine whether such a flow exists. Thus the linear
program for this problem has a “null” objective function:

[art]

The only known polynomial-time algorithm for this problem expresses it
as a linear program and then solves it with a polynomial-time
linear-programming algorithm.

Exercises

29.2-1

Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the
shortest path from vertex s to vertex x in Figure 22.2(a) on page 609.

29.2-2

Given a graph G, write a linear program for the single-source
shortest-paths problem. The solution should have the property that d_(v)
is the shortest-path weight from the source vertex s to v for each
vertex v ∈ V.

29.2-3

Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the
maximum flow in Figure 24.1(a).

29.2-4

Rewrite the linear program for maximum flow (29.25)–(29.28) so that it
uses only O(V + E) constraints.

29.2-5

Write a linear program that, given a bipartite graph G = (V, E), solves
the maximum-bipartite-matching problem.

29.2-6

There can be more than one way to model a particular problem as a linear
program. This exercise gives an alternative formulation for the
maximum-flow problem. Let P = {P₁, P₂, … , P_(p)} be the set of all
possible directed simple paths from source s  to sink t. Using decision
variables x₁, … , x_(p), where x_(i) is the amount of flow on path i,
formulate a linear program for the maximum-flow problem. What is an
upper bound on p, the number of directed simple paths from s to t?

29.2-7

In the minimum-cost multicommodity-flow problem, the input is a directed
graph G = (V, E) in which each edge (u, v) ∈ E has a nonnegative
capacity c(u, v) ≥ 0 and a cost a(u, v). As in the multicommodity-flow
problem, there are k different commodities, K₁, K₂, … , K_(k), with
commodity i specified by the triple K_(i) = (s_(i), t_(i), d_(i)). We
define the flow f_(i) for commodity i and the aggregate flow f_(uv) on
edge (u, v) as in the multicommodity-flow problem. A feasible flow is
one in which the aggregate flow on each edge (u, v) is no more than the
capacity of edge (u, v). The cost of a flow is ∑_(u,v∈E) a(u, v) ·
f_(uv), and the goal is to find the feasible flow of minimum cost.
Express this problem as a linear program.

29.3    Duality

We will now introduce a powerful concept called linear-programming
duality. In general, given a maximization problem, duality allows you to
formulate a related minimization problem that has the same objective
value. The idea of duality is actually more general than linear
programming, but we restrict our attention to linear programming in this
section.

Duality enables us to prove that a solution is indeed optimal. We saw an
example of duality in Chapter 24 with Theorem 24.6, the max-flow min-cut
theorem. Suppose that, given an instance of a maximum-flow problem, you
find a flow f with value |f|. How do you know whether f is a maximum
flow? By the max-flow min-cut theorem, if you can find a cut whose value
is also |f|, then you have verified that f is indeed a maximum flow.
This relationship provides an example of duality: given a maximization
problem, define a related minimization problem such that the two
problems have the same optimal objective values.

Given a linear program in standard form in which the objective is to
maximize, let’s see how to formulate a dual linear program in which the
objective is to minimize and whose optimal value is identical to that of
the original linear program. When referring to dual linear programs, we
call the original linear program the primal.

Given the primal linear program

[art]

subject to

[art]

its dual is

[art]

subject to

[art]

Mechanically, to form the dual, change the maximization to a
minimization, exchange the roles of coefficients on the right-hand sides
and in the objective function, and replace each ≤ by ≥. Each of the m
constraints in the primal corresponds to a variable y_(i) in the dual.
Likewise, each of the n constraints in the dual corresponds to a
variable x_(j) in the primal. For example, consider the following primal
linear program:

[art]

subject to

[art]

Its dual is

[art]

subject to

[art]

Although forming the dual can be considered a mechanical operation,
there is an intuitive explanation. Consider the primal maximization
problem (29.37)–(29.41). Each constraint gives an upper bound on the
objective function. In addition, if you take one or more constraints and
add together nonnegative multiples of them, you get a valid constraint.
For example, you can add constraints (29.38) and (29.39) to obtain the
constraint 3x₁ + 3x₂ + 8x₃ ≤ 54. Any feasible solution to the primal
must satisfy this new constraint, but there is something else
interesting about it. Comparing this new constraint to the objective
function (29.37), you can see that for each variable, the corresponding
coefficient is at least as large as the coefficient in the objective
function. Thus, since the variables x₁, x₂ and x₃ are nonnegative, we
have that

3x₁ + x₂ + 4x₃ ≤ 3x₁ + 3x₂ + 8x₃ ≤ 54,

and so the solution value to the primal is at most 54. In other words,
adding these two constraints together has generated an upper bound on
the objective value.

In general, for any nonnegative multipliers y₁, y₂, and y₃, you can
generate a constraint

y₁(x₁+x₂+3x₃)+y₂(2x₁+2x₂+5x₃)+y₃(4x₁+x₂+2x₃) ≤ 30y₁+24y₂+36y₃

from the primal constraints or, by distributing and regrouping,

(y₁+2y₂+4y₃)x₁+(y₁+2y₂+y₃)x₂+(3y₁+5y₂+2y₃)x₃ ≤ 30y₁+24y₂+36y₃.

Now, as long as this constraint has coefficients of x₁, x₂, and x₃ that
are at least their objective-function coefficients, it is a valid upper
bound. That is, as long as

  ----------------- --- ----
  y₁ + 2y₂ + 4y₃    ≥   3,
  y₁ + 2y₂ + y₃     ≥   1,
  3y₁ + 5y₂ + 2y₃   ≥   4,
  ----------------- --- ----

you have a valid upper bound of 30y₁+24y₂+36y₃. The multipliers y₁, y₂,
and y₃ must be nonnegative, because otherwise you cannot combine the
inequalities. Of course, you would like the upper bound to be as small
as possible, and so you want to choose y to minimize 30y₁ + 24y₂ + 36y₃.
Observe that we have just described the dual linear program as the
problem of finding the smallest possible upper bound on the primal.

We’ll formalize this idea and show in Theorem 29.4 that, if the linear
program and its dual are feasible and bounded, then the optimal value of
the dual linear program is always equal to the optimal value of the
primal linear program. We begin by demonstrating weak duality, which
states that any feasible solution to the primal linear program has a
value no greater than that of any feasible solution to the dual linear
program.

Lemma 29.1 (Weak linear-programming duality)

Let x be any feasible solution to the primal linear program in
(29.31)–(29.33), and let ӯ be any feasible solution to its dual linear
program in (29.34)–(29.36). Then

[art]

Proof   We have

[art]

▪

Corollary 29.2

Let x be a feasible solution to the primal linear program in
(29.31)–(29.33), and let ӯ be a feasible solution to its dual linear
program in (29.34)–(29.36). If

[art]

then x and ӯ are optimal solutions to the primal and dual linear
programs, respectively.

Proof   By Lemma 29.1, the objective value of a feasible solution to the
primal cannot exceed that of a feasible solution to the dual. The primal
linear program is a maximization problem and the dual is a minimization
problem. Thus, if feasible solutions x and ӯ have the same objective
value, neither can be improved.

▪

We now show that, at optimality, the primal and dual objective values
are indeed equal. To prove linear programming duality, we will require
one lemma from linear algebra, known as Farkas’s lemma, the proof of
which Problem 29-4 asks you to provide. Farkas’s lemma can take several
forms, each of which is about when a set of linear equalities has a
solution. In stating the lemma, we use m + 1 as a dimension because it
matches our use below.

Lemma 29.3 (Farkas’s lemma)

Given M ∈ ℝ^((m+1)×n) and g ∈ ℝ^(m+1), exactly one of the following
statements is true:

1.  There exists v ∈ ℝ^(n) such that Mv ≤ g,
2.  There exists w ∈ ℝ^(m+1) such that w ≥ 0, w^(T)M = 0 (an n-vector of
    all zeros), and w^(T)g < 0.

▪

Theorem 29.4 (Linear-programming duality)

Given the primal linear program in (29.31)–(29.33) and its corresponding
dual in (29.34)–(29.36), if both are feasible and bounded, then for
optimal solutions x* and y*, we have c^(T)x* = b^(T)y*.

Proof   Let μ = b^(T)y* be the optimal value of the dual linear program
given in (29.34)–(29.36). Consider an augmented set of primal
constraints in which we add a constraint to (29.31)–(29.33) that the
objective value is at least μ. We write out this augmented primal as

[art]

We can multiply (29.48) through by −1 and rewrite (29.47)–(29.48) as

[art]

Here, [art] denotes an (m+1)×n matrix, x is an n-vector, and [art]
denotes an (m + 1)-vector.

We claim that if there is a feasible solution x to the augmented primal,
then the theorem is proved. To establish this claim, observe that x is
also a feasible solution to the original primal and that it has
objective value at least μ. We can then apply Lemma 29.1, which states
that the objective value of the primal is at most μ, to complete the
proof of the theorem.

It therefore remains to show that the augmented primal has a feasible
solution. Suppose, for the purpose of contradiction, that the augmented
primal is infeasible, which means that there is no v ∈ ℝ^(n) such that
[art]. We can apply Farkas’s lemma, Lemma 29.3, to inequalty (29.49)
with

[art]

Because the augmented primal is infeasible, condition 1 of Farkas’s
lemma does not hold. Therefore, condition 2 must apply, so that there
must exist a w ∈ ℝ^(m+1) such that w ≥ 0, w^(T)M = 0, and w^(T)g < 0.
Let’s write w as [art] for some ӯ ∈ ℝ^(m) and λ ∈ ℝ, where ӯ ≥ 0 and λ ≥
0. Substituting for w, M, and g in condition 2 gives

[art]

Unpacking the matrix notation gives

[art]

We now show that the requirements in (29.50) contradict the assumption
that μ is the optimal solution value for the dual linear program. We
consider two cases.

The first case is when λ = 0. In this case, (29.50) simplifies to

[art]

We’ll now construct a dual feasible solution y′ with an objective value
smaller than b^(T)y*. Set y′ = y* + ϵ ӯ, for any ϵ > 0. Since

  --------- --- -------------------- ---------------------------
  y′^(T)A   =   (y* + ϵ ӯ)^(T)A      
            =   y*^(T)A + ϵ ӯ^(T)A   
            =   y*^(T)A              (by (29.51))
            ≥   c^(T)                (because y* is feasible),
  --------- --- -------------------- ---------------------------

y′ is feasible. Now consider the objective value

  --------- --- --------------------
  b^(T)y′   =   b^(T)(y* + ϵ ӯ)
            =   b^(T)y* + ϵ b^(T)ӯ
            <   b^(T)y*,
  --------- --- --------------------

where the last inequality follows because ϵ > 0 and, by (29.51), ӯ^(T)b
= b^(T)ӯ < 0 (since both ӯ^(T)b and b^(T)ӯ are the inner product of b
and ӯ), and so their product is negative. Thus we have a feasible dual
solution of value less than μ, which contradicts μ being the optimal
objective value.

We now consider the second case, where λ > 0. In this case, we can take
(29.50) and divide through by λ to obtain

[art]

Now set y′ = ӯ/λ in (29.52), giving

y′^(T)A = c^(T) and y′^(T)b < μ.

Thus, y′ is a feasible dual solution with objective value strictly less
than μ, a contradiction. We conclude that the augmented primal has a
feasible solution, and the theorem is proved.

▪

Fundamental theorem of linear programming

We conclude this chapter by stating the fundamental theorem of linear
programming, which extends Theorem 29.4 to the cases when the linear
program may be either feasible or unbounded. Exercise 29.3-8 asks you to
provide the proof.

Theorem 29.5 (Fundamental theorem of linear programming)

Any linear program, given in standard form, either

1.  has an optimal solution with a finite objective value,
2.  is infeasible, or
3.  is unbounded.

▪

Exercises

29.3-1

Formulate the dual of the linear program given in lines (29.6)–(29.10)
on page 852.

29.3-2

You have a linear program that is not in standard form. You could
produce the dual by first converting it to standard form, and then
taking the dual. It would be more convenient, however, to produce the
dual directly. Explain how to directly take the dual of an arbitrary
linear program.

29.3-3

Write down the dual of the maximum-flow linear program, as given in
lines (29.25)–(29.28) on page 862. Explain how to interpret this
formulation as a minimum-cut problem.

29.3-4

Write down the dual of the minimum-cost-flow linear program, as given in
lines (29.29)–(29.30) on page 864. Explain how to interpret this problem
in terms of graphs and flows.

29.3-5

Show that the dual of the dual of a linear program is the primal linear
program.

29.3-6

Which result from Chapter 24 can be interpreted as weak duality for the
maximum-flow problem?

29.3-7

Consider the following 1-variable primal linear program:

  ------------ ---- --- ----
  maximize     tx       
  subject to            
               rx   ≤   s
               x    ≥   0,
  ------------ ---- --- ----

where r, s, and t are arbitrary real numbers. State for which values of
r, s, and t you can assert that

1.  Both the primal linear program and its dual have optimal solutions
    with finite objective values.
2.  The primal is feasible, but the dual is infeasible.
3.  The dual is feasible, but the primal is infeasible.
4.  Neither the primal nor the dual is feasible.

29.3-8

Prove the fundamental theorem of linear programming, Theorem 29.5.

Problems

29-1     Linear-inequality feasibility

Given a set of m linear inequalities on n variables x₁, x₂, … , x_(n),
the linear-inequality feasibility problem asks whether there is a
setting of the variables that simultaneously satisfies each of the
inequalities.

a. Given an algorithm for the linear-programming problem, show how to
use it to solve a linear-inequality feasibility problem. The number of
variables and constraints that you use in the linear-programming problem
should be polynomial in n and m.

b. Given an algorithm for the linear-inequality feasibility problem,
show how to use it to solve a linear-programming problem. The number of
variables and linear inequalities that you use in the linear-inequality
feasibility problem should be polynomial in n and m, the number of
variables and constraints in the linear program.

29-2     Complementary slackness

Complementary slackness describes a relationship between the values of
primal variables and dual constraints and between the values of dual
variables and primal constraints. Let x be a feasible solution to the
primal linear program given in (29.31)–(29.33), and let ӯ be a feasible
solution to the dual linear program given in (29.34)–(29.36).
Complementary slackness states that the following conditions are
necessary and sufficient for x and ӯ to be optimal:

[art]

and

[art]

a. Verify that complementary slackness holds for the linear program in
lines (29.37)–(29.41).

b. Prove that complementary slackness holds for any primal linear
program and its corresponding dual.

c. Prove that a feasible solution x to a primal linear program given in
lines (29.31)–(29.33) is optimal if and only if there exist values ӯ =
(ӯ₁, ӯ₂, … , ӯ_(m)) such that

1.  ӯ is a feasible solution to the dual linear program given in
    (29.34)–(29.36),
2.  [art] for all j such that x_(j) > 0, and
3.  ӯ_(i) = 0 for all i such that [art].

29-3     Integer linear programming

An integer linear-programming problem is a linear-programming problem
with the additional constraint that the variables x must take on integer
values. Exercise 34.5-3 on page 1098 shows that just determining whether
an integer linear program has a feasible solution is NP-hard, which
means that there is no known polynomial-time algorithm for this problem.

a. Show that weak duality (Lemma 29.1) holds for an integer linear
program.

b. Show that duality (Theorem 29.4) does not always hold for an integer
linear program.

c. Given a primal linear program in standard form, let P be the optimal
objective value for the primal linear program, D be the optimal
objective value for its dual, IP be the optimal objective value for the
integer version of the primal (that is, the primal with the added
constraint that the variables take on integer values), and ID be the
optimal objective value for the integer version of the dual. Assuming
that both the primal integer program and the dual integer program are
feasible and bounded, show that

IP ≤ P = D ≤ ID.

29-4     Farkas’s lemma

Prove Farkas’s lemma, Lemma 29.3.

29-5     Minimum-cost circulation

This problem considers a variant of the minimum-cost-flow problem from
Section 29.2 in which there is no demand, source, or sink. Instead, the
input, as before, contains a flow network, capacity constraints c(u, v),
and edge costs a(u, v). A flow is feasible if it satisfies the capacity
constraint on every edge and flow conservation at every vertex. The goal
is to find, among all feasible flows, the one of minimum cost. We call
this problem the minimum-cost-circulation problem.

a. Formulate the minimum-cost-circulation problem as a linear program.

b. Suppose that for all edges (u, v) ∈ E, we have a(u, v) > 0. What does
an optimal solution to the minimum-cost-circulation problem look like?

c. Formulate the maximum-flow problem as a minimum-cost-circulation
problem linear program. That is, given a maximum-flow problem instance G
= (V, E) with source s, sink t and edge capacities c, create a
minimum-cost-circulation problem by giving a (possibly different)
network G′ = (V′, E′) with edge capacities c′ and edge costs a′ such
that you can derive a solution to the maximum-flow problem from a
solution to the minimum-cost-circulation problem.

d. Formulate the single-source shortest-path problem as a
minimum-cost-circulation problem linear program.

Chapter notes

This chapter only begins to study the wide field of linear programming.
A number of books are devoted exclusively to linear programming,
including those by Chvátal [94], Gass [178], Karloff [246], Schrijver
[398], and Vanderbei [444]. Many other books give a good coverage of
linear programming, including those by Papadimitriou and Steiglitz [353]
and Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin [7]. The coverage in this chapter draws
on the approach taken by Chvátal.

The simplex algorithm for linear programming was invented by G. Dantzig
in 1947. Shortly after, researchers discovered how to formulate a number
of problems in a variety of fields as linear programs and solve them
with the simplex algorithm. As a result, applications of linear
programming flourished, along with several algorithms. Variants of the
simplex algorithm remain the most popular methods for solving
linear-programming problems. This history appears in a number of places,
including the notes in [94] and [246].

The ellipsoid algorithm was the first polynomial-time algorithm for
linear programming and is due to L. G. Khachian in 1979. It was based on
earlier work by N. Z. Shor, D. B. Judin, and A. S. Nemirovskii.
Grötschel, Lovász, and Schrijver [201] describe how to use the ellipsoid
algorithm to solve a variety of problems in combinatorial optimization.
To date, the ellipsoid algorithm does not appear to be competitive with
the simplex algorithm in practice.

Karmarkar’s paper [247] includes a description of the first
interior-point algorithm. Many subsequent researchers designed
interior-point algorithms. Good surveys appear in the article of
Goldfarb and Todd [189] and the book by Ye [463].

Analysis of the simplex algorithm remains an active area of research. V.
Klee and G. J. Minty constructed an example on which the simplex
algorithm runs through 2^(n) − 1 iterations. The simplex algorithm
usually performs well in practice, and many researchers have tried to
give theoretical justification for this empirical observation. A line of
research begun by K. H. Borgwardt, and carried on by many others, shows
that under certain probabilistic assumptions on the input, the simplex
algorithm converges in expected polynomial time. Spielman and Teng [421]
made progress in this area, introducing the “smoothed analysis of
algorithms” and applying it to the simplex algorithm.

The simplex algorithm is known to run efficiently in certain special
cases. Particularly noteworthy is the network-simplex algorithm, which
is the simplex algorithm, specialized to network-flow problems. For
certain network problems, including the shortest-paths, maximum-flow,
and minimum-cost-flow problems, variants of the network-simplex
algorithm run in polynomial time. See, for example, the article by Orlin
[349] and the citations therein.

¹ An intuitive definition of a convex region is that it fulfills the
requirement that for any two points in the region, all points on a line
segment between them are also in the region.

30        Polynomials and the FFT

The straightforward method of adding two polynomials of degree n takes
Θ(n) time, but the straightforward method of multiplying them takes
Θ(n²) time. This chapter will show how the fast Fourier transform, or
FFT, can reduce the time to multiply polynomials to Θ(n lg n).

The most common use for Fourier transforms, and hence the FFT, is in
signal processing. A signal is given in the time domain: as a function
mapping time to amplitude. Fourier analysis expresses the signal as a
weighted sum of phase-shifted sinusoids of varying frequencies. The
weights and phases associated with the frequencies characterize the
signal in the frequency domain. Among the many everyday applications of
FFT’s are compression techniques used to encode digital video and audio
information, including MP3 files. Many fine books delve into the rich
area of signal processing, and the chapter notes reference a few of
them.

Polynomials

A polynomial in the variable x over an algebraic field F represents a
function A(x) as a formal sum:

[art]

The values a₀, a₁, … , a_(n−1) are the coefficients of the polynomial.
The coefficients and x are drawn from a field F, typically the set ℂ of
complex numbers. A polynomial A(x) has degree k if its highest nonzero
coefficient is a_(k), in which case we say that degree(A) = k. Any
integer strictly greater than the degree of a polynomial is a
degree-bound of that polynomial. Therefore, the degree of a polynomial
of degree-bound n may be any integer between 0 and n − 1, inclusive.

A variety of operations extend to polynomials. For polynomial addition,
if A(x) and B(x) are polynomials of degree-bound n, their sum is a
polynomial C(x), also of degree-bound n, such that C(x) = A(x)+B(x) for
all x in the underlying field. That is, if

[art]

then

[art]

where c_(j) = a_(j) + b_(j) for j = 0, 1, … , n − 1. For example, given
the polynomials A(x) = 6x³ + 7x² − 10x + 9 and B(x) = −2x³ + 4x − 5,
their sum is C(x) = 4x³ + 7x² − 6x + 4.

For polynomial multiplication, if A(x) and B(x) are polynomials of
degree-bound n, their product C(x) is a polynomial of degree-bound 2n −
1 such that C(x) = A(x)B(x) for all x in the underlying field. You
probably have multiplied polynomials before, by multiplying each term in
A(x) by each term in B(x) and then combining terms with equal powers.
For example, you can multiply A(x) = 6x³ + 7x² − 10x + 9 and B(x) =
−2x³ + 4x − 5 as follows:

[art]

Another way to express the product C(x) is

[art]

where

[art]

(By the definition of degree, a_(k) = 0 for all k > degree(A) and b_(k)
= 0 for all k > degree(B).) If A is a polynomial of degree-bound n_(a)
and B is a polynomial of degree-bound n_(b), then C must be a polynomial
of degree-bound n_(a) + n_(b) − 1, because degree(C) = degree(A) +
degree(B). Since a polynomial of degree-bound k is also a polynomial of
degree-bound k + 1, we normally make the somewhat simpler statement that
the product polynomial C is a polynomial of degree-bound n_(a) + n_(b).

Chapter outline

Section 30.1 presents two ways to represent polynomials: the coefficient
representation and the point-value representation. The straightforward
method for multiplying polynomials of degree n—equations (30.1) and
(30.2)—takes Θ(n²) time with polynomials represented in coefficient
form, but only Θ(n) time with point-value form. Converting between the
two representations, however, reduces the time to multiply polynomials
to just Θ(n lg n). To see why this approach works, you must first
understand complex roots of unity, which Section 30.2 covers. Section
30.2 then uses the FFT and its inverse to perform the conversions.
Because the FFT is used so often in signal processing, it is often
implemented as a circuit in hardware, and Section 30.3 illustrates the
structure of such circuits.

This chapter relies on complex numbers, and within this chapter the
symbol i denotes [art] exclusively.

30.1    Representing polynomials

The coefficient and point-value representations of polynomials are in a
sense equivalent: a polynomial in point-value form has a unique
counterpart in coefficient form. This section introduces the two
representations and shows how to combine them in order to multiply two
degree-bound n polynomials in Θ(n lg n) time.

Coefficient representation

A coefficient representation of a polynomial [art] of degree-bound n is
a vector of coefficients a = (a₀, a₁, … , a_(n−1)). Matrix equations in
this chapter generally treat vectors as column vectors.

The coefficient representation is convenient for certain operations on
polynomials. For example, the operation of evaluating the polynomial
A(x) at a given point x₀ consists of computing the value of A(x₀). To
evaluate a polynomial in Θ(n) time, use Horner’s rule:

[art]

Similarly, adding two polynomials represented by the coefficient vectors
a = (a₀, a₁, … , a_(n−1)) and b = (b₀, b₁, … , b_(n−1)) takes Θ(n) time:
just produce the coefficient vector c = (c₀, c₁, … , c_(n−1)), where
c_(j) = a_(j) + b_(j) for j = 0, 1, … , n− 1.

Now, consider multiplying two degree-bound n polynomials A(x) and B(x)
represented in coefficient form. The method described by equations
(30.1) and (30.2) takes Θ(n²) time, since it multiplies each coefficient
in the vector a by each coefficient in the vector b. The operation of
multiplying polynomials in coefficient form seems to be considerably
more difficult than that of evaluating a polynomial or adding two
polynomials. The resulting coefficient vector c, given by equation
(30.2), is also called the convolution of the input vectors a and b,
denoted c = a ⊗ b. Since multiplying polynomials and computing
convolutions are fundamental computational problems of considerable
practical importance, this chapter concentrates on efficient algorithms
for them.

Point-value representation

A point-value representation of a polynomial A(x) of degree-bound n is a
set of n point-value pairs

{(x₀, y₀), (x₁, y₁), … , (x_(n−1), y_(n−1))}

such that all of the x_(k) are distinct and

[art]

for k = 0, 1, … , n − 1. A polynomial has many different point-value
representations, since any set of n distinct points x₀, x₁, … , x_(n−1)
can serve as a basis for the representation.

Computing a point-value representation for a polynomial given in
coefficient form is in principle straightforward, since all you have to
do is select n distinct points x₀, x₁, … , x_(n−1) and then evaluate
A(x_(k)) for k = 0, 1, … , n − 1. With Horner’s method, evaluating a
polynomial at n points takes Θ(n²) time. We’ll see later that if you
choose the points x_(k) cleverly, you can accelerate this computation to
run in Θ(n lg n) time.

The inverse of evaluation—determining the coefficient form of a
polynomial from a point-value representation—is interpolation. The
following theorem shows that interpolation is well defined when the
desired interpolating polynomial must have a degree-bound equal to the
given number of point-value pairs.

Theorem 30.1 (Uniqueness of an interpolating polynomial)

For any set {(x₀, y₀), (x₁, y₁), … , (x_(n−1), y_(n−1))} of n
point-value pairs such that all the x_(k) values are distinct, there is
a unique polynomial A(x) of degree-bound n such that y_(k) = A(x_(k))
for k = 0, 1, … , n − 1.

Proof   The proof relies on the existence of the inverse of a certain
matrix. Equation (30.3) is equivalent to the matrix equation

[art]

The matrix on the left is denoted V(x₀, x₁, … , x_(n−1)) and is known as
a Vandermonde matrix. By Problem D-1 on page 1223, this matrix has
determinant

[art]

and therefore, by Theorem D.5 on page 1221, it is invertible (that is,
nonsingular) if the x_(k) are distinct. To solve for the coefficients
a_(j) uniquely given the point-value representation, use the inverse of
the Vandermonde matrix:

a = V(x₀, x₁, … , x_(n−1))⁻¹y.

▪

The proof of Theorem 30.1 describes an algorithm for interpolation based
on solving the set (30.4) of linear equations. Section 28.1 shows how to
solve these equations in O(n³) time.

A faster algorithm for n-point interpolation is based on Lagrange’s
formula:

[art]

You might want to verify that the right-hand side of equation (30.5) is
a polynomial of degree-bound n that satisfies A(x_(k)) = y_(k) for all
k. Exercise 30.1-5 asks you how to compute the coefficients of A using
Lagrange’s formula in Θ(n²) time.

Thus, n-point evaluation and interpolation are well-defined inverse
operations that transform between the coefficient representation of a
polynomial and a point-value representation.¹ The algorithms described
above for these problems take Θ(n²) time.

The point-value representation is quite convenient for many operations
on polynomials. For addition, if C(x) = A(x) + B(x), then C(x_(k)) =
A(x_(k)) + B(x_(k)) for any point x_(k). More precisely, given
point-value representations for A,

{(x₀, y₀), (x₁, y₁), … , (x_(n−1), y_(n−1))},

and for B,

[art]

where A and B are evaluated at the same n points, then a point-value
representation for C is

[art]

Thus the time to add two polynomials of degree-bound n in point-value
form is Θ(n).

Similarly, the point-value representation is convenient for multiplying
polynomials. If C(x) = A(x)B(x), then C(x_(k)) = A(x_(k))B(x_(k)) for
any point x_(k), and to obtain a point-value representation for C, just
pointwise multiply a point-value representation for A by a point-value
representation for B. Polynomial multiplication differs from polynomial
addition in one key aspect, however: degree(C) = degree(A) + degree(B),
so that if A and B have degree-bound n, then C has degree-bound 2n. A
standard point-value representation for A and B consists of n
point-value pairs for each polynomial. Multiplying these together gives
n point-value pairs, but 2n pairs are necessary to interpolate a unique
polynomial C of degree-bound 2n. (See Exercise 30.1-4.) Instead, begin
with “extended” point-value representations for A and for B consisting
of 2n point-value pairs each. Given an extended point-value
representation for A,

{(x₀, y₀), (x₁, y₁), … , (x_(2n−1), y_(2n−1))},

and a corresponding extended point-value representation for B,

[art]

then a point-value representation for C is

[art]

Given two input polynomials in extended point-value form, multiplying
them to obtain the point-value form of the result takes just Θ(n) time,
much less than the Θ(n²) time required to multiply polynomials in
coefficient form.

Finally, let’s consider how to evaluate a polynomial given in
point-value form at a new point. For this problem, the simplest approach
known is to first convert the polynomial to coefficient form and then
evaluate it at the new point.

Fast multiplication of polynomials in coefficient form

Can the linear-time multiplication method for polynomials in point-value
form expedite polynomial multiplication in coefficient form? The answer
hinges on whether it is possible convert a polynomial quickly from
coefficient form to point-value form (evaluate) and vice versa
(interpolate).

[art]

Figure 30.1 A graphical outline of an efficient
polynomial-multiplication process. Representations on the top are in
coefficient form, and those on the bottom are in point-value form. The
arrows from left to right correspond to the multiplication operation.
The ω_(2n) terms are complex (2n)th roots of unity.

Any points can serve as evaluation points, but certain evaluation points
allow conversion between representations in only Θ(n lg n) time. As
we’ll see in Section 30.2, if “complex roots of unity” are the
evaluation points, then the discrete Fourier transform (or DFT)
evaluates and the inverse DFT interpolates. Section 30.2 shows how the
FFT accomplishes the DFT and inverse DFT operations in Θ(n lg n) time.

Figure 30.1 shows this strategy graphically. One minor detail concerns
degree-bounds. The product of two polynomials of degree-bound n is a
polynomial of degree-bound 2n. Before evaluating the input polynomials A
and B, therefore, first double their degree-bounds to 2n by adding n
high-order coefficients of 0. Because the vectors have 2n elements, use
“complex (2n)th roots of unity,” which are denoted by the ω_(2n) terms
in Figure 30.1.

The following procedure takes advantage of the FFT to multiply two
polynomials A(x) and B(x) of degree-bound n in Θ(n lg n)-time, where the
input and output representations are in coefficient form. The procedure
assumes that n is an exact power of 2, so if it isn’t, just add
high-order zero coefficients.

1.  Double degree-bound: Create coefficient representations of A(x) and
    B(x) as degree-bound 2n polynomials by adding n high-order zero
    coefficients to each.
2.  Evaluate: Compute point-value representations of A(x) and B(x) of
    length 2n by applying the FFT of order 2n on each polynomial. These
    representations contain the values of the two polynomials at the
    (2n)th roots of unity.
3.  Pointwise multiply: Compute a point-value representation for the
    polynomial C(x) = A(x)B(x) by multiplying these values together
    pointwise. This representation contains the value of C(x) at each
    (2n)th root of unity.
4.  Interpolate: Create the coefficient representation of the polynomial
    C(x) by applying the FFT on 2n point-value pairs to compute the
    inverse DFT.

Steps (1) and (3) take Θ(n) time, and steps (2) and (4) take Θ(n lg n)
time. Thus, once we show how to use the FFT, we will have proven the
following.

Theorem 30.2

Two polynomials of degree-bound n with both the input and output
representations in coefficient form can be multiplied in Θ(n lg n) time.

▪

Exercises

30.1-1

Multiply the polynomials A(x) = 7x³ − x² + x − 10 and B(x) = 8x³ − 6x +
3 using equations (30.1) and (30.2).

30.1-2

Another way to evaluate a polynomial A(x) of degree-bound n at a given
point x₀ is to divide A(x) by the polynomial (x − x₀), obtaining a
quotient polynomial q(x) of degree-bound n − 1 and a remainder r, such
that

A(x) = q(x)(x − x₀) + r.

Then we have A(x₀) = r. Show how to compute the remainder r and the
coefficients of q(x) from x₀ and the coefficients of A in Θ(n) time.

30.1-3

Given a polynomial [art], define [art]. Show how to derive a point-value
representation for A^(rev)(x) from a point-value representation for
A(x), assuming that none of the points is 0.

30.1-4

Prove that n distinct point-value pairs are necessary to uniquely
specify a polynomial of degree-bound n, that is, if fewer than n
distinct point-value pairs are given, they fail to specify a unique
polynomial of degree-bound n. (Hint: Using Theorem 30.1, what can you
say about a set of n − 1 point-value pairs to which you add one more
arbitrarily chosen point-value pair?)

30.1-5

Show how to use equation (30.5) to interpolate in Θ(n²) time. (Hint:
First compute the coefficient representation of the polynomial ∏_(j)(x −
x_(j)) and then divide by (x − x_(k)) as necessary for the numerator of
each term (see Exercise 30.1-2). You can compute each of the n
denominators in O(n) time.)

30.1-6

Explain what is wrong with the “obvious” approach to polynomial division
using a point-value representation: dividing the corresponding y values.
Discuss separately the case in which the division comes out exactly and
the case in which it doesn’t.

30.1-7

Consider two sets A and B, each having n integers in the range from 0 to
10n. The Cartesian sum of A and B is defined by

C = {x + y : x ∈ A and y ∈ B}.

The integers in C lie in the range from 0 to 20n. Show how, in O(n lg n)
time, to find the elements of C and the number of times each element of
C is realized as a sum of elements in A and B. (Hint: Represent A and B
as polynomials of degree at most 10n.)

30.2    The DFT and FFT

In Section 30.1, we claimed that by computing the DFT and its inverse by
using the FFT, it is possible to evaluate and interpolate a degree n
polynomial at the complex roots of unity in Θ(n lg n) time. This section
defines complex roots of unity, studies their properties, defines the
DFT, and then shows how the FFT computes the DFT and its inverse in Θ(n
lg n) time.

Complex roots of unity

A complex nth root of unity is a complex number ω such that

ω^(n) = 1.

There are exactly n complex nth roots of unity: e^(2πik/n) for k = 0, 1,
… , n − 1. To interpret this formula, use the definition of the
exponential of a complex number:

e^(iu) = cos(u) + i sin(u).

Figure 30.2 shows that the n complex roots of unity are equally spaced
around the circle of unit radius centered at the origin of the complex
plane. The value

[art]

Figure 30.2 The values of [art] in the complex plane, where ω₈ =
e^(2πi/8) is the principal 8th root of unity.

[art]

is the principal nth root of unity.² All other complex nth roots of
unity are powers of ω_(n).

The n complex nth roots of unity,

[art]

form a group under multiplication (see Section 31.3). This group has the
same structure as the additive group (ℤ_(n), +) modulo n, since [art]
implies that [art]. Similarly, [art]. The following lemmas furnish some
essential properties of the complex nth roots of unity.

Lemma 30.3 (Cancellation lemma)

For any integers n > 0, k ≥ 0, and d > 0,

[art]

Proof   The lemma follows directly from equation (30.6), since

[art]

▪

Corollary 30.4

For any even integer n > 0,

[art]

Proof   The proof is left as Exercise 30.2-1.

▪

Lemma 30.5 (Halving lemma)

If n > 0 is even, then the squares of the n complex nth roots of unity
are the n/2 complex (n/2)th roots of unity.

Proof   By the cancellation lemma, [art] for any nonnegative integer k.
Squaring all of the complex nth roots of unity produces each (n/2)th
root of unity exactly twice, since

[art]

Thus [art] and [art] have the same square. We could also have used
Corollary 30.4 to prove this property, since [art] implies [art], and
thus [art].

▪

As we’ll see, the halving lemma is essential to the divide-and-conquer
approach for converting between coefficient and point-value
representations of polynomials, since it guarantees that the recursive
subproblems are only half as large.

Lemma 30.6 (Summation lemma)

For any integer n ≥ 1 and nonzero integer k not divisible by n,

[art]

Proof   Equation (A.6) on page 1142 applies to complex values as well as
to reals, giving

[art]

To see that the denominator is not 0, note that [art] only when k is
divisible by n, which the lemma statement prohibits.

▪

The DFT

Recall the goal of evaluating a polynomial

[art]

of degree-bound n at [art], [art], [art] (that is, at the n complex nth
roots of unity).³ The polynomial A is given in coefficient form: a =
(a₀, a₁, … , a_(n−1)). Let us define the results y_(k), for k = 0, 1, …
, n − 1, by

[art]

The vector y = (y₀, y₁, … , y_(n−1)) is the discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) of the coefficient vector a = (a₀, a₁, … , a_(n−1)). We also write
y = DFT_(n)(a).

The FFT

The fast Fourier transform (FFT) takes advantage of the special
properties of the complex roots of unity to compute DFT_(n)(a) in Θ(n lg
n) time, as opposed to the Θ(n²) time of the straightforward method.
Assume throughout that n is an exact power of 2. Although strategies for
dealing with sizes that are not exact powers of 2 are known, they are
beyond the scope of this book.

The FFT method employs a divide-and-conquer strategy, using the
even-indexed and odd-indexed coefficients of A(x) separately to define
the two new polynomials A^(even)(x) and A^(odd)(x) of degree-bound n/2:

A^(even)(x) = a₀ + a₂x + a₄x² + ⋯ + a_(n−2)x^(n/2−1),

A^(odd)(x) = a₁ + a₃x + a₅x² + ⋯ + a_(n−1)x^(n/2−1).

Note that A^(even) contains all the even-indexed coefficients of A (the
binary representation of the index ends in 0) and A^(odd) contains all
the odd-indexed coefficients (the binary representation of the index
ends in 1). It follows that

[art]

so that the problem of evaluating A(x) at [art], [art] reduces to

1.  evaluating the degree-bound n/2 polynomials A^(even)(x) and
    A^(odd)(x) at the points

    [art]

    and then

2.  combining the results according to equation (30.9).

By the halving lemma, the list of values (30.10) consists not of n
distinct values but only of the n/2 complex (n/2)th roots of unity, with
each root occurring exactly twice. Therefore, the FFT recursively
evaluates the polynomials A^(even) and A^(odd) of degree-bound n/2 at
the n/2 complex (n/2)th roots of unity. These subproblems have exactly
the same form as the original problem, but are half the size, dividing
an n-element DFT_(n) computation into two n/2-element DFT_(n/2)
computations. This decomposition is the basis for the FFT procedure on
the next page, which computes the DFT of an n-element vector a = (a₀,
a₁, … , a_(n−1)), where n is an exact power of 2.

The FFT procedure works as follows. Lines 1–2 represent the base case of
the recursion. The DFT of 1 element is the element itself, since in this
case

  ---- --- --------
  y₀   =   [art]
       =   a₀ · 1
       =   a₀.
  ---- --- --------

Lines 5–6 define the coefficient vectors for the polynomials A^(even)
and A^(odd). Lines 3, 4, and 12 guarantee that ω is updated properly so
that whenever lines 10–11 are executed, [art]. (Keeping a running value
of ω from iteration to iteration saves time over computing [art] from
scratch each time through the for loop.⁴) Lines 7–8 perform the
recursive DFT_(n/2) computations, setting, for k = 0, 1, … , n/2 − 1,

FFT(a, n)

  ----- ---------------------------------- -------------------------------------------
    1   if n == 1                          
    2   return a                           // DFT of 1 element is the element itself
    3   ω_(n) = e^(2πi/n)                  
    4   ω = 1                              
    5   a^(even) = (a₀, a₂, … , a_(n−2))   
    6   a^(odd) = (a₁, a₃, … , a_(n−1))    
    7   y^(even) = FFT(a^(even), n/2)      
    8   y^(odd) = FFT(a^(odd), n/2)        
    9   for k = 0 to n/2 − 1               // at this point, [art]
  10    [art]                              
  11    [art]                              
  12    ω = ωω_(n)                         
  13    return y                           
  ----- ---------------------------------- -------------------------------------------

[art]

or, since [art] by the cancellation lemma,

[art]

Lines 10–11 combine the results of the recursive DFT_(n/2) calculations.
For the first n/2 results y₀, y₁, … , y_(n/2−1), line 10 yields

[art]

For y_(n/2), y_(n/2+1), … , y_(n−1), letting k = 0, 1, … , n/2 − 1, line
11 yields

[art]

Thus the vector y returned by FFT is indeed the DFT of the input vector
a.

Lines 10 and 11 multiply each value [art] by [art], for k = 0, 1, … ,
n/2 − 1. Line 10 adds this product to [art], and line 11 subtracts it.
Because each factor [art] appears in both its positive and negative
forms, we call the factors [art] twiddle factors.

To determine the running time of the procedure FFT, note that exclusive
of the recursive calls, each invocation takes Θ(n) time, where n is the
length of the input vector. The recurrence for the running time is
therefore

  ------ --- ----------------
  T(n)   =   2T(n/2) + Θ(n)
         =   Θ(n lg n),
  ------ --- ----------------

by case 2 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1). Thus the FFT can evaluate
a polynomial of degree-bound n at the complex nth roots of unity in Θ(n
lg n) time.

Interpolation at the complex roots of unity

The polynomial multiplication scheme entails converting from coefficient
form to point-value form by evaluating the polynomial at the complex
roots of unity, pointwise multiplying, and finally converting from
point-value form back to coefficient form by interpolating. We’ve just
seen how to evaluate, so now we’ll see how to interpolate the complex
roots of unity by a polynomial. To interpolate, we’ll write the DFT as a
matrix equation and then look at the form of the matrix inverse.

From equation (30.4), we can write the DFT as the matrix product y =
V_(n)a, where V_(n) is a Vandermonde matrix containing the appropriate
powers of ω_(n):

[art]

The (k, j) entry of V_(n) is [art], for j, k = 0, 1, … , n − 1. The
exponents of the entries of V_(n) form a multiplication table for
factors 0 to n − 1.

For the inverse operation, which we write as [art], multiply y by the
matrix [art], the inverse of V_(n).

Theorem 30.7

For j, k = 0, 1, … , n − 1, the (j, k) entry of [art] is [art].

Proof   We show that [art], the n × n identity matrix. Consider the (k,
k′) entry of [art]:

[art]

This summation equals 1 if k′ = k, and it is 0 otherwise by the
summation lemma (Lemma 30.6). Note that in order for the summation lemma
to apply, k′ − k must not be divisible by n. Indeed, it is not, since
−(n − 1) ≤ k′ − k ≤ n − 1.

▪

With the inverse matrix [art] defined, [art] is given by

[art]

for j = 0, 1, … , n − 1. By comparing equations (30.8) and (30.11), you
can see that if you modify the FFT algorithm to switch the roles of a
and y, replace ω_(n) by [art], and divide each element of the result by
n, you get the inverse DFT (see Exercise 30.2-4). Thus, [art] is
computable in Θ(n lg n) time as well.

Thus, the FFT and the inverse FFT provide a way to transform a
polynomial of degree-bound n back and forth between its coefficient
representation and a point-value representation in only Θ(n lg n) time.
In the context of polynomial multiplication, we have shown the following
about the convolution a ⊗ b of vectors a and b:

Theorem 30.8 (Convolution theorem)

For any two vectors a and b of length n, where n is an exact power of 2,

[art]

where the vectors a and b are padded with 0s to length 2n and · denotes
the componentwise product of two 2n-element vectors.

▪

Exercises

30.2-1

Prove Corollary 30.4.

30.2-2

Compute the DFT of the vector (0, 1, 2, 3).

30.2-3

Do Exercise 30.1-1 by using the Θ(n lg n)-time scheme.

30.2-4

Write pseudocode to compute [art] in Θ(n lg n) time.

30.2-5

Describe the generalization of the FFT procedure to the case in which n
is an exact power of 3. Give a recurrence for the running time, and
solve the recurrence.

★ 30.2-6

Instead of performing an n-element FFT over the field of complex numbers
(where n is an exact power of 2), let’s use the ring ℤ_(m) of integers
modulo m, where m = 2^(tn/2) + 1 and t is an arbitrary positive integer.
We can use ω = 2^(t) instead of ω_(n) as a principal nth root of unity,
modulo m. Prove that the DFT and the inverse DFT are well defined in
this system.

30.2-7

Given a list of values z₀, z₁, … , z_(n−1) (possibly with repetitions),
show how to find the coefficients of a polynomial P(x) of degree-bound
n + 1 that has zeros only at z₀, z₁, … , z_(n−1) (possibly with
repetitions). Your procedure should run in O(n lg² n) time. (Hint: The
polynomial P(x) has a zero at z_(j) if and only if P(x) is a multiple of
(x − z_(j)).)

★ 30.2-8

The chirp transform of a vector a = (a₀, a₁, … , a_(n−1)) is the vector
y = (y₀, y₁, … , y_(n−1)), where [art] and z is any complex number. The
DFT is therefore a special case of the chirp transform, obtained by
taking z = ω_(n). Show how to evaluate the chirp transform for any
complex number z in O(n lg n) time. (Hint: Use the equation

[art]

to view the chirp transform as a convolution.)

30.3    FFT circuits

Many of the FFT’s applications in signal processing require the utmost
speed, and so the FFT is often implemented as a circuit in hardware. The
FFT’s divide-and-conquer structure enables the circuit to have a
parallel structure so that the depth of the circuit—the maximum number
of computational elements between any output and any input that can
reach it—is Θ(lg n). Moreover, the structure of the FFT circuit has
several interesting mathematical properties, which we won’t go into
here.

Butterfly operations

Notice that the for loop of lines 9–12 of the FFT procedure computes the
value [art] twice per iteration: once in line 10 and once in line 11. A
good optimizing compiler produces code that evaluates this common
subexpression just once, storing its value into a temporary variable, so
that lines 10–11 are treated like the three lines

[art]

This operation, multiplying the twiddle factor [art] by [art], storing
the product into the temporary variable t, and adding and subtracting t
from [art], is known as a butterfly operation. Figure 30.3 shows it as a
circuit, and you can see how it vaguely resembles the shape of a
butterfly. (Although less colorfully, it could have been called a
“bowtie” operation.)

[art]

Figure 30.3 A circuit for a butterfly operation. (a) The two input
values enter from the left, the twiddle factor [art] is multiplied by
[art], and the sum and difference are output on the right. (b) A
simplified drawing of a butterfly operation, which we’ll use when
drawing the parallel FFT circuit.

[art]

Figure 30.4 The schema for the conquer and combine steps of an n-input,
n-output FFT circuit, FFT_(n), shown for n = 8. Inputs enter from the
left, and outputs exit from the right. The input values first go through
two FFT_(n/2) circuits, and then n/2 butterfly circuits combine the
results. Only the top and bottom wires entering a butterfly interact
with it: wires that pass through the middle of a butterfly do not affect
that butterfly, nor are their values changed by that butterfly.

Recursive circuit structure

The FFT procedure follows the divide-and-conquer strategy that we first
saw in Section 2.3.1:

Divide the n-element input vector into its n/2 even-indexed and n/2
odd-indexed elements.

Conquer by recursively computing the DFTs of the two subproblems, each
of size n/2.

Combine by performing n/2 butterfly operations. These butterfly
operations work with twiddle factors [art], [art].

The circuit schema in Figure 30.4 follows the conquer and combine steps
of this pattern for an FFT circuit with n inputs and n outputs, denoted
by FFT_(n). Each line is a wire that carries a value. Inputs enter from
the left, one per wire, and outputs exit from the right. The conquer
step runs the inputs through two FFT_(n/2) circuits, which are also
constructed recursively. The values produced by the two FFT_(n/2)
circuits feed into n/2 butterfly circuits, with twiddle factors [art],
[art], to combine the results. The base case of the recursion occurs
when n = 1, where the sole output value equals the sole input value. An
FFT₁ circuit, therefore, does nothing, and so the smallest nontrivial
FFT circuit is FFT₂, a single butterfly operation whose twiddle factor
is [art].

[art]

Figure 30.5 The tree of input vectors to the recursive calls of the FFT
procedure. The initial invocation is for n = 8.

Permuting the inputs

How does the divide step enter into the circuit design? Let’s examine
how input vectors to the various recursive calls of the FFT procedure
relate to the original input vector, so that the circuit can emulate the
divide step at the start for all levels of recursion. Figure 30.5
arranges the input vectors to the recursive calls in an invocation of
FFT in a tree structure, where the initial call is for n = 8. The tree
has one node for each call of the procedure, labeled by the elements of
the initial call as they appear in the corresponding input vector. Each
FFT invocation makes two recursive calls, unless it has received a
1-element vector. The first call appears in the left child, and the
second call appears in the right child.

Looking at the tree, observe that if you arrange the elements of the
initial vector a into the order in which they appear in the leaves, you
can trace the execution of the FFT procedure, but bottom up instead of
top down. First, take the elements in pairs, compute the DFT of each
pair using one butterfly operation, and replace the pair with its DFT.
The vector then holds n/2 two-element DFTs. Next, take these n/2 DFTs in
pairs and compute the DFT of the four vector elements they come from by
executing two butterfly operations, replacing two two-element DFTs with
one four-element DFT. The vector then holds n/4 four-element DFTs.
Continue in this manner until the vector holds two (n/2)-element DFTs,
which n/2 butterfly operations combine into the final n-element DFT. In
other words, you can start with the elements of the initial vector a,
but rearranged as in the leaves of Figure 30.5, and then feed them
directly into a circuit that follows the schema in Figure 30.4.

Let’s think about the permutation that rearranges the input vector. The
order in which the leaves appear in Figure 30.5 is a bit-reversal
permutation. That is, letting rev(k) be the lg n-bit integer formed by
reversing the bits of the binary representation of k, then vector
element a_(k) moves to position rev(k). In Figure 30.5, for example, the
leaves appear in the order 0, 4, 2, 6, 1, 5, 3, 7. This sequence in
binary is 000, 100, 010, 110, 001, 101, 011, 111, and you can obtain it
by reversing the bits of each number in the sequence 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7
or, in binary, 000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, 111. To see in general
that the input vector should be rearranged by a bit-reversal
permutation, note that at the top level of the tree, indices whose
low-order bit is 0 go into the left subtree and indices whose low-order
bit is 1 go into the right subtree. Stripping off the low-order bit at
each level, continue this process down the tree, until you get the order
given by the bit-reversal permutation at the leaves.

The full FFT circuit

Figure 30.6 depicts the entire circuit for n = 8. The circuit begins
with a bit-reversal permutation of the inputs, followed by lg n stages,
each stage consisting of n/2 butterflies executed in parallel. Assuming
that each butterfly circuit has constant depth, the full circuit has
depth Θ(lg n). The butterfly operations at each level of recursion in
the FFT procedure are independent, and so the circuit performs them in
parallel. The figure shows wires running from left to right, carrying
values through the lg n stages. For s = 1, 2, … , lg n, stage s consists
of n/2^(s) groups of butterflies, with 2^(s−1) butterflies per group.
The twiddle factors in stage s are [art], [art], where m = 2^(s).

Exercises

30.3-1

Show the values on the wires for each butterfly input and output in the
FFT circuit of Figure 30.6, given the input vector (0, 2, 3, −1, 4, 5,
7, 9).

30.3-2

Consider an FFT_(n) circuit, such as in Figure 30.6, with wires 0, 1, …
, n−1 (wire j has output y_(j)) and stages numbered as in the figure.
Stage s, for s = 1, 2 … , lg n, consists of n/2^(s) groups of
butterflies. Which two wires are inputs and outputs for the jth
butterfly circuit in the gth group in stage s?

30.3-3

Consider a b-bit integer k in the range 0 ≤ k < 2^(b). Treating k as a
b-element vector over {0, 1}, describe a b × b matrix M such that the
matrix-vector product Mk is the binary representation of rev(k).

[art]

Figure 30.6 A full circuit that computes the FFT in parallel, here shown
for n = 8 inputs. It has lg n stages, and each stage comprises n/2
butterflies that can operate in parallel. As in Figure 30.4, only the
top and bottom wires entering a butterfly interact with it. For example,
the top butterfly in stage 2 has inputs and outputs only on wires 0 and
2 (the wires with outputs y₀ and y₂, respectively). This circuit has
depth Θ(lg n) and performs Θ(n lg n) butterfly operations altogether.

30.3-4

Write pseudocode for the procedure BIT-REVERSE-PERMUTATION(a, n), which
performs the bit-reversal permutation on a vector a of length n
in-place. Assume that you may call the procedure BIT-REVERSE-OF(k, b),
which returns an integer that is the b-bit reversal of the nonnegative
integer k, where 0 ≤ k < 2^(b).

★ 30.3-5

Suppose that the adders within the butterfly operations of a given FFT
circuit sometimes fail in such a manner that they always produce a 0
output, independent of their inputs. In addition, suppose that exactly
one adder has failed, but you don’t know which one. Describe how you can
identify the failed adder by supplying inputs to the overall FFT circuit
and observing the outputs. How efficient is your method?

Problems

30-1     Divide-and-conquer multiplication

a. Show how to multiply two linear polynomials ax + b and cx + d using
only three multiplications. (Hint: One of the multiplications is (a + b)
· (c + d).)

b. Give two divide-and-conquer algorithms for multiplying two
polynomials of degree-bound n in Θ(n^(lg 3)) time. The first algorithm
should divide the input polynomial coefficients into a high half and a
low half, and the second algorithm should divide them according to
whether their index is odd or even.

c. Show how to multiply two n-bit integers in O(n^(lg 3)) steps, where
each step operates on at most a constant number of 1-bit values.

30-2     Multidimensional fast Fourier transform

The 1-dimensional discrete Fourier transform defined by equation (30.8)
generalizes to d dimensions. The input is a d-dimensional array A =
(a_(j1,j2,…,j_(d))) whose dimensions are n₁, n₂, … , n_(d), where n₁n₂ ⋯
n_(d) = n. The d-dimensional discrete Fourier transform is defined by
the equation

[art]

for 0 ≤ k₁ < n₁, 0 ≤ k₂ < n₂, … , 0 ≤ k_(d) < n_(d).

a. Show how to produce a d-dimensional DFT by computing 1-dimensional
DFTs on each dimension in turn. That is, first compute n/n₁ separate
1-dimensional DFTs along dimension 1. Then, using the result of the DFTs
along dimension 1 as the input, compute n/n₂ separate 1-dimensional DFTs
along dimension 2. Using this result as the input, compute n/n₃ separate
1-dimensional DFTs along dimension 3, and so on, through dimension d.

b. Show that the ordering of dimensions does not matter, so that if you
compute the 1-dimensional DFTs in any order of the d dimensions, you
compute the d-dimensional DFT.

c. Show that if you compute each 1-dimensional DFT by computing the fast
Fourier transform, the total time to compute a d-dimensional DFT is O(n
lg n), independent of d.

30-3     Evaluating all derivatives of a polynomial at a point

Given a polynomial A(x) of degree-bound n, we define its tth derivative
by

[art]

In this problem, you will show how to determine A^((t))(x₀) for t = 0,
1, … , n − 1, given the coefficient representation (a₀, a₁, … , a_(n−1))
of A(x) and a point x₀.

a. Given coefficients b₀, b₁, … , b_(n−1) such that

[art]

show how to compute A^((t))(x₀), for t = 0, 1, … , n − 1, in O(n) time.

b. Explain how to find b₀, b₁, … , b_(n−1) in O(n lg n) time, given
[art] for k = 0, 1, … , n − 1.

c. Prove that

[art]

where f(j) = a_(j) · j! and

[art]

d. Explain how to evaluate [art] for k = 0, 1, … , n − 1 in O(n lg n)
time. Conclude that you can evaluate all nontrivial derivatives of A(x)
at x₀ in O(n lg n) time.

30-4     Polynomial evaluation at multiple points

Problem 2-3 showed how to evaluate a polynomial of degree-bound n at a
single point in O(n) time using Horner’s rule. This chapter described
how to evaluate such a polynomial at all n complex roots of unity in O(n
lg n) time using the FFT. Now, you will show how to evaluate a
polynomial of degree-bound n at n arbitrary points in O(n lg² n) time.

To do so, assume that you can compute the polynomial remainder when one
such polynomial is divided by another in O(n lg n) time. For example,
the remainder of 3x³ + x² − 3x + 1 when divided by x² + x + 2 is

(3x³ + x² − 3x + 1) mod (x² + x + 2) = −7x + 5.

Given the coefficient representation of a polynomial [art] and n points
x₀, x₁, … , x_(n−1), your goal is to compute the n values A(x₀), A(x₁),
… , A(x_(n−1)). For 0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n − 1, define the polynomials [art] and
Q_(ij)(x) = A(x) mod P_(ij)(x). Note that Q_(ij)(x) has degree at most j
− i.

a. Prove that A(x) mod (x − z) = A(z) for any point z.

b. Prove that Q_(kk)(x) = A(x_(k)) and that Q_(0,n−1)(x) = A(x).

c. Prove that for i ≤ k ≤ j, we have both Q_(ik)(x) = Q_(ij)(x) mod
P_(ik)(x) and Q_(kj)(x) = Q_(ij)(x) mod P_(kj)(x).

d. Give an O(n lg² n)-time algorithm to evaluate A(x₀), A(x₁), … ,
A(x_(n−1)).

30-5     FFT using modular arithmetic

As defined, the discrete Fourier transform requires computation with
complex numbers, which can result in a loss of precision due to
round-off errors. For some problems, the answer is known to contain only
integers, and a variant of the FFT based on modular arithmetic can
guarantee that the answer is calculated exactly. An example of such a
problem is that of multiplying two polynomials with integer
coefficients. Exercise 30.2-6 gives one approach, using a modulus of
length Ω(n) bits to handle a DFT on n points. This problem explores
another approach that uses a modulus of the more reasonable length O(lg
n), but it requires that you understand the material of Chapter 31. Let
n be an exact power of 2.

a. You wish to search for the smallest k such that p = kn + 1 is prime.
Give a simple heuristic argument why you might expect k to be
approximately ln n. (The value of k might be much larger or smaller, but
you can reasonably expect to examine O(lg n) candidate values of k on
average.) How does the expected length of p compare to the length of n?

Let g be a generator of [art], and let w = g^(k) mod p.

b. Argue that the DFT and the inverse DFT are well-defined inverse
operations modulo p, where w is used as a principal nth root of unity.

c. Show how to make the FFT and its inverse work modulo p in O(n lg n)
time, where operations on words of O(lg n) bits take unit time. Assume
that the algorithm is given p and w.

d. Compute the DFT modulo p = 17 of the vector (0, 5, 3, 7, 7, 2, 1, 6).
(Hint: Verify and use the fact that g = 3 is a generator of [art].)

Chapter notes

Van Loan’s book [442] provides an outstanding treatment of the fast
Fourier transform. Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery [365, 366]
offer a good description of the fast Fourier transform and its
applications. For an excellent introduction to signal processing, a
popular FFT application area, see the texts by Oppenheim and Schafer
[347] and Oppenheim and Willsky [348]. The Oppenheim and Schafer book
also shows how to handle cases in which n is not an exact power of 2.

Fourier analysis is not limited to 1-dimensional data. It is widely used
in image processing to analyze data in two or more dimensions. The books
by Gonzalez and Woods [194] and Pratt [363] discuss multidimensional
Fourier transforms and their use in image processing, and books by
Tolimieri, An, and Lu [439] and Van Loan [442] discuss the mathematics
of multidimensional fast Fourier transforms.

Cooley and Tukey [101] are widely credited with devising the FFT in the
1960s. The FFT had in fact been discovered many times previously, but
its importance was not fully realized before the advent of modern
digital computers. Although Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery
attribute the origins of the method to Runge and König in 1924, an
article by Heideman, Johnson, and Burrus [211] traces the history of the
FFT as far back as C. F. Gauss in 1805.

Frigo and Johnson [161] developed a fast and flexible implementation of
the FFT, called FFTW (“fastest Fourier transform in the West”). FFTW is
designed for situations requiring multiple DFT computations on the same
problem size. Before actually computing the DFTs, FFTW executes a
“planner,” which, by a series of trial runs, determines how best to
decompose the FFT computation for the given problem size on the host
machine. FFTW adapts to use the hardware cache efficiently, and once
subproblems are small enough, FFTW solves them with optimized,
straight-line code. Moreover, FFTW has the advantage of taking Θ(n lg n)
time for any problem size n, even when n is a large prime.

Although the standard Fourier transform assumes that the input
represents points that are uniformly spaced in the time domain, other
techniques can approximate the FFT on “nonequispaced” data. The article
by Ware [449] provides an overview.

¹ Interpolation is a notoriously tricky problem from the point of view
of numerical stability. Although the approaches described here are
mathematically correct, small differences in the inputs or round-off
errors during computation can cause large differences in the result.

² Many other authors define ω_(n) differently: ω_(n) = e^(−2πi/n). This
alternative definition tends to be used for signal-processing
applications. The underlying mathematics is substantially the same with
either definition of ω_(n).

³ The length n is actually what Section 30.1 referred to as 2n, since
the degree-bound of the given polynomials doubles prior to evaluation.
In the context of polynomial multiplication, therefore, we are actually
working with complex (2n)th roots of unity.

⁴ The downside of iteratively updating ω is that round-off errors can
accumulate, especially for larger input sizes. Several techniques to
limit the magnitude of FFT round-off errors have been proposed, but are
beyond the scope of this book. If several FFTs are going to be run on
inputs of the same size, then it might be worthwhile to directly
precompute a table of all n/2 values of [art].

31        Number-Theoretic Algorithms

Number theory was once viewed as a beautiful but largely useless subject
in pure mathematics. Today number-theoretic algorithms are used widely,
due in large part to the invention of cryptographic schemes based on
large prime numbers. These schemes are feasible because we can find
large primes quickly, and they are secure because we do not know how to
factor the product of large primes (or solve related problems, such as
computing discrete logarithms) efficiently. This chapter presents some
of the number theory and related algorithms that underlie such
applications.

We start in Section 31.1 by introducing basic concepts of number theory,
such as divisibility, modular equivalence, and unique prime
factorization. Section 31.2 studies one of the world’s oldest
algorithms: Euclid’s algorithm for computing the greatest common divisor
of two integers, and Section 31.3 reviews concepts of modular
arithmetic. Section 31.4 then explores the set of multiples of a given
number a, modulo n, and shows how to find all solutions to the equation
ax = b (mod n) by using Euclid’s algorithm. The Chinese remainder
theorem is presented in Section 31.5. Section 31.6 considers powers of a
given number a, modulo n, and presents a repeated-squaring algorithm for
efficiently computing a^(b) mod n, given a, b, and n. This operation is
at the heart of efficient primality testing and of much modern
cryptography, such as the RSA public-key cryptosystem described in
Section 31.7. We wrap up in Section 31.8, which examines a randomized
primality test. This test finds large primes efficiently, an essential
step in creating keys for the RSA cryptosystem.

Size of inputs and cost of arithmetic computations

Because we’ll be working with large integers, we need to adjust how to
think about the size of an input and about the cost of elementary
arithmetic operations.

In this chapter, a “large input” typically means an input containing
“large integers” rather than an input containing “many integers” (as for
sorting). Thus, the size of an input depends on the number of bits
required to represent that input, not just the number of integers in the
input. An algorithm with integer inputs a₁, a₂, …, a_(k) is a
polynomial-time algorithm if it runs in time polynomial in 1g a₁, 1g a₂,
…, 1g a_(k), that is, polynomial in the lengths of its binary-encoded
inputs.

Most of this book considers the elementary arithmetic operations
(multiplications, divisions, or computing remainders) as primitive
operations that take one unit of time. Counting the number of such
arithmetic operations that an algorithm performs provides a basis for
making a reasonable estimate of the algorithm’s actual running time on a
computer. Elementary operations can be time-consuming, however, when
their inputs are large. It thus becomes appropriate to measure how many
bit operations a number-theoretic algorithm requires. In this model,
multiplying two β-bit integers by the ordinary method uses Θ(β²) bit
operations. Similarly, dividing a β-bit integer by a shorter integer or
taking the remainder of a β-bit integer when divided by a shorter
integer requires Θ(β²) time by simple algorithms. (See Exercise
31.1-12.) Faster methods are known. For example, a simple
divide-and-conquer method for multiplying two β-bit integers has a
running time of Θ(β^(1g 3)), and O(β 1g β 1g 1g β) time is possible. For
practical purposes, however, the Θ(β²) algorithm is often best, and we
use this bound as a basis for our analyses. In this chapter, we’ll
usually analyze algorithms in terms of both the number of arithmetic
operations and the number of bit operations they require.

31.1    Elementary number-theoretic notions

This section provides a brief review of notions from elementary number
theory concerning the set ℤ = {…, –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, …} of integers and
the set ℕ = {0, 1, 2, …} of natural numbers.

Divisibility and divisors

The notion of one integer being divisible by another is key to the
theory of numbers. The notation d | a (read “d divides a”) means that a
= kd for some integer k. Every integer divides 0. If a > 0 and d | a,
then |d| ≤ |a|. If d | a, then we also say that a is a multiple of d. If
d does not divide a, we write d ∤ a.

If d | a and d ≥ 0, then d is a divisor of a. Since d | a if and only if
–d | a, without loss of generality, we define the divisors of a to be
nonnegative, with the understanding that the negative of any divisor of
a also divides a. A divisor of a nonzero integer a is at least 1 but not
greater than |a|. For example, the divisors of 24 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8,
12, and 24.

Every positive integer a is divisible by the trivial divisors 1 and a.
The nontrivial divisors of a are the factors of a. For example, the
factors of 20 are 2, 4, 5, and 10.

Prime and composite numbers

An integer a > 1 whose only divisors are the trivial divisors 1 and a is
a prime number or, more simply, a prime. Primes have many special
properties and play a critical role in number theory. The first 20
primes, in order, are

2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 47, 53, 59, 61, 67,
71.

Exercise 31.1-2 asks you to prove that there are infinitely many primes.
An integer a > 1 that is not prime is a composite number or, more
simply, a composite. For example, 39 is composite because 3 | 39. We
call the integer 1 a unit, and it is neither prime nor composite.
Similarly, the integer 0 and all negative integers are neither prime nor
composite.

The division theorem, remainders, and modular equivalence

Given an integer n, we can partition the integers into those that are
multiples of n and those that are not multiples of n. Much number theory
is based upon refining this partition by classifying the integers that
are not multiples of n according to their remainders when divided by n.
The following theorem provides the basis for this refinement. We omit
the proof (but see, for example, Niven and Zuckerman [345]).

Theorem 31.1 (Division theorem)

For any integer a and any positive integer n, there exist unique
integers q and r such that 0 ≤ r < n and a = qn + r.

▪

The value q = ⌊a/n⌋ is the quotient of the division. The value r = a mod
n is the remainder (or residue) of the division, so that n | a if and
only if a mod n = 0.

The integers partition into n equivalence classes according to their
remainders modulo n. The equivalence class modulo n containing an
integer a is

[a]_(n) = {a + kn : k ∈ ℤ}.

For example, [3]₇ = {…, –11, –4, 3, 10, 17, …}, and [–4]₇ and [10]₇ also
denote this set. With the notation defined on page 64, writing a ∈
[b]_(n) is the same as writing a = b (mod n). The set of all such
equivalence classes is

[art]

When you see the definition

[art]

you should read it as equivalent to equation (31.1) with the
understanding that 0 represents [0]_(n), 1 represents [1]_(n), and so
on. Each class is represented by its smallest nonnegative element. You
should keep the underlying equivalence classes in mind, however. For
example, if we refer to –1 as a member of ℤ_(n), we are really referring
to [n – 1]_(n), since –1 = n – 1 (mod n).

Common divisors and greatest common divisors

If d is a divisor of a and d is also a divisor of b, then d is a common
divisor of a and b. For example, the divisors of 30 are 1, 2, 3, 5, 6,
10, 15, and 30, and so the common divisors of 24 and 30 are 1, 2, 3, and
6. Any pair of integers has a common divisor of 1.

An important property of common divisors is that

[art]

More generally, for any integers x and y,

[art]

Also, if a | b, then either |a| ≤ |b| or b = 0, which implies that

[art]

The greatest common divisor of two integers a and b which are not both
0, denoted by gcd(a, b), is the largest of the common divisors of a and
b. For example, gcd(24, 30) = 6, gcd(5, 7) = 1, and gcd(0, 9) = 9. If a
and b are both nonzero, then gcd(a, b) is an integer between 1 and min
{|a|, |b|}. We define gcd(0, 0) to be 0, so that standard properties of
the gcd function (such as equation (31.9) below) hold universally.

Exercise 31.1-9 asks you to prove the following elementary properties of
the gcd function:

[art]

The following theorem provides an alternative and useful way to
characterize gcd(a, b).

Theorem 31.2

If a and b are any integers, not both zero, then gcd(a, b) is the
smallest positive element of the set {ax + by : x, y ∈ ℤ} of linear
combinations of a and b.

Proof   Let s be the smallest positive such linear combination of a and
b, and let s = ax + by for some x, y ∈ ℤ. Let q = ⌊a/s⌋. Equation (3.11)
on page 64 then implies

  --------- --- -----------------------
  a mod s   =   a – qs
            =   a – q(ax + by)
            =   a (1 – qx) + b (–qy),
  --------- --- -----------------------

so that a mod s is a linear combination of a and b as well. Because s is
the smallest positive such linear combination and 0 ≤ a mod s < s
(inequality (3.12) on page 64), a mod s cannot be positive. Hence, a mod
s = 0. Therefore, we have that s | a and, by analogous reasoning, s | b.
Thus, s is a common divisor of a and b, so that gcd(a, b) ≥ s. By
definition, gcd(a, b) divides both a and b, and s is defined as a linear
combination of a and b. Equation (31.4) therefore implies that gcd(a, b)
| s. But gcd(a, b) | s and s > 0 imply that gcd(a, b) ≤ s. Combining
gcd(a, b) ≥ s and gcd(a, b) ≤ s yields gcd(a, b) = s. We conclude that
s, the smallest positive linear combination of a and b, is also their
greatest common divisor.

▪

Theorem 31.2 engenders three useful corollaries.

Corollary 31.3

For any integers a and b, if d | a and d | b, then d | gcd(a, b).

Proof   This corollary follows from equation (31.4) and Theorem 31.2,
because gcd(a, b) is a linear combination of a and b,

▪

Corollary 31.4

For all integers a and b and any nonnegative integer n, we have

gcd(an, bn) = n gcd(a, b).

Proof   If n = 0, the corollary is trivial. If n > 0, then gcd(an, bn)
is the smallest positive element of the set {anx + bny : x, y ∈ ℤ},
which in turn is n times the smallest positive element of the set {ax +
by : x, y ∈ ℤ}.

▪

Corollary 31.5

For all positive integers n, a, and b, if n | ab and gcd(a, n) = 1, then
n | b.

Proof   Exercise 31.1-5 asks you to provide the proof.

▪

Relatively prime integers

Two integers a and b are relatively prime if their only common divisor
is 1, that is, if gcd(a, b) = 1. For example, 8 and 15 are relatively
prime, since the divisors of 8 are 1, 2, 4, and 8, and the divisors of
15 are 1, 3, 5, and 15. The following theorem states that if two
integers are each relatively prime to an integer p, then their product
is relatively prime to p.

Theorem 31.6

For any integers a, b, and p, we have gcd(ab, p) = 1 if and only if
gcd(a, p) = 1 and gcd(b, p) = 1 both hold.

Proof   If gcd(a, p) = 1 and gcd(b, p) = 1, then it follows from Theorem
31.2 that there exist integers x, y, x′, and y′ such that

  ----------- --- ----
  ax + py     =   1,
  bx′ + py′   =   1.
  ----------- --- ----

Multiplying these equations and rearranging gives

ab(xx′) + p(ybx′ + y′ax + pyy′) = 1.

Since 1 is thus a positive linear combination of ab and p, it is the
smallest positive linear combination. Applying Theorem 31.2 implies
gcd(ab, p) = 1, completing the proof in this direction.

Conversely, if gcd(ab, p) = 1, then Theorem 31.2 implies that there
exist integers x and y such that

abx + py = 1.

Writing abx as a(bx) and applying Theorem 31.2 again proves that gcd(a,
p) = 1. Proving that gcd(b, p) = 1 is similar.

▪

Integers n₁, n₂, …, n_(k) are pairwise relatively prime if gcd(n_(i),
n_(j)) = 1 for 1 ≤ i < j ≤ k.

Unique prime factorization

An elementary but important fact about divisibility by primes is the
following.

Theorem 31.7

For all primes p and all integers a and b, if p | ab, then p | a or p |
b (or both).

Proof   Assume for the purpose of contradiction that p | ab, but that p
∤ a and p ∤ b. Because p > 1 and ab = kp for some k ∈ ℤ, equation
(31.10) gives that gcd(ab, p) = p. We also have that gcd(a, p) = 1 and
gcd(b, p) = 1, since the only divisors of p are 1 and p, and we assumed
that p divides neither a nor b. Theorem 31.6 then implies that gcd(ab,
p) = 1, contradicting gcd(ab, p) = p. This contradiction completes the
proof.

▪

A consequence of Theorem 31.7 is that any composite integer can be
uniquely factored into a product of primes. Exercise 31.1-11 asks you to
provide a proof.

Theorem 31.8 (Unique prime factorization)

There is exactly one way to write any composite integer a as a product
of the form

[art]

where the p_(i) are prime, p₁ < p₂ < … < p_(r), and the e_(i) are
positive integers.

▪

As an example, the unique prime factorization of the number 6000 is 2⁴ ·
3¹ · 5³.

Exercises

31.1-1

Prove that if a > b > 0 and c = a + b, then c mod a = b.

31.1-2

Prove that there are infinitely many primes. (Hint: Show that none of
the primes p₁, p₂, …, p_(k) divide (p₁p₂ ⋯ p_(k)) + 1.)

31.1-3

Prove that if a | b and b | c, then a | c.

31.1-4

Prove that if p is prime and 0 < k < p, then gcd(k, p) = 1.

31.1-5

Prove Corollary 31.5.

31.1-6

Prove that if p is prime and 0 < k < p, then [art]. Conclude that for
all integers a and b and all primes p,

(a + b)^(p) = a^(p) + b^(p) (mod p).

31.1-7

Prove that if a and b are any positive integers such that a | b, then

(x mod b) mod a = x mod a

for any x. Prove, under the same assumptions, that

x = y (mod b) implies x = y (mod a)

for any integers x and y.

31.1-8

For any integer k > 0, an integer n is a kth power if there exists an
integer a such that a^(k) = n. Furthermore, n > 1 is a nontrivial power
if it is a kth power for some integer k > 1. Show how to determine
whether a given β-bit integer n is a nontrivial power in time polynomial
in β.

31.1-9

Prove equations (31.6)–(31.10).

31.1-10

Show that the gcd operator is associative. That is, prove that for all
integers a, b, and c, we have

gcd(a, gcd(b, c)) = gcd(gcd(a, b), c).

★ 31.1-11

Prove Theorem 31.8.

31.1-12

Give efficient algorithms for the operations of dividing a β-bit integer
by a shorter integer and of taking the remainder of a β-bit integer when
divided by a shorter integer. Your algorithms should run in Θ(β²) time.

31.1-13

Give an efficient algorithm to convert a given β-bit (binary) integer to
a decimal representation. Argue that if multiplication or division of
integers whose length is at most β takes M(β) time, where M(β) = Ω(β),
then you can convert binary to decimal in O(M(β) 1g β) time. (Hint: Use
a divide-and-conquer approach, obtaining the top and bottom halves of
the result with separate recursions.)

31.1-14

Professor Marshall sets up n lightbulbs in a row. The lightbulbs all
have switches, so that if he presses a bulb, it toggles on if it was off
and off if it was on. The lightbulbs all start off. For i = 1, 2, 3, …,
n, the professor presses bulb i, 2i, 3i, …. After the last press, which
lightbulbs are on? Prove your answer.

31.2    Greatest common divisor

In this section, we describe Euclid’s algorithm for efficiently
computing the greatest common divisor of two integers. When we analyze
the running time, we’ll see a surprising connection with the Fibonacci
numbers, which yield a worst-case input for Euclid’s algorithm.

We restrict ourselves in this section to nonnegative integers. This
restriction is justified by equation (31.8), which states that gcd(a, b)
= gcd(|a|, |b|).

In principle, for positive integers a and b, their prime factorizations
suffice to compute gcd(a, b). Indeed, if

[art]

with 0 exponents being used to make the set of primes p₁, p₂, …, p_(r)
the same for both a and b, then, as Exercise 31.2-1 asks you to show,

[art]

The best algorithms to date for factoring do not run in polynomial time.
Thus, this approach to computing greatest common divisors seems unlikely
to yield an efficient algorithm.

Euclid’s algorithm for computing greatest common divisors relies on the
following theorem.

Theorem 31.9 (GCD recursion theorem)

For any nonnegative integer a and any positive integer b,

gcd(a, b) = gcd(b, a mod b).

Proof   We will show that gcd(a, b) and gcd(b, a mod b) divide each
other. Since they are both nonnegative, equation (31.5) then implies
that they must be equal.

We first show that gcd(a, b) | gcd(b, a mod b). If we let d = gcd(a, b),
then d | a and d | b. By equation (3.11) on page 64, a mod b = a – qb,
where q = ⌊a/b⌋. Since a mod b is thus a linear combination of a and b,
equation (31.4) implies that d | (a mod b). Therefore, since d | b and d
| (a mod b), Corollary 31.3 implies that d | gcd(b, a mod b), that is,

[art]

Showing that gcd(b, a mod b) | gcd(a, b) is almost the same. If we now
let d = gcd(b, a mod b), then d | b and d | (a mod b). Since a = qb + (a
mod b), where q = ⌊a/b⌋, we have that a is a linear combination of b and
(a mod b). By equation (31.4), we conclude that d | a. Since d | b and d
| a, we have that d | gcd(a, b) by Corollary 31.3, so that

[art]

Using equation (31.5) to combine equations (31.14) and (31.15) completes
the proof.

▪

Euclid’s algorithm

Euclid’s Elements (circa 300 B.C.E.) describes the following gcd
algorithm, although its origin might be even earlier. The recursive
procedure EUCLID implements Euclid’s algorithm, based directly on
Theorem 31.9. The inputs a and b are arbitrary nonnegative integers.

EUCLID(a, b)

  --- --------------------------------
  1   if b == 0
  2   return a
  3   else return EUCLID(b, a mod b)
  --- --------------------------------

For example, here is how the procedure computes gcd(30, 21):

  ---------------- --- ---------------
  EUCLID(30, 21)   =   EUCLID(21, 9)
                   =   EUCLID(9, 3)
                   =   EUCLID(3, 0)
                   =   3.
  ---------------- --- ---------------

This computation calls EUCLID recursively three times.

The correctness of EUCLID follows from Theorem 31.9 and the property
that if the algorithm returns a in line 2, then b = 0, so that by
equation (31.9), gcd(a, b) = gcd(a, 0) = a. The algorithm cannot recurse
indefinitely, since the second argument strictly decreases in each
recursive call and is always nonnegative. Therefore, EUCLID always
terminates with the correct answer.

The running time of Euclid’s algorithm

Let’s analyze the worst-case running time of EUCLID as a function of the
size of a and b. The overall running time of EUCLID is proportional to
the number of recursive calls it makes. The analysis assumes that a > b
≥ 0, that is, the first argument is greater than the second argument.
Why? If b = a > 0, then a mod b = 0 and the procedure terminates after
one recursive call. If b > a ≥ 0, then the procedure makes just one more
recursive call than when a > b, because in this case EUCLID(a, b)
immediately makes the recursive call EUCLID(b, a), and now the first
argument is greater than the second.

Our analysis relies on the Fibonacci numbers F_(k), defined by the
recurrence equation (3.31) on page 69.

Lemma 31.10

If a > b ≥ 1 and the call EUCLID(a, b) performs k ≥ 1 recursive calls,
then a ≥ F_(k+2) and b ≥ F_(k+1).

Proof   The proof proceeds by induction on k. For the base case of the
induction, let k = 1. Then, b ≥ 1 = F₂, and since a > b, we must have a
≥ 2 = F₃. Since b > (a mod b), in each recursive call the first argument
is strictly larger than the second. The assumption that a > b therefore
holds for each recursive call.

Assuming inductively that the lemma holds if the procedure makes k – 1
recursive calls, we shall prove that the lemma holds for k recursive
calls. Since k > 0, we have b > 0, and EUCLID(a, b) calls EUCLID(b, a
mod b) recursively, which in turn makes k – 1 recursive calls. The
inductive hypothesis then implies that b ≥ F_(k+1) (thus proving part of
the lemma), and a mod b ≥ F_(k). We have

  --------------- --------------------- ----------------------
  b + (a mod b)   = b + (a – b ⌊a/b⌋)   (by equation (3.11))
                  ≤ a,                  
  --------------- --------------------- ----------------------

since a > b > 0 implies ⌊a/b⌋ ≥ 1. Thus,

  --- --- -----------------
  a   ≥   b + (a mod b)
      ≥   F_(k+1) + F_(k)
      =   F_(k+2).
  --- --- -----------------

▪

The following theorem is an immediate corollary of this lemma.

Theorem 31.11 (Lamé’s theorem)

For any integer k ≥ 1, if a > b ≥ 1 and b < F_(k+1), then the call
EUCLID(a, b) makes fewer than k recursive calls.

▪

To show that the upper bound of Theorem 31.11 is the best possible,
we’ll show that the call EUCLID(F_(k+1), F_(k)) makes exactly k – 1
recursive calls when k ≥ 2. We use induction on k. For the base case, k
= 2, and the call EUCLID(F₃, F₂) makes exactly one recursive call, to
EUCLID(1, 0). (We have to start at k = 2, because when k = 1 we do not
have F₂ > F₁.) For the inductive step, assume that EUCLID(F_(k),
F_(k−1)) makes exactly k – 2 recursive calls. For k > 2, we have F_(k) >
F_(k−1) > 0 and F_(k+1) = F_(k) + F_(k−1), and so by Exercise 31.1-1, we
have F_(k+1) mod F_(k) = F_(k−1). Because EUCLID(a, b) calls EUCLID(b, a
mod b) when b > 0, the call EUCLID(F_(k+1), F_(k)) recurses one time
more than the call EUCLID(F_(k), F_(k−1)), or exactly k – 1 times, which
meets the upper bound given by Theorem 31.11.

Since F_(k) is approximately [art], where ϕ is the golden ratio [art]
defined by equation (3.32) on page 69, the number of recursive calls in
EUCLID is O(1g b). (See Exercise 31.2-5 for a tighter bound.) Therefore,
a call of EUCLID on two β-bit numbers performs O(β) arithmetic
operations and O(β³) bit operations (assuming that multiplication and
division of β-bit numbers take O(β²) bit operations). Problem 31-2 asks
you to prove an O(β²) bound on the number of bit operations.

The extended form of Euclid’s algorithm

By rewriting Euclid’s algorithm, we can gain additional useful
information. Specifically, let’s extend the algorithm to compute the
integer coefficients x and y such that

[art]

where either or both of x and y may be zero or negative. These
coefficients will prove useful later for computing modular
multiplicative inverses. The procedure EXTENDED-EUCLID takes as input a
pair of nonnegative integers and returns a triple of the form (d, x, y)
that satisfies equation (31.16). As an example, Figure 31.1 traces out
the call EXTENDED-EUCLID(99, 78).

EXTENDED-EUCLID(a, b)

  --- -------------------------------------------------
  1   if b == 0
  2   return (a, 1, 0)
  3   else (d′, x′, y′) = EXTENDED-EUCLID(b, a mod b)
  4   (d, x, y) = (d′, y′, x′ – ⌊a/b⌋ y′)
  5   return (d, x, y)
  --- -------------------------------------------------

The EXTENDED-EUCLID procedure is a variation of the EUCLID procedure.
Line 1 is equivalent to the test “b == 0” in line 1 of EUCLID. If b = 0,
then EXTENDED-EUCLID returns not only d = a in line 2, but also the
coefficients x = 1 and y = 0, so that a = ax + by. If b ≠ 0,
EXTENDED-EUCLID first computes (d′, x′, y′) such that d′ = gcd(b, a mod
b) and

[art]

As in the EUCLID procedure, we have d = gcd(a, b) = d′ = gcd(b, a mod
b). To obtain x and y such that d = ax + by, let’s rewrite equation
(31.17), setting d = d′ and using equation (3.11):

[art]

Figure 31.1 How EXTENDED-EUCLID computes gcd(99, 78). Each line shows
one level of the recursion: the values of the inputs a and b, the
computed value ⌊a/b⌋, and the values d, x, and y returned. The triple
(d, x, y) returned becomes the triple (d′, x′, y′) used at the next
higher level of recursion. The call EXTENDED-EUCLID(99, 78) returns (3,
–11, 14), so that gcd(99, 78) = 3 = 99 · (–11) + 78 · 14.

  --- --- -------------------------
  d   =   bx′ + (a – b ⌊a/b⌋)y′
      =   ay′ + b(x′ – ⌊a/b⌋ y′).
  --- --- -------------------------

Thus, choosing x = y′ and y = x′ – ⌊a/b⌋ y′ satisfies the equation d =
ax + by, thereby proving the correctness of EXTENDED-EUCLID.

Since the number of recursive calls made in EUCLID is equal to the
number of recursive calls made in EXTENDED-EUCLID, the running times of
EUCLID and EXTENDED-EUCLID are the same, to within a constant factor.
That is, for a > b > 0, the number of recursive calls is O(1g b).

Exercises

31.2-1

Prove that equations (31.11) and (31.12) imply equation (31.13).

31.2-2

Compute the values (d, x, y) that the call EXTENDED-EUCLID(899, 493)
returns.

31.2-3

Prove that for all integers a, k, and n,

[art]

Use equation (31.18) to show that a = 1 (mod n) implies gcd(a, n) = 1.

31.2-4

Rewrite EUCLID in an iterative form that uses only a constant amount of
memory (that is, stores only a constant number of integer values).

31.2-5

If a > b ≥ 0, show that the call EUCLID (a, b) makes at most 1 +
log_(ϕ) b recursive calls. Improve this bound to 1 + log_(ϕ)(b/gcd(a,
b)).

31.2-6

What does EXTENDED-EUCLID(F_(k+1), F_(k)) return? Prove your answer
correct.

31.2-7

Define the gcd function for more than two arguments by the recursive
equation gcd(a₀, a₁, …, a_(n)) = gcd(a₀, gcd(a₁, a₂, …, a_(n))). Show
that the gcd function returns the same answer independent of the order
in which its arguments are specified. Also show how to find integers x₀,
x₁, …, x_(n) such that gcd(a₀, a₁, …, a_(n)) = a₀x₀ + a₁x₁ + ⋯ +
a_(n)x_(n). Show that the number of divisions performed by your
algorithm is O(n + 1g(max {a₀, a₁, …, a_(n)})).

31.2-8

The least common multiple 1cm(a₁, a₂, …, a_(n)) of integers a₁, a₂, …,
a_(n) is the smallest nonnegative integer that is a multiple of each
a_(i). Show how to compute 1cm(a₁, a₂, …, a_(n)) efficiently using the
(two-argument) gcd operation as a subroutine.

31.2-9

Prove that n₁, n₂, n₃, and n₄ are pairwise relatively prime if and only
if

gcd(n₁n₂, n₃n₄) = gcd(n₁n₃, n₂n₄) = 1.

More generally, show that n₁, n₂, …, n_(k) are pairwise relatively prime
if and only if a set of ⌈1g k⌉ pairs of numbers derived from the n_(i)
are relatively prime.

31.3    Modular arithmetic

Informally, you can think of modular arithmetic as arithmetic as usual
over the integers, except that when working modulo n, then every result
x is replaced by the element of {0, 1, …, n – 1} that is equivalent to
x, modulo n (so that x is replaced by x mod n). This informal model
suffices if you stick to the operations of addition, subtraction, and
multiplication. A more formal model for modular arithmetic, which
follows, is best described within the framework of group theory.

Finite groups

A group (S, ⊕) is a set S together with a binary operation ⊕ defined on
S for which the following properties hold:

1.  Closure: For all a, b ∈ S, we have a ⊕ b ∈ S.
2.  Identity: There exists an element e ∈ S, called the identity of the
    group, such that e ⊕ a = a ⊕ e = a for all a ∈ S.
3.  Associativity: For all a, b, c ∈ S, we have (a ⊕ b) ⊕ c = a ⊕ (b ⊕
    c).
4.  Inverses: For each a ∈ S, there exists a unique element b ∈ S,
    called the inverse of a, such that a ⊕ b = b ⊕ a = e.

As an example, consider the familiar group (ℤ, +) of the integers ℤ
under the operation of addition: 0 is the identity, and the inverse of a
is –a. An abelian group (S, ⊕) satisfies the commutative law a ⊕ b = b ⊕
a for all a, b ∈ S. The size of group (S, ⊕) is |S|, and if |S| < ∞,
then (S, ⊕) is a finite group.

The groups defined by modular addition and multiplication

We can form two finite abelian groups by using addition and
multiplication modulo n, where n is a positive integer. These groups are
based on the equivalence classes of the integers modulo n, defined in
Section 31.1.

To define a group on ℤ_(n), we need suitable binary operations, which we
obtain by redefining the ordinary operations of addition and
multiplication. We can define addition and multiplication operations for
ℤ_(n), because the equivalence class of two integers uniquely determines
the equivalence class of their sum or product. That is, if a = a′ (mod
n) and b = b′ (mod n), then

  ------- --- --------- ----------
  a + b   =   a′ + b′   (mod n),
  ab      =   a′b′      (mod n).
  ------- --- --------- ----------

Thus, we define addition and multiplication modulo n, denoted +_(n) and
·_(n), by

[art]

(We can define subtraction similarly on ℤ_(n) by [a]_(n) –_(n) [b]_(n) =
[a – b]_(n), but division is more complicated, as we’ll see.) These
facts justify the common and convenient practice of using the smallest
nonnegative element of each equivalence class as its representative when
performing computations in ℤ_(n). We add, subtract, and multiply as
usual on the representatives, but we replace each result x by the
representative of its class, that is, by x mod n.

[art]

Figure 31.2 Two finite groups. Equivalence classes are denoted by their
representative elements. (a) The group (ℤ₆, +₆). (b) The group [art].

Using this definition of addition modulo n, we define the additive group
modulo n as (ℤ_(n), +_(n)). The size of the additive group modulo n is
|ℤ_(n)| = n. Figure 31.2(a) gives the operation table for the group (ℤ₆,
+₆).

Theorem 31.12

The system (ℤ_(n), +_(n)) is a finite abelian group.

Proof   Equation (31.19) shows that (ℤ_(n), +_(n)) is closed.
Associativity and commutativity of +_(n) follow from the associativity
and commutativity of +:

+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+
| ([a]_(n) +_(n) [b]_(n)) +_(n)  | = | [a + b]_(n) +_(n) [c]_(n)      |
| [c]_(n)                        |   |                                |
+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+
|                                | = | [(a + b) + c]_(n)              |
+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+
|                                | = | [a + (b + c)]_(n)              |
+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+
|                                | = | [a]_(n) +_(n) [b + c]_(n)      |
+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+
|                                | = | [a]_(n) +_(n) ([b]_(n) +_(n)   |
|                                |   | [c]_(n)),                      |
+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+
|                                                                     |
+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+
| [a]_(n) +_(n) [b]_(n)          | = | [a + b]_(n)                    |
+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+
|                                | = | [b + a]_(n)                    |
+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+
|                                | = | [b]_(n) +_(n) [a]_(n).         |
+--------------------------------+---+--------------------------------+

The identity element of (ℤ_(n), +_(n)) is 0 (that is, [0]_(n)). The
(additive) inverse of an element a (that is, of [a]_(n)) is the element
–a (that is, [–a]_(n) or [n – a]_(n)), since [a]_(n) +_(n) [–a]_(n) = [a
– a]_(n) = [0]_(n).

▪

Using the definition of multiplication modulo n, we define the
multiplicative group modulo n as [art]. The elements of this group are
the set [art] of elements in ℤ_(n) that are relatively prime to n, so
that each one has a unique inverse, modulo n:

[art]

To see that [art] is well defined, note that for 0 ≤ a < n, we have a =
(a + kn) (mod n) for all integers k. By Exercise 31.2-3, therefore,
gcd(a, n) = 1 implies gcd(a + kn, n) = 1 for all integers k. Since
[a]_(n) = {a + kn : k ∈ ℤ}, the set [art] is well defined. An example of
such a group is

[art]

where the group operation is multiplication modulo 15. (We have denoted
an element [a]₁₅ as a, and thus, for example, we denote [7]₁₅ as 7.)
Figure 31.2(b) shows the group [art]. For example, 8 · 11 = 13 (mod 15),
working in [art]. The identity for this group is 1.

Theorem 31.13

The system [art] is a finite abelian group.

Proof   Theorem 31.6 implies that [art] is closed. Associativity and
commutativity can be proved for ·_(n) as they were for +_(n) in the
proof of Theorem 31.12. The identity element is [1]_(n). To show the
existence of inverses, let a be an element of [art] and let (d, x, y) be
returned by EXTENDED-EUCLID(a, n). Then we have d = 1, since [art], and

[art]

or equivalently,

ax = 1 (mod n).

Thus [x]_(n) is a multiplicative inverse of [a]_(n), modulo n.
Furthermore, we claim that [art]. To see why, equation (31.20)
demonstrates that the smallest positive linear combination of x and n
must be 1. Therefore, Theorem 31.2 implies that gcd(x, n) = 1. We defer
the proof that inverses are uniquely defined until Corollary 31.26 in
Section 31.4.

▪

As an example of computing multiplicative inverses, suppose that a = 5
and n = 11. Then EXTENDED-EUCLID(a, n) returns (d, x, y) = (1, –2, 1),
so that 1 = 5 · (–2) + 11 · 1. Thus, [–2]₁₁ (i.e., [9]₁₁) is the
multiplicative inverse of [5]₁₁.

When working with the groups (ℤ_(n), +_(n)) and [art] in the remainder
of this chapter, we follow the convenient practice of denoting
equivalence classes by their representative elements and denoting the
operations +_(n) and ·_(n) by the usual arithmetic notations + and · (or
juxtaposition, so that ab = a · b) respectively. Furthermore,
equivalences modulo n may also be interpreted as equations in ℤ_(n). For
example, the following two statements are equivalent:

ax = b (mod n)

and

[a]_(n) ·_(n) [x]_(n) = [b]_(n).

As a further convenience, we sometimes refer to a group (S, ⊕) merely as
S when the operation ⊕ is understood from context. We may thus refer to
the groups (ℤ_(n), +_(n)) and [art] as just ℤ_(n) and [art],
respectively.

We denote the (multiplicative) inverse of an element a by (a⁻¹ mod n).
Division in [art] is defined by the equation a/b = ab⁻¹ (mod n). For
example, in [art] we have that 7⁻¹ = 13 (mod 15), since 7 · 13 = 91 = 1
(mod 15), so that 2/7 = 2 · 13 = 11 (mod 15).

The size of [art] is denoted ϕ(n). This function, known as Euler’s phi
function, satisfies the equation

[art]

so that p runs over all the primes dividing n (including n itself, if n
is prime). We won’t prove this formula here. Intuitively, begin with a
list of the n remainders {0, 1, …, n – 1} and then, for each prime p
that divides n, cross out every multiple of p in the list. For example,
since the prime divisors of 45 are 3 and 5,

[art]

If p is prime, then [art], and

[art]

If n is composite, then ϕ(n) < n – 1, although it can be shown that

[art]

for n ≥ 3, where γ = 0.5772156649 … is Euler’s constant. A somewhat
simpler (but looser) lower bound for n > 5 is

[art]

The lower bound (31.23) is essentially the best possible, since

[art]

Subgroups

If (S, ⊕) is a group, S′ ⊆ S, and (S′, ⊕) is also a group, then (S′, ⊕)
is a subgroup of (S, ⊕). For example, the even integers form a subgroup
of the integers under the operation of addition. The following theorem,
whose proof we leave as Exercise 31.3-3, provides a useful tool for
recognizing subgroups.

Theorem 31.14 (A nonempty closed subset of a finite group is a subgroup)

If (S, ⊕) is a finite group and S′ is any nonempty subset of S such that
a ⊕ b ∈ S′ for all a, b ∈ S′, then (S′, ⊕) is a subgroup of (S, ⊕).

▪

For example, the set {0, 2, 4, 6} forms a subgroup of ℤ₈, since it is
nonempty and closed under the operation + (that is, it is closed under
+₈).

The following theorem, whose proof is omitted, provides an extremely
useful constraint on the size of a subgroup.

Theorem 31.15 (Lagrange’s theorem)

If (S, ⊕) is a finite group and (S′, ⊕) is a subgroup of (S, ⊕), then
|S′| is a divisor of |S|.

▪

A subgroup S′ of a group S is a proper subgroup if S′ ≠ S. We’ll use the
following corollary in the analysis in Section 31.8 of the Miller-Rabin
primality test procedure.

Corollary 31.16

If S′ is a proper subgroup of a finite group S, then |S′| ≤ |S|/2.

▪

Subgroups generated by an element

Theorem 31.14 affords us a straightforward way to produce a subgroup of
a finite group (S, ⊕): choose an element a and take all elements that
can be generated from a using the group operation. Specifically, define
a^((k)) for k ≥ 1 by

[art]

For example, taking a = 2 in the group ℤ₆ yields the sequence

a⁽¹⁾, a⁽²⁾, a⁽³⁾, … = 2, 4, 0, 2, 4, 0, 2, 4, 0, ….

We have a^((k)) = ka mod n in the group ℤ_(n), and a^((k)) = a^(k) mod n
in the group [art]. We define the subgroup generated by a, denoted 〈a〉
or (〈a〉, ⊕), by

〈a〉 = {a^((k)) : k ≥ 1}.

We say that a generates the subgroup 〈a〉 or that a is a generator of
〈a〉. Since S is finite, 〈a〉 is a finite subset of S, possibly
including all of S. Since the associativity of ⊕ implies

a^((i)) ⊕ a^((j)) = a^((i+j)),

〈a〉 is closed and therefore, by Theorem 31.14, 〈a〉 is a subgroup of
S. For example, in ℤ₆, we have

  ------- --- ---------------------
  〈0〉   =   {0},
  〈1〉   =   {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5},
  〈2〉   =   {0, 2, 4}.
  ------- --- ---------------------

Similarly, in [art], we have

  ------- --- ---------------------
  〈1〉   =   {1},
  〈2〉   =   {1, 2, 4},
  〈3〉   =   {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.
  ------- --- ---------------------

The order of a (in the group S), denoted ord(a), is defined as the
smallest positive integer t such that a^((t)) = e. (Recall that e ∈ S is
the group identity.)

Theorem 31.17

For any finite group (S, ⊕) and any a ∈ S, the order of a is equal to
the size of the subgroup it generates, or ord(a) = |〈a〉|.

Proof   Let t = ord(a). Since a^((t)) = e and a^((t+k)) = a^((t)) ⊕
a^((k)) = a^((k)) for k ≥ 1, if i > t, then a^((i)) = a^((j)) for some j
< i. Therefore, as we generate elements by a, we see no new elements
after a^((t)). Thus, 〈a〉 = {a⁽¹⁾, a⁽²⁾, …, a^((t))}, and so |〈a〉| ≤
t. To show that |〈a〉| ≥ t, we show that each element of the sequence
a⁽¹⁾, a⁽²⁾, …, a^((t)) is distinct. Suppose for the purpose of
contradiction that a^((i)) = a^((j)) for some i and j satisfying 1 ≤ i <
j ≤ t. Then, a^((i+k)) = a^((j+k)) for k ≥ 0. But this equation implies
that a^((i+(t–j))) = a^((j+(t–j))) = e, a contradiction, since i + (t –
j) < t but t is the least positive value such that a^((t)) = e.
Therefore, each element of the sequence a⁽¹⁾, a⁽²⁾, …, a^((t)) is
distinct, and |〈a〉| ≥ t. We conclude that ord(a) = |〈a〉|.

▪

Corollary 31.18

The sequence a⁽¹⁾, a⁽²⁾, … is periodic with period t = ord(a), that is,
a^((i)) = a^((j)) if and only if i = j (mod t).

▪

Consistent with the above corollary, we define a⁽⁰⁾ as e and a^((i)) as
a^((i mod t)), where t = ord(a), for all integers i.

Corollary 31.19

If (S, ⊕) is a finite group with identity e, then for all a ∈ S,

a^((|S|)) = e.

Proof   Lagrange’s theorem (Theorem 31.15) implies that ord(a) | |S|,
and so |S| = 0 (mod t), where t = ord(a). Therefore, a^((|S|)) = a⁽⁰⁾ =
e.

▪

Exercises

31.3-1

Draw the group operation tables for the groups (ℤ₄, +₄) and [art]. Show
that these groups are isomorphic by exhibiting a one-to-one
correspondence f between ℤ₄ and [art] such that a+b = c (mod 4) if and
only if f(a)·f(b) = f(c) (mod 5).

31.3-2

List all subgroups of ℤ₉ and of [art].

31.3-3

Prove Theorem 31.14.

31.3-4

Show that if p is prime and e is a positive integer, then

ϕ(p^(e)) = p^(e–1)(p – 1).

31.3-5

Show that for any integer n > 1 and for any [art], the function [art]
defined by f_(a)(x) = ax mod n is a permutation of [art].

31.4    Solving modular linear equations

We now consider the problem of finding solutions to the equation

[art]

where a > 0 and n > 0. This problem has several applications. For
example, we’ll use it in Section 31.7 as part of the procedure to find
keys in the RSA public-key cryptosystem. We assume that a, b, and n are
given, and we wish to find all values of x, modulo n, that satisfy
equation (31.26). The equation may have zero, one, or more than one such
solution.

Let 〈a〉 denote the subgroup of ℤ_(n) generated by a. Since 〈a〉 =
{a^((x)) : x > 0} = {ax mod n : x > 0}, equation (31.26) has a solution
if and only if [b] ∈ 〈a〉. Lagrange’s theorem (Theorem 31.15) tells us
that |〈a〉| must be a divisor of n. The following theorem gives us a
precise characterization of 〈a〉.

Theorem 31.20

For any positive integers a and n, if d = gcd(a, n), then we have

  ------- --- -----------------------------
  〈a〉   =   〈d〉
          =   {0, d, 2d, …, ((n/d) – 1)d}
  ------- --- -----------------------------

in ℤ_(n), and thus

|〈a〉| = n/d.

Proof   We begin by showing that d ∈ 〈a〉. Recall that
EXTENDED-EUCLID(a, n) returns a triple (d, x, y) such that ax + ny = d.
Thus, ax = d (mod n), so that d ∈ 〈a〉. In other words, d is a multiple
of a in ℤ_(n).

Since d ∈ 〈a〉, it follows that every multiple of d belongs to 〈a〉,
because any multiple of a multiple of a is itself a multiple of a. Thus,
〈a〉 contains every element in {0, d, 2d, …, ((n/d) – 1)d}. That is,
〈d〉 ⊆ 〈a〉.

We now show that 〈a〉 ⊆ 〈d〉. If m ∈ 〈a〉, then m = ax mod n for some
integer x, and so m = ax + ny for some integer y. Because d = gcd(a, n),
we know that d | a and d | n, and so d | m by equation (31.4).
Therefore, m ∈ 〈d〉.

Combining these results, we have that 〈a〉 = 〈d〉. To see that |〈a〉|
= n/d, observe that there are exactly n/d multiples of d between 0 and n
– 1, inclusive.

▪

Corollary 31.21

The equation ax = b (mod n) is solvable for the unknown x if and only if
d | b, where d = gcd(a, n).

Proof   The equation ax = b (mod n) is solvable if and only if [b] ∈
〈a〉, which is the same as saying

(b mod n) ∈ {0, d, 2d, …, ((n/d) – 1)d},

by Theorem 31.20. If 0 ≤ b < n, then b ∈ 〈a〉 if and only if d | b,
since the members of 〈a〉 are precisely the multiples of d. If b < 0 or
b ≥ n, the corollary then follows from the observation that d | b if and
only if d | (b mod n), since b and b mod n differ by a multiple of n,
which is itself a multiple of d.

▪

Corollary 31.22

The equation ax = b (mod n) either has d distinct solutions modulo n,
where d = gcd(a, n), or it has no solutions.

Proof   If ax = b (mod n) has a solution, then b ∈ 〈a〉. By Theorem
31.17, ord(a) = |〈a〉|, and so Corollary 31.18 and Theorem 31.20 imply
that the sequence ai mod n, for i = 0, 1, …, is periodic with period
|〈a〉| = n/d. If b ∈ 〈a〉, then b appears exactly d times in the
sequence ai mod n, for i = 0, 1, …, n – 1, since the length-(n/d) block
of values 〈a〉 repeats exactly d times as i increases from 0 to n–1.
The indices x of the d positions for which ax mod n = b are the
solutions of the equation ax = b (mod n).

▪

Theorem 31.23

Let d = gcd(a, n), and suppose that d = ax′ + ny′ for some integers x′
and y′ (for example, as computed by EXTENDED-EUCLID). If d | b, then the
equation ax = b (mod n) has as one of its solutions the value x₀, where

x₀ = x′(b/d) mod n.

Proof   We have

  ----- ------------ ---------- ---------------------------
  ax₀   = ax′(b/d)   (mod n)    
        = d(b/d)     (mod n)    (because ax′ = d (mod n))
        = b          (mod n),   
  ----- ------------ ---------- ---------------------------

and thus x₀ is a solution to ax = b (mod n).

▪

Theorem 31.24

Suppose that the equation ax = b (mod n) is solvable (that is, d | b,
where d = gcd(a, n)) and that x₀ is any solution to this equation. Then,
this equation has exactly d distinct solutions, modulo n, given by x_(i)
= x₀ + i(n/d) for i = 0, 1, …, d – 1.

Proof   Because n/d > 0 and 0 ≤ i(n/d) < n for i = 0, 1, …, d – 1, the
values x₀, x₁, …, x_(d–1) are all distinct, modulo n. Since x₀ is a
solution of ax = b (mod n), we have ax₀ mod n = b (mod n). Thus, for i =
0, 1, …, d – 1, we have

  -------------- --- -----------------------------------------------------------------
  ax_(i) mod n   =   a(x₀ + in/d) mod n
                 =   (ax₀ + ain/d) mod n
                 =   ax₀ mod n (because d | a implies that ain/d is a multiple of n)
                 =   b (mod n),
  -------------- --- -----------------------------------------------------------------

and hence ax_(i) = b (mod n), making x_(i) a solution, too. By Corollary
31.22, the equation ax = b (mod n) has exactly d solutions, so that x₀,
x₁, …, x_(d–1) must be all of them.

▪

We have now developed the mathematics needed to solve the equation ax =
b (mod n). The procedure MODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVER prints all
solutions to this equation. The inputs a and n are arbitrary positive
integers, and b is an arbitrary integer.

MODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVER(a, b, n)

  --- -------------------------------------
  1   (d, x′, y′) = EXTENDED-EUCLID(a, n)
  2   if d | b
  3   x₀ = x′(b/d) mod n
  4   for i = 0 to d – 1
  5   print (x₀ + i(n/d)) mod n
  6   else print “no solutions”
  --- -------------------------------------

As an example of the operation of MODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVER,
consider the equation 14x = 30 (mod 100) (and thus a = 14, b = 30, and n
= 100). Calling EXTENDED-EUCLID in line 1 gives (d, x′, y′) = (2, –7,
1). Since 2 | 30, lines 3–5 execute. Line 3 computes x₀ = (–7)(15) mod
100 = 95. The for loop of lines 4–5 prints the two solutions, 95 and 45.

The procedure MODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVER works as follows. The call
to EXTENDED-EUCLID in line 1 returns a triple (d, x′, y′) such that d =
gcd(a, n) and d = ax′ + ny′. Therefore, x′ is a solution to the equation
ax′ = d (mod n). If d does not divide b, then the equation ax = b (mod
n) has no solution, by Corollary 31.21. Line 2 checks to see whether d |
b, and if not, line 6 reports that there are no solutions. Otherwise,
line 3 computes a solution x₀ to ax = b (mod n), as Theorem 31.23
suggests. Given one solution, Theorem 31.24 states that adding multiples
of (n/d), modulo n, yields the other d – 1 solutions. The for loop of
lines 4–5 prints out all d solutions, beginning with x₀ and spaced n/d
apart, modulo n.

MODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVER performs O(1g n + gcd(a, n)) arithmetic
operations, since EXTENDED-EUCLID performs O(1g n) arithmetic
operations, and each iteration of the for loop of lines 4–5 performs a
constant number of arithmetic operations.

The following corollaries of Theorem 31.24 give specializations of
particular interest.

Corollary 31.25

For any n > 1, if gcd(a, n) = 1, then the equation ax = b (mod n) has a
unique solution, modulo n.

▪

If b = 1, a common case of considerable interest, the x that solves the
equation is a multiplicative inverse of a, modulo n.

Corollary 31.26

For any n > 1, if gcd(a, n) = 1, then the equation ax = 1 (mod n) has a
unique solution, modulo n. Otherwise, it has no solution.

▪

Thanks to Corollary 31.26, the notation a⁻¹ mod n refers to the
multiplicative inverse of a, modulo n, when a and n are relatively
prime. If gcd(a, n) = 1, then the unique solution to the equation ax = 1
(mod n) is the integer x returned by EXTENDED-EUCLID, since the equation

gcd(a, n) = 1 = ax + ny

implies ax = 1 (mod n). Thus, EXTENDED-EUCLID can compute a⁻¹ mod n
efficiently.

Exercises

31.4-1

Find all solutions to the equation 35x = 10 (mod 50).

31.4-2

Prove that the equation ax = ay (mod n) implies x = y (mod n) whenever
gcd(a, n) = 1. Show that the condition gcd(a, n) = 1 is necessary by
supplying a counterexample with gcd(a, n) > 1.

31.4-3

Consider the following change to line 3 of the procedure
MODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVER:

 

  --- ------------------------
  3   x₀ = x′(b/d) mod (n/d)
  --- ------------------------

With this change, will the procedure still work? Explain why or why not.

★ 31.4-4

Let p be prime and f(x) = (f₀ + f₁x + ⋯ + f_(t)x^(t)) (mod p) be a
polynomial of degree t, with coefficients f_(i) drawn from ℤ_(p). We say
that a ∈ ℤ_(p) is a zero of f if f(a) = 0 (mod p). Prove that if a is a
zero of f, then f(x) = (x – a)g(x) (mod p) for some polynomial g(x) of
degree t – 1. Prove by induction on t that if p is prime, then a
polynomial f(x) of degree t can have at most t distinct zeros modulo p.

31.5    The Chinese remainder theorem

Around 100 C.E., the Chinese mathematician Sun-Tsŭ solved the problem of
finding those integers x that leave remainders 2, 3, and 2 when divided
by 3, 5, and 7 respectively. One such solution is x = 23, and all
solutions are of the form 23+105k for arbitrary integers k. The “Chinese
remainder theorem” provides a correspondence between a system of
equations modulo a set of pairwise relatively prime moduli (for example,
3, 5, and 7) and an equation modulo their product (for example, 105).

The Chinese remainder theorem has two major applications. Let the
integer n be factored as n = n₁n₂ ⋯ n_(k), where the factors n_(i) are
pairwise relatively prime. First, the Chinese remainder theorem is a
descriptive “structure theorem” that describes the structure of ℤ_(n) as
identical to that of the Cartesian product [art] with componentwise
addition and multiplication modulo n_(i) in the ith component. Second,
this description helps in designing efficient algorithms, since working
in each of the systems [art] can be more efficient (in terms of bit
operations) than working modulo n.

Theorem 31.27 (Chinese remainder theorem)

Let n = n₁n₂ ⋯ n_(k), where the n_(i) are pairwise relatively prime.
Consider the correspondence

[art]

where [art], and

a_(i) = a mod n_(i)

for i = 1, 2, …, k. Then, mapping (31.27) is a one-to-one mapping
(bijection) between ℤ_(n) and the Cartesian product [art]. Operations
performed on the elements of ℤ_(n) can be equivalently performed on the
corresponding k-tuples by performing the operations independently in
each coordinate position in the appropriate system. That is, if

  --- --- ---------------------
  a   ↔   (a₁, a₂, …, a_(k)),
  b   ↔   (b₁, b₂, …, b_(k)),
  --- --- ---------------------

then

[art]

Proof   Let’s see how to translate between the two representations.
Going from a to (a₁, a₂, …, a_(k)) requires only k “mod” operations. The
reverse—computing a from inputs (a₁, a₂, …, a_(k))—is only slightly more
complicated.

We begin by defining m_(i) = n/n_(i) for i = 1, 2, …, k. Thus, m_(i) is
the product of all of the n_(j)’s other than n_(i): m_(i) = n₁n₂ ⋯
n_(i−1)n_(i+1) ⋯ n_(k). We next define

[art]

for i = 1, 2, …, k. Equation (31.31) is well defined: since m_(i) and
n_(i) are relatively prime (by Theorem 31.6), Corollary 31.26 guarantees
that [art] mod n_(i) exists. Here is how to compute a as a function of
the a_(i) and c_(i):

[art]

We now show that equation (31.32) ensures that a = a_(i) (mod n_(i)) for
i = 1, 2, …, k. If j ≠ i, then m_(j) = 0 (mod n_(i)), which implies that
c_(j) = m_(j) = 0 (mod n_(i)). Note also that c_(i) = 1 (mod n_(i)),
from equation (31.31). We thus have the appealing and useful
correspondence

c_(i) ↔ (0, 0, …, 0, 1, 0, …, 0),

a vector that has 0s everywhere except in the ith coordinate, where it
has a 1. The c_(i) thus form a “basis” for the representation, in a
certain sense. For each i, therefore, we have

[art]

which is what we wished to show: our method of computing a from the
a_(i)’s produces a result a that satisfies the constraints a = a_(i)
(mod n_(i)) for i = 1, 2, …, k. The correspondence is one-to-one, since
we can transform in both directions. Finally, equations (31.28)–(31.30)
follow directly from Exercise 31.1-7, since x mod n_(i) = (x mod n) mod
n_(i) for any x and i = 1, 2, …, k.

▪

We’ll use the following corollaries later in this chapter.

Corollary 31.28

If n₁, n₂, …, n_(k) are pairwise relatively prime and n = n₁n₂ ⋯ n_(k),
then for any integers a₁, a₂, …, a_(k), the set of simultaneous
equations

  ----------- --------------
  x = a_(i)   (mod n_(i)),
  ----------- --------------

for i = 1, 2, …, k, has a unique solution modulo n for the unknown x.

▪

Corollary 31.29

If n₁, n₂, …, n_(k) are pairwise relatively prime and n = n₁n₂ ⋯ n_(k),
then for all integers x and a,

x = a (mod n_(i))

for i = 1, 2, …, k if and only if

x = a (mod n).

▪

As an example of the application of the Chinese remainder theorem,
suppose that you are given the two equations

  ------- -----------
  a = 2   (mod 5),
  a = 3   (mod 13),
  ------- -----------

so that a₁ = 2, n₁ = m₂ = 5, a₂ = 3, and n₂ = m₁ = 13, and you wish to
compute a mod 65, since n = n₁n₂ = 65. Because 13⁻¹ = 2 (mod 5) and 5⁻¹
= 8 (mod 13), you compute

  ---- ------------------------
  c₁   = 13 · (2 mod 5) = 26,
  c₂   = 5 · (8 mod 13) = 40,
  ---- ------------------------

and

  --- --- ----------------- -----------
  a   =   2 · 26 + 3 · 40   (mod 65)
      =   52 + 120          (mod 65)
      =   42                (mod 65).
  --- --- ----------------- -----------

[art]

Figure 31.3 An illustration of the Chinese remainder theorem for n₁ = 5
and n₂ = 13. For this example, c₁ = 26 and c₂ = 40. In row i, column j
is shown the value of a, modulo 65, such that a mod 5 = i and a mod 13 =
j. Note that row 0, column 0 contains a 0. Similarly, row 4, column 12
contains a 64 (equivalent to −1). Since c₁ = 26, moving down a row
increases a by 26. Similarly, c₂ = 40 means that moving right by a
column increases a by 40. Increasing a by 1 corresponds to moving
diagonally downward and to the right, wrapping around from the bottom to
the top and from the right to the left.

See Figure 31.3 for an illustration of the Chinese remainder theorem,
modulo 65.

Thus, you can work modulo n by working modulo n directly or by working
in the transformed representation using separate modulo n_(i)
computations, as convenient. The computations are entirely equivalent.

Exercises

31.5-1

Find all solutions to the equations x = 4 (mod 5) and x = 5 (mod 11).

31.5-2

Find all integers x that leave remainders 1, 2, and 3 when divided by 9,
8, and 7, respectively.

31.5-3

Argue that, under the definitions of Theorem 31.27, if gcd(a, n) = 1,
then

[art]

31.5-4

Under the definitions of Theorem 31.27, prove that for any polynomial f,
the number of roots of the equation f(x) = 0 (mod n) equals the product
of the number of roots of each of the equations f(x) = 0 (mod n₁), f(x)
= 0 (mod n₂), …, f(x) = 0 (mod n_(k)).

31.6    Powers of an element

Along with considering the multiples of a given element a, modulo n, we
often consider the sequence of powers of a, modulo n, where [art]:

a⁰, a¹, a², a³, …,

modulo n. Indexing from 0, the 0th value in this sequence is a⁰ mod n =
1, and the ith value is a^(i) mod n. For example, the powers of 3 modulo
7 are

[art]

and the powers of 2 modulo 7 are

[art]

In this section, let 〈a〉 denote the subgroup of [art] generated by a
through repeated multiplication, and let ord_(n)(a) (the “order of a,
modulo n”) denote the order of a in [art]. For example, 〈2〉 = {1, 2,
4} in [art], and ord₇(2) = 3. Using the definition of the Euler phi
function ϕ(n) as the size of [art] (see Section 31.3), we now translate
Corollary 31.19 into the notation of [art] to obtain Euler’s theorem and
specialize it to [art], where p is prime, to obtain Fermat’s theorem.

Theorem 31.30 (Euler’s theorem)

For any integer n > 1,

[art]

▪

Theorem 31.31 (Fermat’s theorem)

If p is prime, then

[art]

Proof   By equation (31.22), ϕ(p) = p – 1 if p is prime.

▪

Fermat’s theorem applies to every element in ℤ_(p) except 0, since
[art]. For all a ∈ ℤ_(p), however, we have a^(p) = a (mod p) if p is
prime.

If [art], then every element in [art] is a power of g, modulo n, and g
is a primitive root or a generator of [art]. For example, 3 is a
primitive root, modulo 7, but 2 is not a primitive root, modulo 7. If
[art] possesses a primitive root, the group [art] is cyclic. We omit the
proof of the following theorem, which is proven by Niven and Zuckerman
[345].

Theorem 31.32

The values of n > 1 for which [art] is cyclic are 2, 4, p^(e), and
2p^(e), for all primes p > 2 and all positive integers e.

▪

If g is a primitive root of [art] and a is any element of [art], then
there exists a z such that g^(z) = a (mod n). This z is a discrete
logarithm or an index of a, modulo n, to the base g. We denote this
value as ind_(n,g)(a).

Theorem 31.33 (Discrete logarithm theorem)

If g is a primitive root of [art], then the equation g^(x) = g^(y) (mod
n) holds if and only if the equation x = y (mod ϕ(n)) holds.

Proof   Suppose first that x = y (mod ϕ(n)). Then, we have x = y + kϕ(n)
for some integer k, and thus

  ------- -------------------------- ---------- ----------------------
  g^(x)   = g^(y+kϕ(n))              (mod n)    
          = g^(y) · (g^(ϕ(n)))^(k)   (mod n)    
          = g^(y) · 1^(k)            (mod n)    (by Euler’s theorem)
          = g^(y)                    (mod n).   
  ------- -------------------------- ---------- ----------------------

Conversely, suppose that g^(x) = g^(y) (mod n). Because the sequence of
powers of g generates every element of 〈g〉 and |〈g〉| = ϕ(n),
Corollary 31.18 implies that the sequence of powers of g is periodic
with period ϕ(n). Therefore, if g^(x) = g^(y) (mod n), we must have x =
y (mod ϕ(n)).

▪

Let’s now turn our attention to the square roots of 1, modulo a prime
power. The following properties will be useful to justify the
primality-testing algorithm in Section 31.8.

Theorem 31.34

If p is an odd prime and e ≥ 1, then the equation

[art]

has only two solutions, namely x = 1 and x = −1.

Proof   By Exercise 31.6-2, equation (31.33) is equivalent to

p^(e) | (x − 1)(x + 1).

Since p > 2, we can have p | (x − 1) or p | (x + 1), but not both.
(Otherwise, by property (31.3), p would also divide their difference
(x + 1) – (x − 1) = 2.) If p ∤ (x – 1), then gcd(p^(e), x − 1) = 1, and
by Corollary 31.5, we would have p^(e) | (x + 1). That is, x = −1 (mod
p^(e)). Symmetrically, if p ∤ (x + 1), then gcd(p^(e), x + 1) = 1, and
Corollary 31.5 implies that p^(e) | (x − 1), so that x = 1 (mod p^(e)).
Therefore, either x = −1 (mod p^(e)) or x = 1 (mod p^(e)).

▪

A number x is a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n, if it satisfies
the equation x² = 1 (mod n) but x is equivalent to neither of the two
“trivial” square roots: 1 or −1, modulo n. For example, 6 is a
nontrivial square root of 1, modulo 35. We’ll use the following
corollary to Theorem 31.34 in Section 31.8 to prove the Miller-Rabin
primality-testing procedure correct.

Corollary 31.35

If there exists a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n, then n is
composite.

Proof   By the contrapositive of Theorem 31.34, if there exists a
nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n, then n cannot be an odd prime or
a power of an odd prime. Nor can n be 2, because if x² = 1 (mod 2), then
x = 1 (mod 2), and therefore, all square roots of 1, modulo 2, are
trivial. Thus, n cannot be prime. Finally, we must have n > 1 for a
nontrivial square root of 1 to exist. Therefore, n must be composite.

▪

Raising to powers with repeated squaring

A frequently occurring operation in number-theoretic computations is
raising one number to a power modulo another number, also known as
modular exponentiation. More precisely, we would like an efficient way
to compute a^(b) mod n, where a and b are nonnegative integers and n is
a positive integer. Modular exponentiation is an essential operation in
many primality-testing routines and in the RSA public-key cryptosystem.
The method of repeated squaring solves this problem efficiently.

Repeated squaring is based on the following formula to compute a^(b) for
nonnegative integers a and b:

[art]

The last case, where b is odd, reduces to the one of the first two
cases, since if b is odd, then b − 1 is even. The recursive procedure
MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION on the next page computes a^(b) mod n using
equation (31.34), but performing all computations modulo n. The term
“repeated squaring” comes from squaring the intermediate result d =
a^(b/2) in line 5. Figure 31.4 shows the values of the parameter b, the
local variable d, and the value returned at each level of the recursion
for the call MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION(7,560,561), which returns the result
1.

[art]

Figure 31.4 The values of the parameter b, the local variable d, and the
value returned for recursive calls of MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION with
parameter values a = 7, b = 560, and n = 561. The value returned by each
recursive call is assigned directly to d. The result of the call with a
= 7, b = 560, and n = 561 is 1.

MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION(a, b, n)

  --- ---------------------------------------------- --------------
  1   if b == 0                                      
  2   return 1                                       
  3   elseif b mod 2 == 0                            
  4   d = MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION(a, b/2, n)          // b is even
  5   return (d · d) mod n                           
  6   else d = MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION(a, b − 1, n)   // b is odd
  7   return (a · d) mod n                           
  --- ---------------------------------------------- --------------

The total number of recursive calls depends on the number of bits of b
and the values of these bits. Assume that b > 0 and that the most
significant bit of b is a 1. Each 0 generates one recursive call (in
line 4), and each 1 generates two recursive calls (one in line 6
followed by one in line 4 because if b is odd, then b − 1 is even). If
the inputs a, b, and n are β-bit numbers, then there are between β and
2β − 1 recursive calls altogether, the total number of arithmetic
operations required is O(β), and the total number of bit operations
required is O(β³).

Exercises

31.6-1

Draw a table showing the order of every element in [art]. Pick the
smallest primitive root g and compute a table giving ind_(11,g)(x) for
all [art].

31.6-2

Show that x² = 1 (mod p^(e)) is equivalent to p^(e) | (x − 1)(x + 1).

31.6-3

Rewrite the third case of MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION, where b is odd, so
that if b has β bits and the most significant bit is 1, then there are
always exactly β recursive calls.

31.6-4

Give a nonrecursive (i.e., iterative) version of MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION.

31.6-5

Assuming that you know ϕ(n), explain how to compute a⁻¹ mod n for any
[art] using the procedure MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION.

31.7    The RSA public-key cryptosystem

With a public-key cryptosystem, you can encrypt messages sent between
two communicating parties so that an eavesdropper who overhears the
encrypted messages will not be able to decode, or decrypt, them. A
public-key cryptosystem also enables a party to append an unforgeable
“digital signature” to the end of an electronic message. Such a
signature is the electronic version of a handwritten signature on a
paper document. It can be easily checked by anyone, forged by no one,
yet loses its validity if any bit of the message is altered. It
therefore provides authentication of both the identity of the signer and
the contents of the signed message. It is the perfect tool for
electronically signed business contracts, electronic checks, electronic
purchase orders, and other electronic communications that parties wish
to authenticate.

The RSA public-key cryptosystem relies on the dramatic difference
between the ease of finding large prime numbers and the difficulty of
factoring the product of two large prime numbers. Section 31.8 describes
an efficient procedure for finding large prime numbers.

Public-key cryptosystems

In a public-key cryptosystem, each participant has both a public key and
a secret key. Each key is a piece of information. For example, in the
RSA cryptosystem, each key consists of a pair of integers. The
participants “Alice” and “Bob” are traditionally used in cryptography
examples. We denote the public keys for Alice and Bob as P_(A) and
P_(B), respectively, and likewise the secret keys are S_(A) for Alice
and S_(B) for Bob.

Each participant creates his or her own public and secret keys. Secret
keys are kept secret, but public keys can be revealed to anyone or even
published. In fact, it is often convenient to assume that everyone’s
public key is available in a public directory, so that any participant
can easily obtain the public key of any other participant.

[art]

Figure 31.5 Encryption in a public key system. Bob encrypts the message
M using Alice’s public key P_(A) and transmits the resulting ciphertext
C = P_(A)(M) over a communication channel to Alice. An eavesdropper who
captures the transmitted ciphertext gains no information about M. Alice
receives C and decrypts it using her secret key to obtain the original
message M = S_(A)(C).

The public and secret keys specify functions that can be applied to any
message. Let D denote the set of permissible messages. For example, D
might be the set of all finite-length bit sequences. The simplest, and
original, formulation of public-key cryptography requires one-to-one
functions from D to itself, based on the public and secret keys. We
denote the function based on Alice’s public key P_(A) by P_(A)() and the
function based on her secret key S_(A) by S_(A)(). The functions P_(A)()
and S_(A)() are thus permutations of D. We assume that the functions
P_(A)() and S_(A)() are efficiently computable given the corresponding
keys P_(A) and S_(A).

The public and secret keys for any participant are a “matched pair” in
that they specify functions that are inverses of each other. That is,

[art]

for any message M ∈ D. Transforming M with the two keys P_(A) and S_(A)
successively, in either order, yields back the original message M.

A public-key cryptosystem requires that Alice, and only Alice, be able
to compute the function S_(A)() in any practical amount of time. This
assumption is crucial to keeping encrypted messages sent to Alice
private and to knowing that Alice’s digital signatures are authentic.
Alice must keep her key S_(A) secret. If she does not, whoever else has
access to S_(A) can decrypt messages intended only for Alice and can
also forge her digital signature. The assumption that only Alice can
reasonably compute S_(A)() must hold even though everyone knows P_(A)
and can compute P_(A)(), the inverse function to S_(A)(), efficiently.
These requirements appear formidable, but we’ll see how to satisfy them.

In a public-key cryptosystem, encryption works as shown in Figure 31.5.
Suppose that Bob wishes to send Alice a message M encrypted so that it
looks like

[art]

Figure 31.6 Digital signatures in a public-key system. Alice signs the
message M′ by appending her digital signature σ = S_(A)(M′) to it. She
transmits the message/signature pair (M′, σ) to Bob, who verifies it by
checking the equation M′ = P_(A)(σ). If the equation holds, he accepts
(M′, σ) as a message that Alice has signed.

unintelligible gibberish to an eavesdropper. The scenario for sending
the message goes as follows.

- Bob obtains Alice’s public key P_(A), perhaps from a public directory
  or perhaps directly from Alice.
- Bob computes the ciphertext C = P_(A)(M) corresponding to the message
  M and sends C to Alice.
- When Alice receives the ciphertext C, she applies her secret key S_(A)
  to retrieve the original message: S_(A)(C) = S_(A)(P_(A)(M)) = M.

Because S_(A)() and P_(A)() are inverse functions, Alice can compute M
from C. Because only Alice is able to compute S_(A)(), only Alice can
compute M from C. Because Bob encrypts M using P_(A)(), only Alice can
understand the transmitted message.

Digital signatures can be implemented within this formulation of a
public-key cryptosystem. (There are other ways to construct digital
signatures, but we won’t go into them here.) Suppose now that Alice
wishes to send Bob a digitally signed response M′. Figure 31.6 shows how
the digital-signature scenario proceeds.

- Alice computes her digital signature σ for the message M′ using her
  secret key S_(A) and the equation σ = S_(A)(M′).
- Alice sends the message/signature pair (M′, σ) to Bob.
- When Bob receives (M′, σ), he can verify that it originated from Alice
  by using Alice’s public key to verify the equation M′ = P_(A)(σ).
  (Presumably, M′ contains Alice’s name, so that Bob knows whose public
  key to use.) If the equation holds, then Bob concludes that the
  message M′ was actually signed by Alice. If the equation fails to
  hold, Bob concludes either that the information he received was
  corrupted by transmission errors or that the pair (M′, σ) is an
  attempted forgery.

Because a digital signature provides both authentication of the signer’s
identity and authentication of the contents of the signed message, it is
analogous to a handwritten signature at the end of a written document.

A digital signature must be verifiable by anyone who has access to the
signer’s public key. A signed message can be verified by one party and
then passed on to other parties who can also verify the signature. For
example, the message might be an electronic check from Alice to Bob.
After Bob verifies Alice’s signature on the check, he can give the check
to his bank, who can then also verify the signature and effect the
appropriate funds transfer.

A signed message may or may not be encrypted. The message can be “in the
clear” and not protected from disclosure. By composing the above
protocols for encryption and for signatures, Alice can create a message
to Bob that is both signed and encrypted. Alice first appends her
digital signature to the message and then encrypts the resulting
message/signature pair with Bob’s public key. Bob decrypts the received
message with his secret key to obtain both the original message and its
digital signature. Bob can then verify the signature using Alice’s
public key. The corresponding combined process using paper-based systems
would be to sign the paper document and then seal the document inside a
paper envelope that is opened only by the intended recipient.

The RSA cryptosystem

In the RSA public-key cryptosystem, a participant creates a public key
and a secret key with the following procedure:

1.  Select at random two large prime numbers p and q such that p ≠ q.
    The primes p and q might be, say, 1024 bits each.
2.  Compute n = pq.
3.  Select a small odd integer e that is relatively prime to ϕ(n),
    which, by equation (31.21), equals (p – 1)(q – 1).
4.  Compute d as the multiplicative inverse of e, modulo ϕ(n).
    (Corollary 31.26 guarantees that d exists and is uniquely defined.
    You can use the technique of Section 31.4 to compute d, given e and
    ϕ(n).)
5.  Publish the pair P = (e, n) as the participant’s RSA public key.
6.  Keep secret the pair S = (d, n) as the participant’s RSA secret key.

For this scheme, the domain D is the set ℤ_(n). To transform a message M
associated with a public key P = (e, n), compute

[art]

To transform a ciphertext C associated with a secret key S = (d, n),
compute

[art]

These equations apply to both encryption and signatures. To create a
signature, the signer’s secret key is applied to the message to be
signed, rather than to a ciphertext. To verify a signature, the public
key of the signer is applied to the signature rather than to a message
to be encrypted.

To implement the public-key and secret-key operations (31.37) and
(31.38), you can use the procedure MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION described in
Section 31.6. To analyze the running time of these operations, assume
that the public key (e, n) and secret key (d, n) satisfy 1g e = O(1), 1g
d ≤ β, and 1g n ≤ β. Then, applying a public key requires O(1) modular
multiplications and uses O(β²) bit operations. Applying a secret key
requires O(β) modular multiplications, using O(β³) bit operations.

Theorem 31.36 (Correctness of RSA)

The RSA equations (31.37) and (31.38) define inverse transformations of
ℤ_(n) satisfying equations (31.35) and (31.36).

Proof   From equations (31.37) and (31.38), we have that for any M ∈
ℤ_(n),

P(S(M)) = S(P(M)) = M^(ed) (mod n).

Since e and d are multiplicative inverses modulo ϕ(n) = (p – 1)(q – 1),

ed = 1 + k(p – 1)(q – 1)

for some integer k. But then, if M ≠ 0 (mod p), we have

  -------- ------------------------------- --------- --------------------
  M^(ed)   = M(M^(p–1))^(k(q–1))           (mod p)   
           = M((M mod p)^(p–1))^(k(q–1))   (mod p)   
           = M(1)^(k(q–1))                 (mod p)   (by Theorem 31.31)
           = M                             (mod p)   
  -------- ------------------------------- --------- --------------------

Also, M^(ed) = M (mod p) if M = 0 (mod p). Thus,

M^(ed) = M (mod p)

for all M. Similarly,

M^(ed) = M (mod q)

for all M. Thus, by Corollary 31.29 to the Chinese remainder theorem,

M^(ed) = M (mod n)

for all M.

▪

The security of the RSA cryptosystem rests in large part on the
difficulty of factoring large integers. If an adversary can factor the
modulus n in a public key, then the adversary can derive the secret key
from the public key, using the knowledge of the factors p and q in the
same way that the creator of the public key used them. Therefore, if
factoring large integers is easy, then breaking the RSA cryptosystem is
easy. The converse statement, that if factoring large integers is hard,
then breaking RSA is hard, is unproven. After two decades of research,
however, no easier method has been found to break the RSA public-key
cryptosystem than to factor the modulus n. And factoring large integers
is surprisingly difficult. By randomly selecting and multiplying
together two 1024-bit primes, you can create a public key that cannot be
“broken” in any feasible amount of time with current technology. In the
absence of a fundamental breakthrough in the design of number-theoretic
algorithms, and when implemented with care following recommended
standards, the RSA cryptosystem is capable of providing a high degree of
security in applications.

In order to achieve security with the RSA cryptosystem, however, you
should use integers that are quite long—more than 1000 bits—to resist
possible advances in the art of factoring. In 2021, RSA moduli are
commonly in the range of 2048 to 4096 bits. To create moduli of such
sizes, you must find large primes efficiently. Section 31.8 addresses
this problem.

For efficiency, RSA is often used in a “hybrid” or “key-management” mode
with fast cryptosystems that are not public-key cryptosystems. With such
a symmetric-key system, the encryption and decryption keys are
identical. If Alice wishes to send a long message M to Bob privately,
she selects a random key K for the fast symmetric-key cryptosystem and
encrypts M using K, obtaining ciphertext C, where C is as long as M, but
K is quite short. Then she encrypts K using Bob’s public RSA key. Since
K is short, computing P_(B)(K) is fast (much faster than computing
P_(B)(M)). She then transmits (C, P_(B)(K)) to Bob, who decrypts
P_(B)(K) to obtain K and then uses K to decrypt C, obtaining M.

A similar hybrid approach creates digital signatures efficiently. This
approach combines RSA with a public collision-resistant hash
function h—a function that is easy to compute but for which it is
computationally infeasible to find two messages M and M′ such that h(M)
= h(M′). The value h(M) is a short (say, 256-bit) “fingerprint” of the
message M. If Alice wishes to sign a message M, she first applies h to M
to obtain the fingerprint h(M), which she then encrypts with her secret
key. She sends (M, S_(A)(h(M))) to Bob as her signed version of M. Bob
can verify the signature by computing h(M) and verifying that P_(A)
applied to S_(A)(h(M)) as received equals h(M). Because no one can
create two messages with the same fingerprint, it is computationally
infeasible to alter a signed message and preserve the validity of the
signature.

One way to distribute public keys uses certificates. For example, assume
that there is a “trusted authority” T whose public key is known by
everyone. Alice can obtain from T a signed message (her certificate)
stating that “Alice’s public key is P_(A).” This certificate is
“self-authenticating” since everyone knows P_(T). Alice can include her
certificate with her signed messages, so that the recipient has Alice’s
public key immediately available in order to verify her signature.
Because her key was signed by T, the recipient knows that Alice’s key is
really Alice’s.

Exercises

31.7-1

Consider an RSA key set with p = 11, q = 29, n = 319, and e = 3. What
value of d should be used in the secret key? What is the encryption of
the message M = 100?

31.7-2

Prove that if Alice’s public exponent e is 3 and an adversary obtains
Alice’s secret exponent d, where 0 < d < ϕ(n), then the adversary can
factor Alice’s modulus n in time polynomial in the number of bits in n.
(Although you are not asked to prove it, you might be interested to know
that this result remains true even if the condition e = 3 is removed.
See Miller [327].)

★ 31.7-3

Prove that RSA is multiplicative in the sense that

P_(A)(M₁)P_(A)(M₂) = P_(A)(M₁M₂) (mod n).

Use this fact to prove that if an adversary had a procedure that could
efficiently decrypt 1% of messages from ℤ_(n) encrypted with P_(A), then
the adversary could employ a probabilistic algorithm to decrypt every
message encrypted with P_(A) with high probability.

★ 31.8    Primality testing

This section shows how to find large primes. We begin with a discussion
of the density of primes, proceed to examine a plausible, but
incomplete, approach to primality testing, and then present an effective
randomized primality test due to Miller and Rabin.

The density of prime numbers

Many applications, such as cryptography, call for finding large “random”
primes. Fortunately, large primes are not too rare, so that it is
feasible to test random integers of the appropriate size until you find
one that is prime. The prime distribution function π(n) specifies the
number of primes that are less than or equal to n. For example, π(10) =
4, since there are 4 prime numbers less than or equal to 10, namely, 2,
3, 5, and 7. The prime number theorem gives a useful approximation to
π(n).

Theorem 31.37 (Prime number theorem)

[art]

▪

The approximation n/ln n gives reasonably accurate estimates of π(n)
even for small n. For example, it is off by less than 6% at n = 10⁹,
where π(n) = 50,847,534 and n/ln n ≈ 48,254,942. (To a number theorist,
10⁹ is a small number.)

The process of randomly selecting an integer n and determining whether
it is prime is really just a Bernoulli trial (see Section C.4). By the
prime number theorem, the probability of a success—that is, the
probability that n is prime—is approximately 1/ln n. The geometric
distribution says how many trials must occur to obtain a success, and by
equation (C.36) on page 1197, the expected number of trials is
approximately ln n. Thus, in order to find a prime that has the same
length as n by testing integers chosen randomly near n, the expected
number examined would be approximately ln n. For example, the
expectation is that finding a 1024-bit prime would require testing
approximately ln 2¹⁰²⁴ ≈ 710 randomly chosen 1024-bit numbers for
primality. (Of course, to cut this figure in half, choose only odd
integers.)

The remainder of this section shows how to determine whether a large odd
integer n is prime. For notational convenience, we assume that n has the
prime factorization

[art]

where r ≥ 1, p₁, p₂, …, p_(r) are the prime factors of n, and e₁, e₂, …,
e_(r) are positive integers. The integer n is prime if and only if r = 1
and e₁ = 1.

One simple approach to the problem of testing for primality is trial
division: try dividing n by each integer 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, …, [art],
skipping even integers greater than 2. We can conclude that n is prime
if and only if none of the trial divisors divides n. Assuming that each
trial division takes constant time, the worst-case running time is
[art], which is exponential in the length of n. (Recall that if n is
encoded in binary using β bits, then β = ⌈1g(n + 1)⌉, and so [art].)
Thus, trial division works well only if n is very small or happens to
have a small prime factor. When it works, trial division has the
advantage that it not only determines whether n is prime or composite,
it also determines one of n’s prime factors if n is composite.

This section focuses on finding out whether a given number n is prime.
If n is composite, we won’t worry about finding its prime factorization.
Computing the prime factorization of a number is computationally
expensive. You might be surprised that it turns out to be much easier to
ascertain whether a given number is prime than it is to determine the
prime factorization of the number if it is not prime.

Pseudoprimality testing

We’ll start with a method for primality testing that “almost works” and,
in fact, is good enough for many practical applications. Later on, we’ll
refine this method to remove the small defect. Let [art] denote the
nonzero elements of ℤ_(n):

[art]

If n is prime, then [art].

We say that n is a base-a pseudoprime if n is composite and

[art]

Fermat’s theorem (Theorem 31.31 on page 932) implies that if n is prime,
then n satisfies equation (31.39) for every a in [art]. Thus, if there
is any [art] such that n does not satisfy equation (31.39), then n is
certainly composite. Surprisingly, the converse almost holds, so that
this criterion forms an almost perfect test for primality. Instead of
trying every value of [art], test to see whether n satisfies equation
(31.39) for just a = 2. If not, then declare n to be composite by
returning COMPOSITE. Otherwise, return PRIME, guessing that n is prime
(when, in fact, all we know is that n is either prime or a base-2
pseudoprime).

The procedure PSEUDOPRIME on the next page pretends in this manner to
check whether n is prime. It uses the procedure MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION
from Section 31.6. It assumes that the input n is an odd integer greater
than 2. This procedure can make errors, but only of one type. That is,
if it says that n is composite, then it is always correct. If it says
that n is prime, however, then it makes an error only if n is a base-2
pseudoprime.

How often does PSEUDOPRIME err? Surprisingly rarely. There are only 22
values of n less than 10,000 for which it errs, the first four of which
are 341, 561, 645,

PSEUDOPRIME(n)

+---+---------------------------+---------------------------+
| 1 | if MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION(2, n – 1, n) ≠ 1 (mod n)    |
+---+---------------------------+---------------------------+
| 2 | return COMPOSITE          | // definitely             |
+---+---------------------------+---------------------------+
| 3 | else return PRIME         | // we hope!               |
+---+---------------------------+---------------------------+

and 1105. We won’t prove it, but the probability that this program makes
an error on a randomly chosen β-bit number goes to 0 as β approaches ∞.
Using more precise estimates due to Pomerance [361] of the number of
base-2 pseudoprimes of a given size, a randomly chosen 512-bit number
that is called prime by PSEUDOPRIME has less than one chance in 10²⁰ of
being a base-2 pseudoprime, and a randomly chosen 1024-bit number that
is called prime has less than one chance in 10⁴¹ of being a base-2
pseudoprime. Thus, if you are merely trying to find a large prime for
some application, for all practical purposes you almost never go wrong
by choosing large numbers at random until one of them causes PSEUDOPRIME
to return PRIME. But when the numbers being tested for primality are not
randomly chosen, you might need a better approach for testing primality.
As we’ll see, a little more cleverness, and some randomization, will
yield a primality-testing method that works well on all inputs.

Since PSEUDOPRIME checks equation (31.39) for only a = 2, you might
think that you could eliminate all the errors by simply checking
equation (31.39) for a second base number, say a = 3. Better yet, you
could check equation (31.39) for even more values of a. Unfortunately,
even checking for several values of a does not eliminate all errors,
because there exist composite integers n, known as Carmichael numbers,
that satisfy equation (31.39) for all [art]. (The equation does fail
when gcd(a, n) > 1—that is, when [art]—but demonstrating that n is
composite by finding such an a can be difficult if n has only large
prime factors.) The first three Carmichael numbers are 561, 1105, and
1729. Carmichael numbers are extremely rare. For example, only 255 of
them are less than 100,000,000. Exercise 31.8-2 helps explain why they
are so rare.

Let’s see how to improve the primality test so that Carmichael numbers
won’t fool it.

The Miller-Rabin randomized primality test

The Miller-Rabin primality test overcomes the problems of the simple
procedure PSEUDOPRIME with two modifications:

- It tries several randomly chosen base values a instead of just one
  base value.
- While computing each modular exponentiation, it looks for a nontrivial
  square root of 1, modulo n, during the final set of squarings. If it
  finds one, it stops and returns COMPOSITE. Corollary 31.35 from
  Section 31.6 justifies detecting composites in this manner.

The pseudocode for the Miller-Rabin primality test appears in the
procedures MILLER-RABIN and WITNESS. The input n > 2 to MILLER-RABIN is
the odd number to be tested for primality, and s is the number of
randomly chosen base values from [art] to be tried. The code uses the
random-number generator RANDOM described on page 129: RANDOM(2, n – 2)
returns a randomly chosen integer a satisfying 2 ≤ a ≤ n – 2. (This
range of values avoids having a = ≥1 (mod n).) The call of the auxiliary
procedure WITNESS(a, n) returns TRUE if and only if a is a “witness” to
the compositeness of n—that is, if it is possible using a to prove (in a
manner that we will see) that n is composite. The test WITNESS(a, n) is
an extension of, but more effective than, the test in equation (31.39)
that formed the basis for PSEUDOPRIME, using a = 2.

Let’s first understand how WITNESS works, and then we’ll see how the
Miller-Rabin primality test uses it. Let n – 1 = 2^(t)u where t ≥ 1 and
u is odd. That is, the binary representation of n – 1 is the binary
representation of the odd integer u followed by exactly t zeros.
Therefore, [art], so that one way to compute a^(n−1) mod n is to first
compute a^(u) mod n and then square the result t times successively.

+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| MILLER-RABIN(n, s)                     | // n > 2 is odd            |
+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 1         | for j = 1 to s                                          |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 2         | a = RANDOM(2, n – 2)                                    |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 3         | if WITNESS(a, n)                                        |
+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 4         | return COMPOSITE           | // definitely              |
+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 5         | return PRIME               | // almost surely           |
+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| WITNESS(a, n)                          |                            |
+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 1         | let t and u be such that t ≥ 1, u is odd, and n – 1 =   |
|           | 2^(t)u                                                  |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 2         | x₀ = MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION(a, u, n)                    |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 3         | for i = 1 to t                                          |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 4         | [art]                                                   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 5         | if x_(i) == 1 and x_(i–1) ≠ 1 and x_(i–1) ≠ n – 1       |
+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 6         | return TRUE                | // found a nontrivial      |
|           |                            | square root of 1           |
+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 7         | if x_(t) ≠ 1                                            |
+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 8         | return TRUE                | // composite, as in        |
|           |                            | PSEUDOPRIME                |
+-----------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 9         | return FALSE                                            |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------------+

This pseudocode for WITNESS computes a^(n–1) mod n by first computing
the value x₀ = a^(u) mod n in line 2 and then repeatedly squaring the
result t times in the for loop of lines 3–6. By induction on i, the
sequence x₀, x₁, …, x_(t) of values computed satisfies the equation
[art] for i = 0, 1, …, t, so that in particular x_(t) = a^(n–1) (mod n).
After line 4 performs a squaring step, however, the loop will terminate
early if lines 5–6 detect that a nontrivial square root of 1 has just
been discovered. (We’ll explain these tests shortly.) If so, the
procedure stops and returns TRUE. Lines 7–8 return TRUE if the value
computed for x_(t) = a^(n–1) (mod n) is not equal to 1, just as the
PSEUDOPRIME procedure returns COMPOSITE in this case. Line 9 returns
FALSE if lines 6 or 8 have not returned TRUE.

The following lemma proves the correctness of WITNESS.

Lemma 31.38

If WITNESS(a, n) returns TRUE, then a proof that n is composite can be
constructed using a as a witness.

Proof   If WITNESS returns TRUE from line 8, it’s because line 7
determined that x_(t) = a^(n–1) mod n ≠ 1. If n is prime, however,
Fermat’s theorem (Theorem 31.31) says that a^(n–1) = 1 (mod n) for all
[art]. Since [art] if n is prime, Fermat’s theorem also says that
a^(n–1) = 1 (mod n) for all [art]. Therefore, n cannot be prime, and the
equation a^(n–1) mod n ≠ 1 proves this fact.

If WITNESS returns TRUE from line 6, then it has discovered that x_(i–1)
is a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n, since we have that x_(i–1) ≠
±1 (mod n) yet [art]. Corollary 31.35 on page 934 states that only if n
is composite can there exist a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n, so
that demonstrating that x_(i–1) is a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo
n proves that n is composite.

▪

Thus, if the call WITNESS(a, n) returns TRUE, then n is surely
composite, and the witness a, along with the reason that the procedure
returns TRUE (did it return from line 6 or from line 8?), provides a
proof that n is composite.

Let’s explore an alternative view of the behavior of WITNESS as a
function of the sequence X = 〈x₀, x₁, …, x_(t)〉. We’ll find this view
useful later on, when we analyze the error rate of the Miller-Rabin
primality test. Note that if x_(i) = 1 for some 0 ≤ i < t, WITNESS might
not compute the rest of the sequence. If it were to do so, however, each
value x_(i+1), x_(i+2), …, x_(t) would be 1, so we can consider these
positions in the sequence X as being all 1s. There are four cases:

1.  X = 〈…, d〉, where d ≠ 1: the sequence X does not end in 1. Return
    TRUE in line 8, since a is a witness to the compositeness of n (by
    Fermat’s Theorem).
2.  X = 〈1, 1, …, 1〉: the sequence X is all 1s. Return FALSE, since a
    is not a witness to the compositeness of n.
3.  X = 〈…, –1, 1, …, 1〉: the sequence X ends in 1, and the last non-1
    is equal to –1. Return FALSE, since a is not a witness to the
    compositeness of n.
4.  X = 〈…, d, 1, …, 1〉, where d ≠ ±1: the sequence X ends in 1, but
    the last non-1 is not –1. Return TRUE in line 6: a is a witness to
    the compositeness of n, since d is a nontrivial square root of 1.

Now, let’s examine the Miller-Rabin primality test based on how it uses
the WITNESS procedure. As before, assume that n is an odd integer
greater than 2.

The procedure MILLER-RABIN is a probabilistic search for a proof that n
is composite. The main loop (beginning on line 1) picks up to s random
values of a from [art], except for 1 and n – 1 (line 2). If it picks a
value of a that is a witness to the compositeness of n, then
MILLER-RABIN returns COMPOSITE on line 4. Such a result is always
correct, by the correctness of WITNESS. If MILLER-RABIN finds no witness
in s trials, then the procedure assumes that it found no witness because
no witnesses exist, and therefore it assumes that n is prime. We’ll see
that this result is likely to be correct if s is large enough, but there
is still a tiny chance that the procedure could be unlucky in its choice
of s random values of a, so that even though the procedure failed to
find a witness, at least one witness exists.

To illustrate the operation of MILLER-RABIN, let n be the Carmichael
number 561, so that n – 1 = 560 = 2⁴ · 35, t = 4, and u = 35. If the
procedure chooses a = 7 as a base, the column for b = 35 in Figure 31.4
(Section 31.6) shows that WITNESS computes x₀ = a³⁵ = 241 (mod 561).
Because of how the MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION procedure operates recursively
on its parameter b, the first four columns in Figure 31.4 represent the
factor 2⁴ of 560—the rightmost four zeros in the binary representation
of 560—reading these four zeros from right to left in the binary
representation. Thus WITNESS computes the sequence X = 〈241, 298, 166,
67, 1〉. Then, in the last squaring step, WITNESS discovers that a²⁸⁰ is
a nontrivial square root of 1 since a²⁸⁰ = 67 (mod n) and (a²⁸⁰)² = a⁵⁶⁰
= 1 (mod n). Therefore, a = 7 is a witness to the compositeness of n,
WITNESS(7, n) returns TRUE, and MILLER-RABIN returns COMPOSITE.

If n is a β-bit number, MILLER-RABIN requires O(sβ) arithmetic
operations and O(sβ³) bit operations, since it requires asymptotically
no more work than s modular exponentiations.

Error rate of the Miller-Rabin primality test

If MILLER-RABIN returns PRIME, then there is a very slim chance that it
has made an error. Unlike PSEUDOPRIME, however, the chance of error does
not depend on n: there are no bad inputs for this procedure. Rather, it
depends on the size of s and the “luck of the draw” in choosing base
values a. Moreover, since each test is more stringent than a simple
check of equation (31.39), we can expect on general principles that the
error rate should be small for randomly chosen integers n. The following
theorem presents a more precise argument.

Theorem 31.39

If n is an odd composite number, then the number of witnesses to the
compositeness of n is at least (n – 1)/2.

Proof   The proof shows that the number of nonwitnesses is at most (n –
1)/2, which implies the theorem.

We start by claiming that any nonwitness must be a member of [art]. Why?
Consider any nonwitness a. It must satisfy a^(n–1) = 1 (mod n) or,
equivalently, a · a^(n−2) = 1 (mod n). Thus the equation ax = 1 (mod n)
has a solution, namely a^(n−2). By Corollary 31.21 on page 924, gcd(a,
n) | 1, which in turn implies that gcd(a, n) = 1. Therefore, a is a
member of [art], and all nonwitnesses belong to [art].

To complete the proof, we show that not only are all nonwitnesses
contained in [art], they are all contained in a proper subgroup B of
[art] (recall that B is a proper subgroup of [art] when B is subgroup of
[art] but B is not equal to [art]). By Corollary 31.16 on page 921, we
then have [art]. Since [art], we obtain |B| ≤ (n – 1)/2. Therefore, if
all nonwitnesses are contained in a proper subgroup of [art], then the
number of nonwitnesses is at most (n – 1)/2, so that the number of
witnesses must be at least (n – 1)/2.

To find a proper subgroup B of [art] containing all of the nonwitnesses,
we consider two cases.

Case 1: There exists an [art] such that

x^(n–1) ≠ 1 (mod n).

In other words, n is not a Carmichael number. Since, as noted earlier,
Carmichael numbers are extremely rare, case 1 is the more typical case
(e.g., when n has been chosen randomly and is being tested for
primality).

Let [art]. The set B must be nonempty, since 1 ∈ B. The set B is closed
under multiplication modulo n, and so B is a subgroup of [art] by
Theorem 31.14. Every nonwitness belongs to B, since a nonwitness a
satisfies a^(n–1) = 1 (mod n). Since [art], we have that B is a proper
subgroup of [art].

Case 2: For all [art],

[art]

In other words, n is a Carmichael number. This case is extremely rare in
practice. Unlike a pseudoprimality test, however, the Miller-Rabin test
can efficiently determine that Carmichael numbers are composite, as
we’re about to see.

In this case, n cannot be a prime power. To see why, suppose to the
contrary that n = p^(e), where p is a prime and e > 1. We derive a
contradiction as follows. Since we assume that n is odd, p must also be
odd. Theorem 31.32 on page 933 implies that [art] is a cyclic group: it
contains a generator g such that [art]. (The formula for ϕ(n) comes from
equation (31.21) on page 920.) By equation (31.40), we have g^(n–1) = 1
(mod n). Then the discrete logarithm theorem (Theorem 31.33 on page 933,
taking y = 0) implies that n – 1 = 0 (mod ϕ (n)), or

(p – 1)p^(e−1) | p^(e) – 1.

This statement is a contradiction for e > 1, since (p – 1)p^(e−1) is
divisible by the prime p, but p^(e) – 1 is not. Thus n is not a prime
power.

Since the odd composite number n is not a prime power, we decompose it
into a product n₁n₂, where n₁ and n₂ are odd numbers greater than 1 that
are relatively prime to each other. (There may be several ways to
decompose n, and it does not matter which one we choose. For example, if
[art], then we can choose [art] and [art].)

Recall that t and u are such that n – 1 = 2^(t)u, where t ≥ 1 and u is
odd, and that for an input a, the procedure WITNESS computes the
sequence

[art]

where all computations are performed modulo n.

Let us call a pair (v, j) of integers acceptable if [art], and

[art]

Acceptable pairs certainly exist, since u is odd. Choose v = n – 1 and j
= 0, and let u = 2k + 1, so that [art]. Taking this number modulo n
gives (n – 1)^(2k+1) = (n – 1)^(2k) · (n – 1) = (–1)^(2k) · –1 = −1 (mod
n). Thus, (n – 1, 0) is an acceptable pair. Now pick the largest
possible j such that there exists an acceptable pair (v, j), and fix v
so that (v, j) is an acceptable pair. Let

[art]

Since B is closed under multiplication modulo n, it is a subgroup of
[art]. By Theorem 31.15 on page 921, therefore, |B| divides [art]. Every
nonwitness must be a member of B, since the sequence X produced by a
nonwitness must either be all 1s or else contain a –1 no later than the
jth position, by the maximality of j. (If (a, j′) is acceptable, where a
is a nonwitness, we must have j′ ≤ j by how we chose j.)

We now use the existence of v to demonstrate that there exists a [art],
and hence that B is a proper subgroup of [art]. Since [art], we also
have [art] by Corollary 31.29 to the Chinese remainder theorem. By
Corollary 31.28, there exists a w simultaneously satisfying the
equations

  --- ---------------
  w   = v (mod n₁),
  w   = 1 (mod n₂).
  --- ---------------

Therefore,

[art]

Corollary 31.29 gives that [art] implies [art] and also that [art]
implies [art]. Hence, we conclude that [art], and so w ∉ B.

It remains to show that [art]. We start by working separately modulo n₁
and modulo n₂. Working modulo n₁, since [art], we have that gcd(v, n)
= 1. Also, we have gcd(v, n₁) = 1, since if v does not have any common
divisors with n, then it certainly does not have any common divisors
with n₁. Since w = v (mod n₁), we see that gcd(w, n₁) = 1. Working
modulo n₂, we have w = 1 (mod n₂) implies gcd(w, n₂) = 1 by Exercise
31.2-3. Since gcd(w, n₁) = 1 and gcd(w, n₂) = 1, Theorem 31.6 on page
908 yields gcd(w, n₁n₂) = gcd(w, n) = 1. That is, [art].

Therefore, we have [art], and we can conclude in case 2 that B, which
includes all nonwitnesses, is a proper subgroup of [art] and therefore
has size at most (n – 1)/2.

In either case, the number of witnesses to the compositeness of n is at
least (n – 1)/2.

▪

Theorem 31.40

For any odd integer n > 2 and positive integer s, the probability that
MILLER-RABIN(n, s) errs is at most 2^(–s).

Proof   By Theorem 31.39, if n is composite, then each execution of the
for loop of lines 1–4 of MILLER-RABIN has a probability of at least 1/2
of discovering a witness to the compositeness of n. MILLER-RABIN makes
an error only if it is so unlucky as to miss discovering a witness to
the compositeness of n on each of the s iterations of the main loop. The
probability of such a sequence of misses is at most 2^(–s).

▪

If n is prime, MILLER-RABIN always reports PRIME, and if n is composite,
the chance that MILLER-RABIN reports PRIME is at most 2^(−s).

When applying MILLER-RABIN to a large randomly chosen integer n,
however, we need to consider as well the prior probability that n is
prime, in order to correctly interpret MILLER-RABIN’s result. Suppose
that we fix a bit length β and choose at random an integer n of length β
bits to be tested for primality, so that β ≈ 1g n ≈ 1.443 ln n. Let A
denote the event that n is prime. By the prime number theorem (Theorem
31.37), the probability that n is prime is approximately

  -------- --- ----------
  Pr {A}   ≈   1/ln n
           ≈   1.443/β.
  -------- --- ----------

Now let B denote the event that MILLER-RABIN returns PRIME. We have that
[art] (or equivalently, that Pr{B | A} = 1) and [art] (or equivalently,
that [art]).

But what is Pr{A | B}, the probability that n is prime, given that
MILLER-RABIN has returned PRIME? By the alternate form of Bayes’s
theorem (equation (C.20) on page 1189) and approximating [art], we have

[art]

This probability does not exceed 1/2 until s exceeds 1g(ln n – 1).
Intuitively, that many initial trials are needed just for the confidence
derived from failing to find a witness to the compositeness of n to
overcome the prior bias in favor of n being composite. For a number with
β = 1024 bits, this initial testing requires about

  -------------- --- -------------
  lg(ln n – 1)   ≈   lg(β/1.443)
                 ≈   9
  -------------- --- -------------

trials. In any case, choosing s = 50 should suffice for almost any
imaginable application.

In fact, the situation is much better. If you are trying to find large
primes by applying MILLER-RABIN to large randomly chosen odd integers,
then choosing a small value of s (say 3) is unlikely to lead to
erroneous results, though we won’t prove it here. The reason is that for
a randomly chosen odd composite integer n, the expected number of
nonwitnesses to the compositeness of n is likely to be considerably
smaller than (n – 1)/2.

If the integer n is not chosen randomly, however, the best that can be
proven is that the number of nonwitnesses is at most (n – 1)/4, using an
improved version of Theorem 31.39. Furthermore, there do exist integers
n for which the number of nonwitnesses is (n – 1)/4.

Exercises

31.8-1

Prove that if an odd integer n > 1 is not a prime or a prime power, then
there exists a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n.

★ 31.8-2

It is possible to strengthen Euler’s theorem (Theorem 31.30) slightly to
the form

[art]

where [art] and λ(n) is defined by

[art]

Prove that λ(n) | ϕ(n). A composite number n is a Carmichael number if
λ(n) | n – 1. The smallest Carmichael number is 561 = 3 · 11 · 17, for
which λ(n) = 1cm(2, 10, 16) = 80, which divides 560. Prove that
Carmichael numbers must be both “square-free” (not divisible by the
square of any prime) and the product of at least three primes. (For this
reason, they are not common.)

31.8-3

Prove that if x is a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n, then gcd(x −
1, n) and gcd(x + 1, n) are both nontrivial divisors of n.

Problems

31-1     Binary gcd algorithm

Most computers can perform the operations of subtraction, testing the
parity (odd or even) of a binary integer, and halving more quickly than
computing remainders. This problem investigates the binary gcd
algorithm, which avoids the remainder computations used in Euclid’s
algorithm.

a. Prove that if a and b are both even, then gcd(a, b) = 2 · gcd(a/2,
b/2).

b. Prove that if a is odd and b is even, then gcd(a, b) = gcd(a, b/2).

c. Prove that if a and b are both odd, then gcd(a, b) = gcd((a – b)/2,
b).

d. Design an efficient binary gcd algorithm for input integers a and b,
where a ≥ b, that runs in O(1g a) time. Assume that each subtraction,
parity test, and halving takes unit time.

31-2     Analysis of bit operations in Euclid’s algorithm

a. Consider the ordinary “paper and pencil” algorithm for long division:
dividing a by b, which yields a quotient q and remainder r. Show that
this method requires O((1 + 1g q)1g b) bit operations.

b. Define μ(a, b) = (1 + 1g a)(1 + 1g b). Show that the number of bit
operations performed by EUCLID in reducing the problem of computing
gcd(a, b) to that of computing gcd(b, a mod b) is at most c(μ(a, b) –
μ(b, a mod b)) for some sufficiently large constant c > 0.

c. Show that EUCLID(a, b) requires O(μ(a, b)) bit operations in general
and O(β²) bit operations when applied to two β-bit inputs.

31-3     Three algorithms for Fibonacci numbers

This problem compares the efficiency of three methods for computing the
nth Fibonacci number F_(n), given n. Assume that the cost of adding,
subtracting, or multiplying two numbers is O(1), independent of the size
of the numbers.

a. Show that the running time of the straightforward recursive method
for computing F_(n) based on recurrence (3.31) on page 69 is exponential
in n. (See, for example, the FIB procedure on page 751.)

b. Show how to compute F_(n) in O(n) time using memoization.

c. Show how to compute F_(n) in O(1g n) time using only integer addition
and multiplication. (Hint: Consider the matrix [art] and its powers.)

d. Assume now that adding two β-bit numbers takes Θ(β) time and that
multiplying two β-bit numbers takes Θ(β²) time. What is the running time
of these three methods under this more reasonable cost measure for the
elementary arithmetic operations?

31-4     Quadratic residues

Let p be an odd prime. A number [art] is a quadratic residue modulo p,
if the equation x² = a (mod p) has a solution for the unknown x.

a. Show that there are exactly (p – 1)/2 quadratic residues, modulo p.

b. If p is prime, we define the Legendre symbol [art], for [art], to be
1 if a is a quadratic residue, modulo p, and –1 otherwise. Prove that if
[art], then

[art]

Give an efficient algorithm that determines whether a given number a is
a quadratic residue, modulo p. Analyze the efficiency of your algorithm.

c. Prove that if p is a prime of the form 4k + 3 and a is a quadratic
residue in [art], then a^(k+1) mod p is a square root of a, modulo p.
How much time is required to find the square root of a quadratic residue
a, modulo p?

d. Describe an efficient randomized algorithm for finding a nonquadratic
residue, modulo an arbitrary prime p, that is, a member of [art] that is
not a quadratic residue. How many arithmetic operations does your
algorithm require on average?

Chapter notes

Knuth [260] contains a good discussion of algorithms for finding the
greatest common divisor, as well as other basic number-theoretic
algorithms. Dixon [121] gives an overview of factorization and primality
testing. Bach [33], Riesel [378], and Bach and Shallit [34] provide
overviews of the basics of computational number theory; Shoup [411]
provides a more recent survey. The conference proceedings edited by
Pomerance [362] contains several excellent survey articles.

Knuth [260] discusses the origin of Euclid’s algorithm. It appears in
Book 7, Propositions 1 and 2, of the Greek mathematician Euclid’s
Elements, which was written around 300 B.C.E. Euclid’s description may
have been derived from an algorithm due to Eudoxus around 375 B.C.E.
Euclid’s algorithm may hold the honor of being the oldest nontrivial
algorithm, rivaled only by an algorithm for multiplication known to the
ancient Egyptians. Shallit [407] chronicles the history of the analysis
of Euclid’s algorithm.

Knuth attributes a special case of the Chinese remainder theorem
(Theorem 31.27) to the Chinese mathematician Sun-Tsŭ, who lived sometime
between 200 B.C.E. and 200 C.E.—the date is quite uncertain. The same
special case was given by the Greek mathematician Nichomachus around 100
C.E. It was generalized by Qin Jiushao in 1247. The Chinese remainder
theorem was finally stated and proved in its full generality by L. Euler
in 1734.

The randomized primality-testing algorithm presented here is due to
Miller [327] and Rabin [373] and is the fastest randomized
primality-testing algorithm known, to within constant factors. The proof
of Theorem 31.40 is a slight adaptation of one suggested by Bach [32]. A
proof of a stronger result for MILLER-RABIN was given by Monier [332,
333]. For many years primality-testing was the classic example of a
problem where randomization appeared to be necessary to obtain an
efficient (polynomial-time) algorithm. In 2002, however, Agrawal, Kayal,
and Saxena [4] surprised everyone with their deterministic
polynomial-time primality-testing algorithm. Until then, the fastest
deterministic primality testing algorithm known, due to Cohen and
Lenstra [97], ran in (1g n)^(O(1g1g1g n)) time on input n, which is just
slightly superpolynomial. Nonetheless, for practical purposes,
randomized primality-testing algorithms remain more efficient and are
generally preferred.

Beauchemin, Brassard, Crépeau, Goutier, and Pomerance [40] nicely
discuss the problem of finding large “random” primes.

The concept of a public-key cryptosystem is due to Diffie and Hellman
[115]. The RSA cryptosystem was proposed in 1977 by Rivest, Shamir, and
Adleman [380]. Since then, the field of cryptography has blossomed. Our
understanding of the RSA cryptosystem has deepened, and modern
implementations use significant refinements of the basic techniques
presented here. In addition, many new techniques have been developed for
proving cryptosystems to be secure. For example, Goldwasser and Micali
[190] show that randomization can be an effective tool in the design of
secure public-key encryption schemes. For signature schemes, Goldwasser,
Micali, and Rivest [191] present a digital-signature scheme for which
every conceivable type of forgery is provably as difficult as factoring.
Katz and Lindell [253] provide an overview of modern cryptography.

The best algorithms for factoring large numbers have a running time that
grows roughly exponentially with the cube root of the length of the
number n to be factored. The general number-field sieve factoring
algorithm (as developed by Buhler, Lenstra, and Pomerance [77] as an
extension of the ideas in the number-field sieve factoring algorithm by
Pollard [360] and Lenstra et al. [295] and refined by Coppersmith [102]
and others) is perhaps the most efficient such algorithm in general for
large inputs. Although it is difficult to give a rigorous analysis of
this algorithm, under reasonable assumptions we can derive a
running-time estimate of L(1/3, n)^(1.902+o(1)), where [art].

The elliptic-curve method due to Lenstra [296] may be more effective for
some inputs than the number-field sieve method, since it can find a
small prime factor p quite quickly. With this method, the time to find p
is estimated to be [art].

32        String Matching

Text-editing programs frequently need to find all occurrences of a
pattern in the text. Typically, the text is a document being edited, and
the pattern searched for is a particular word supplied by the user.
Efficient algorithms for this problem—called “string matching”—can
greatly aid the responsiveness of the text-editing program. Among their
many other applications, string-matching algorithms search for
particular patterns in DNA sequences. Internet search engines also use
them to find web pages relevant to queries.

The string-matching problem can be stated formally as follows. The text
is given as an array T[1 : n] of length n, and the pattern is an array
P[1 : m] of length m ≤ n. The elements of P and T are characters drawn
from an alphabet ∑, which is a finite set of characters. For example, ∑
could be the set {0, 1}, or it could be the set {a, b, …, z}. The
character arrays P and T are often called strings of characters.

As Figure 32.1 shows, pattern P occurs with shift s in text T (or,
equivalently, that pattern P occurs beginning at position s + 1 in text
T) if 0 ≤ s ≤ n – m and T[s + 1:s + m] = P[1:m], that is, if T[s + j] =
P[j], for 1 ≤ j ≤ m. If P occurs with shift s in T, then s is a valid
shift, and otherwise, s is an invalid shift. The string-matching problem
is the problem of finding all valid shifts with which a given pattern P
occurs in a given text T.

[art]

Figure 32.1 An example of the string-matching problem to find all
occurrences of the pattern P = abaa in the text T = abcabaabcabac. The
pattern occurs only once in the text, at shift s = 3, which is a valid
shift. A vertical line connects each character of the pattern to its
matching character in the text, and all matched characters are shaded
blue.

Except for the naive brute-force algorithm in Section 32.1, each
string-matching algorithm in this chapter performs some preprocessing
based on the pattern and then finds all valid shifts. We call this
latter phase “matching.” Here are the preprocessing and matching times
for each of the string-matching algorithms in this chapter. The total
running time of each algorithm is the sum of the preprocessing and
matching times:

  -------------------- -------------------- -----------------
  Algorithm            Preprocessing time   Matching time
  Naive                0                    O((n – m + 1)m)
  Rabin-Karp           Θ(m)                 O((n – m + 1)m)
  Finite automaton     O(m |∑|)             Θ(n)
  Knuth-Morris-Pratt   Θ(m)                 Θ(n)
  Suffix array¹        O(n 1g n)            O(m 1g n + km)
  -------------------- -------------------- -----------------

Section 32.2 presents an interesting string-matching algorithm, due to
Rabin and Karp. Although the Θ((n – m + 1)m) worst-case running time of
this algorithm is no better than that of the naive method, it works much
better on average and in practice. It also generalizes nicely to other
pattern-matching problems. Section 32.3 then describes a string-matching
algorithm that begins by constructing a finite automaton specifically
designed to search for occurrences of the given pattern P in a text.
This algorithm takes O(m |∑|) preprocessing time, but only Θ(n) matching
time. Section 32.4 presents the similar, but much cleverer,
Knuth-Morris-Pratt (or KMP) algorithm, which has the same Θ(n) matching
time, but it reduces the preprocessing time to only Θ(m).

A completely different approach appears in Section 32.5, which examines
suffix arrays and the longest common prefix array. You can use these
arrays not only to find a pattern in a text, but also to answer other
questions, such as what is the longest repeated substring in the text
and what is the longest common substring between two texts. The
algorithm to form the suffix array in Section 32.5 takes O(n 1g n) time
and, given the suffix array, the section shows how to compute the
longest common prefix array in O(n) time.

Notation and terminology

We denote by ∑* (read “sigma-star”) the set of all finite-length strings
formed using characters from the alphabet ∑. This chapter considers only
finite-length strings. The 0-length empty string, denoted ϵ, also
belongs to ∑*. The length of a string x is denoted |x|. The
concatenation of two strings x and y, denoted xy, has length |x| + |y|
and consists of the characters from x followed by the characters from y.

[art]

Figure 32.2 A graphical proof of Lemma 32.1. Suppose that x ⊐ z and y ⊐
z. The three parts of the figure illustrate the three cases of the
lemma. Vertical lines connect matching regions (shown in blue) of the
strings. (a) If |x| ≤ |y|, then x ⊐ y. (b) If |x| ≥ |y|, then y ⊐ x. (c)
If |x| = |y|, then x = y.

A string w is a prefix of a string x, denoted w ⊏ x, if x = wy for some
string y ∈ ∑*. Note that if w ⊏ x, then |w| ≤ |x|. Similarly, a string w
is a suffix of a string x, denoted w ⊐ x, if x = yw for some y ∈ ∑*. As
with a prefix, w ⊐ x implies |w| ≤ |x|. For example, ab ⊏ abcca and cca
⊐ abcca. A string w is a proper prefix of x if w ⊏ x and |w| < |x|, and
likewise for a proper suffix. The empty string ϵ is both a suffix and a
prefix of every string. For any strings x and y and any character a, we
have x ⊐ y if and only if xa ⊐ ya. The ⊏ and ⊐ relations are transitive.
The following lemma will be useful later.

Lemma 32.1 (Overlapping-suffix lemma)

Suppose that x, y, and z are strings such that x ⊐ z and y ⊐ z. If |x| ≤
|y|, then x ⊐ y. If |x| ≥ |y|, then y ⊐ x. If |x| = |y|, then x = y.

Proof   See Figure 32.2 for a graphical proof.

▪

For convenience, denote the k-character prefix P[1:k] of the pattern
P[1:m] by P[:k]. Thus, we can write P[:0] = ϵ and P[:m] = P = P[1:m].
Similarly, denote the k-character prefix of the text T by T[:k]. Using
this notation, we can state the string-matching problem as that of
finding all shifts s in the range 0 ≤ s ≤ n – m such that P ⊐ T[:s + m].

Our pseudocode allows two equal-length strings to be compared for
equality as a primitive operation. If the strings are compared from left
to right and the comparison stops when a mismatch is discovered, we
assume that the time taken by such a test is a linear function of the
number of matching characters discovered. To be precise, the test “x ==
y” is assumed to take Θ(t) time, where t is the length of the longest
string z such that z ⊏ x and z ⊏ y.

32.1    The naive string-matching algorithm

The NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER procedure finds all valid shifts using a loop
that checks the condition P[1:m] = T[s+1:s+m] for each of the n−m+1
possible values of s.

NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER(T, P, n, m)

  --- -------------------------------------
  1   for s = 0 to n – m
  2   if P[1:m] == T[s + 1:s + m]
  3   print “Pattern occurs with shift” s
  --- -------------------------------------

Figure 32.3 portrays the naive string-matching procedure as sliding a
“template” containing the pattern over the text, noting for which shifts
all of the characters on the template equal the corresponding characters
in the text. The for loop of lines 1–3 considers each possible shift
explicitly. The test in line 2 determines whether the current shift is
valid. This test implicitly loops to check corresponding character
positions until all positions match successfully or a mismatch is found.
Line 3 prints out each valid shift s.

Procedure NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER takes O((n – m + 1)m) time, and this
bound is tight in the worst case. For example, consider the text string
a^(n) (a string of na’s) and the pattern a^(m). For each of the n−m+1
possible values of the shift s, the implicit loop on line 2 to compare
corresponding characters must execute m times to validate the shift. The
worst-case running time is thus Θ((n − m + 1)m), which is Θ(n²) if m =
⌊n/2⌋. Because it requires no preprocessing, NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER’s
running time equals its matching time.

NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER is far from an optimal procedure for this problem.
Indeed, this chapter will show that the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm is
much better in the worst case. The naive string-matcher is inefficient
because it entirely ignores information gained about the text for one
value of s when it considers other values of s. Such information can be
quite valuable, however. For example, if P = aaab and s = 0 is valid,
then none of the shifts 1, 2, or 3 are valid, since T[4] = b. The
following sections examine several ways to make effective use of this
sort of information.

[art]

Figure 32.3 The operation of the NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER procedure for the
pattern P = aab and the text T = acaabc. Imagine the pattern P as a
template that slides next to the text. (a)–(d) The four successive
alignments tried by the naive string matcher. In each part, vertical
lines connect corresponding regions found to match (shown in blue), and
a red jagged line connects the first mismatched character found, if any.
The algorithm finds one occurrence of the pattern, at shift s = 2, shown
in part (c).

Exercises

32.1-1

Show the comparisons the naive string matcher makes for the pattern P =
0001 in the text T = 000010001010001.

32.1-2

Suppose that all characters in the pattern P are different. Show how to
accelerate NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER to run in O(n) time on an n-character
text T.

32.1-3

Suppose that pattern P and text T are randomly chosen strings of length
m and n, respectively, from the d-ary alphabet ∑_(d) = {0, 1, …, d – 1},
where d ≥ 2. Show that the expected number of character-to-character
comparisons made by the implicit loop in line 2 of the naive algorithm
is

[art]

over all executions of this loop. (Assume that the naive algorithm stops
comparing characters for a given shift once it finds a mismatch or
matches the entire pattern.) Thus, for randomly chosen strings, the
naive algorithm is quite efficient.

32.1-4

Suppose that the pattern P may contain occurrences of a gap character ♢
that can match an arbitrary string of characters (even one of 0 length).
For example, the pattern ab♢ba♢c occurs in the text cabccbacbacab as

[art]

and as

[art]

The gap character may occur an arbitrary number of times in the pattern
but not at all in the text. Give a polynomial-time algorithm to
determine whether such a pattern P occurs in a given text T, and analyze
the running time of your algorithm.

32.2    The Rabin-Karp algorithm

Rabin and Karp proposed a string-matching algorithm that performs well
in practice and that also generalizes to other algorithms for related
problems, such as two-dimensional pattern matching. The Rabin-Karp
algorithm uses Θ(m) preprocessing time, and its worst-case running time
is Θ((n−m+1)m). Based on certain assumptions, however, its average-case
running time is better.

This algorithm makes use of elementary number-theoretic notions such as
the equivalence of two numbers modulo a third number. You might want to
refer to Section 31.1 for the relevant definitions.

For expository purposes, let’s assume that ∑ = {0, 1, 2, …, 9}, so that
each character is a decimal digit. (In the general case, you can assume
that each character is a digit in radix-d notation, so that it has a
numerical value in the range 0 to d – 1, where d = |∑|.) You can then
view a string of k consecutive characters as representing a length-k
decimal number. For example, the character string 31415 corresponds to
the decimal number 31,415. Because we interpret the input characters as
both graphical symbols and digits, it will be convenient in this section
to denote them as digits in standard text font.

Given a pattern P[1:m], let p denote its corresponding decimal value. In
a similar manner, given a text T[1:n], let t_(s) denote the decimal
value of the length-m substring T[s + 1:s + m], for s = 0, 1, …, n – m.
Certainly, t_(s) = p if and only if T [s + 1:s + m] = P[1:m], and thus,
s is a valid shift if and only if t_(s) = p. If you could compute p in
Θ(m) time and all the t_(s) values in a total of Θ(n – m + 1) time,²
then you could determine all valid shifts s in Θ(m)+Θ(n − m + 1) = Θ(n)
time by comparing p with each of the t_(s) values. (For the moment,
let’s not worry about the possibility that p and the t_(s) values might
be very large numbers.)

Indeed, you can compute p in Θ(m) time using Horner’s rule (see Problem
2-3):

[art]

Similarly, you can compute t₀ from T[1:m] in Θ(m) time.

To compute the remaining values t₁, t₂, …, t_(n–m) in Θ(n – m) time,
observe that you can compute t_(s+1) from t_(s) in constant time, since

[art]

Subtracting 10^(m−1)T [s + 1] removes the high-order digit from t_(s),
multiplying the result by 10 shifts the number left by one digit
position, and adding T[s + m + 1] brings in the appropriate low-order
digit. For example, suppose that m = 5, t_(s) = 31415, and the new
low-order digit is T[s + 5 + 1] = 2. The high-order digit to remove is
T[s + 1] = 3, and so

  --------- --- ----------------------------
  t_(s+1)   =   10 (31415 − 10000 · 3) + 2
            =   14152.
  --------- --- ----------------------------

If you precompute the constant 10^(m−1) (which you can do in O(1g m)
time using the techniques of Section 31.6, although for this application
a straightforward O(m)-time method suffices), then each execution of
equation (32.1) takes a constant number of arithmetic operations. Thus,
you can compute p in Θ(m) time, and you can compute all of t₀, t₁, …,
t_(n−m) in Θ(n − m + 1) time. Therefore, you can find all occurrences of
the pattern P[1:m] in the text T[1: n] with Θ(m) preprocessing time and
Θ(n − m + 1) matching time.

This scheme works well if P is short enough and the alphabet ∑ is small
enough that arithmetic operations on p and t_(s) take constant time. But
what if P is long, or if the size of ∑ means that instead of powers of
10 in equation (32.1) you have to use powers of a larger number (such as
powers of 256 for the extended ASCII character set)? Then the values of
p and t_(s) might be too large to work with in constant time.
Fortunately, this problem can be solved, as Figure 32.4 shows: compute p
and the t_(s) values modulo a suitable modulus q. You can compute p
modulo q in Θ(m) time and all the t_(s) values modulo q in Θ(n − m + 1)
time. With |∑| = 10, if you choose the modulus q as a prime such that
10q just fits within one computer word, then you can perform all the
necessary computations with single-precision arithmetic. In general,
with a d-ary alphabet {0, 1, …, d – 1}, choose q so that dq fits within
a computer word and adjust the recurrence equation (32.1) to work modulo
q, so that it becomes

[art]

[art]

Figure 32.4 The Rabin-Karp algorithm. Each character is a decimal digit.
Values are computed modulo 13. (a) A text string. A window of length 5
is shaded blue. The numerical value of the blue number, computed modulo
13, yields the value 7. (b) The same text string with values computed
modulo 13 for each possible position of a length-5 window. Assuming the
pattern P = 31415, look for windows whose value modulo 13 is 7, since
31415 = 7 (mod 13). The algorithm finds two such windows, shaded blue in
the figure. The first, beginning at text position 7, is indeed an
occurrence of the pattern. The second window, beginning at text position
13, is a spurious hit. (c) How to compute the value for a window in
constant time, given the value for the previous window. The first window
has value 31415. Dropping the high-order digit 3, shifting left
(multiplying by 10), and then adding in the low-order digit 2 gives the
new value 14152. Because all computations are performed modulo 13, the
value for the first window is 7, and the value for the new window is 8.

where h = d^(m−1) mod q is the value of the digit “1” in the high-order
position of an m-digit text window.

The solution of working modulo q is not perfect, however: t_(s) = p (mod
q) does not automatically mean that t_(s) = p. On the other hand, if
t_(s) ≠ p (mod q), then you definitely know that t_(s) ≠ p, so that
shift s is invalid. Thus you can use the test t_(s) = p (mod q) as a
fast heuristic test to rule out invalid shifts. If t_(s) = p (mod q)—a
hit—then you need to test further to see whether s is really valid or
you just have a spurious hit. This additional test explicitly checks the
condition P[1:m] = T[s + 1:s + m]. If q is large enough, then you would
hope that spurious hits occur infrequently enough that the cost of the
extra checking is low.

The procedure RABIN-KARP-MATCHER on the next page makes these ideas
precise. The inputs to the procedure are the text T, the pattern P,
their lengths n and m, the radix d to use (which is typically taken to
be |∑|), and the prime q to use. The procedure works as follows. All
characters are interpreted as radix-d digits. The subscripts on t are
provided only for clarity: the procedure works correctly if all the
subscripts are dropped. Line 1 initializes h to the value of the
high-order digit position of an m-digit window. Lines 2–6 compute p as
the value of P[1:m] mod q and t₀ as the value of T[1:m] mod q. The for
loop of lines 7–12 iterates through all possible shifts s, maintaining
the following invariant:

Whenever line 8 is executed, t_(s) = T[s + 1:s + m] mod q.

If a hit occurs because p = t_(s) in line 8, then line 9 determines
whether s is a valid shift or the hit was spurious via the test P[1:m]
== T[s +1:s +m]. Line 10 prints out any valid shifts that are found. If
s < n – m (checked in line 11), then the for loop will iterate at least
one more time, and so line 12 first executes to ensure that the loop
invariant holds upon the next iteration. Line 12 computes the value of
t_(s+1) mod q from the value of t_(s) mod q in constant time using
equation (32.2) directly.

RABIN-KARP-MATCHER takes Θ(m) preprocessing time, and its matching time
is Θ((n − m + 1)m) in the worst case, since (like the naive
string-matching algorithm) the Rabin-Karp algorithm explicitly verifies
every valid shift. If P = a^(m) and T = a^(n), then verifying takes
Θ((n−m+1)m) time, since each of the n−m+1 possible shifts is valid.

In many applications, you expect few valid shifts—perhaps some constant
c of them. In such applications, the expected matching time of the
algorithm is only O((n−m+1)+cm) = O(n+m), plus the time required to
process spurious hits. We can base a heuristic analysis on the
assumption that reducing values modulo q acts like a random mapping from
∑* to ℤ_(q). The expected number of spurious hits is then O(n/q),
because we can estimate the chance that an arbitrary t_(s) will be
equivalent to p, modulo q, as 1/q. Since there are O(n) positions at
which the test of line 8 fails (actually, at most n − m + 1 positions)
and checking each hit takes O(m) time in line 9, the expected matching
time taken by the Rabin-Karp algorithm is

RABIN-KARP-MATCHER(T, P, n, m, d, q)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | h = d^(m−1) mod q                                             |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   2 | p = 0                                                         |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   3 | t₀ = 0                                                        |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   4 | for i = 1 to m                | // preprocessing              |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | p = (dp + P[i]) mod q                                         |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   6 | t₀ = (dt₀ + T[i]) mod q                                       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   7 | for s = 0 to n – m            | // matching—try all possible  |
|     |                               | shifts                        |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   8 | if p == t_(s)                 | // a hit?                     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | if P[1:m] == T[s + 1:s + m]   | // valid shift?               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10  | print “Pattern occurs with shift” s                           |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11  | if s < n – m                                                  |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12  | [art]                                                         |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

O(n) + O(m(v + n/q)),

where v is the number of valid shifts. This running time is O(n) if v =
O(1) and you choose q ≥ m. That is, if the expected number of valid
shifts is small (O(1)) and you choose the prime q to be larger than the
length of the pattern, then you can expect the Rabin-Karp procedure to
use only O(n + m) matching time. Since m ≤ n, this expected matching
time is O(n).

Exercises

32.2-1

Working modulo q = 11, how many spurious hits does the Rabin-Karp
matcher encounter in the text T = 3141592653589793 when looking for the
pattern P = 26?

32.2-2

Describe how to extend the Rabin-Karp method to the problem of searching
a text string for an occurrence of any one of a given set of k patterns.
Start by assuming that all k patterns have the same length. Then
generalize your solution to allow the patterns to have different
lengths.

32.2-3

Show how to extend the Rabin-Karp method to handle the problem of
looking for a given m × m pattern in an n × n array of characters. (The
pattern may be shifted vertically and horizontally, but it may not be
rotated.)

32.2-4

Alice has a copy of a long n-bit file A = 〈a_(n–1), a_(n–2), …, a₀〉,
and Bob similarly has an n-bit file B = 〈b_(n–1), b_(n–2), …, b₀〉.
Alice and Bob wish to know if their files are identical. To avoid
transmitting all of A or B, they use the following fast probabilistic
check. Together, they select a prime q > 1000n and randomly select an
integer x from {0, 1, …, q – 1}. Letting

[art]

Alice evaluates A(x) and Bob evaluates B(x). Prove that if A ≠ B, there
is at most one chance in 1000 that A(x) = B(x), whereas if the two files
are the same, A(x) is necessarily the same as B(x). (Hint: See Exercise
31.4-4.)

32.3    String matching with finite automata

Many string-matching algorithms build a finite automaton—a simple
machine for processing information—that scans the text string T for all
occurrences of the pattern P. This section presents a method for
building such an automaton. These string-matching automata are
efficient: they examine each text character exactly once, taking
constant time per text character. The matching time used—after
preprocessing the pattern to build the automaton—is therefore Θ(n). The
time to build the automaton, however, can be large if ∑ is large.
Section 32.4 describes a clever way around this problem.

We begin this section with the definition of a finite automaton. We then
examine a special string-matching automaton and show how to use it to
find occurrences of a pattern in a text. Finally, we’ll see how to
construct the string-matching automaton for a given input pattern.

Finite automata

A finite automaton M, illustrated in Figure 32.5, is a 5-tuple (Q, q₀,
A, ∑, δ), where

- Q is a finite set of states,
- q₀ ∈ Q is the start state,
- A ⊆ Q is a distinguished set of accepting states,
- ∑ is a finite input alphabet,
- δ is a function from Q × ∑ into Q, called the transition function of
  M.

[art]

Figure 32.5 A simple two-state finite automaton with state set Q = {0,
1}, start state q₀ = 0, and input alphabet ∑ = {a, b}. (a) A tabular
representation of the transition function δ. (b) An equivalent
state-transition diagram. State 1, in orange, is the only accepting
state. Directed edges represent transitions. For example, the edge from
state 1 to state 0 labeled b indicates that δ(1, b) = 0. This automaton
accepts those strings that end in an odd number of a’s. More precisely,
it accepts a string x if and only if x = yz, where y = ϵ or y ends with
a b, and z = a^(k), where k is odd. For example, on input abaaa,
including the start state, this automaton enters the sequence of states
〈0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1〉, and so it accepts this input. For input abbaa, it
enters the sequence of states 〈0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0〉, and so it rejects
this input.

The finite automaton begins in state q₀ and reads the characters of its
input string one at a time. If the automaton is in state q and reads
input character a, it moves (“makes a transition”) from state q to state
δ(q, a). Whenever its current state q is a member of A, the machine M
has accepted the string read so far. An input that is not accepted is
rejected.

A finite automaton M induces a function ϕ, called the final-state
function, from ∑* to Q such that ϕ(w) is the state M ends up in after
reading the string w. Thus, M accepts a string w if and only if ϕ(w) ∈
A. We define the function ϕ recursively, using the transition function:

  ------- --- ------------ --------------------
  ϕ(ϵ)    =   q₀,          
  ϕ(wa)   =   δ(ϕ(w), a)   for w ∈ ∑*, a ∈ ∑.
  ------- --- ------------ --------------------

String-matching automata

For a given pattern P, a preprocessing step constructs a string-matching
automaton specific to P. The automaton then searches the text string for
occurrences of P. Figure 32.6 illustrates the automaton for the pattern
P = ababaca. From now on, let’s assume that P is fixed, and for brevity,
we won’t bother to indicate the dependence upon P in our notation.

In order to specify the string-matching automaton corresponding to a
given pattern P[1:m], we first define an auxiliary function σ, called
the suffix function corresponding to the pattern P. The function σ maps
∑* to {0, 1, …, m} such that σ(x) is the length of the longest prefix of
P that is also a suffix of x:

[art]

[art]

Figure 32.6 (a) A state-transition diagram for the string-matching
automaton that accepts all strings ending in the string ababaca. State 0
is the start state, and state 7 (in orange) is the only accepting state.
The transition function δ is defined by equation (32.4), and a directed
edge from state i to state j labeled a represents δ(i, a) = j. The
right-going edges forming the “spine” of the automaton, shown in blue,
correspond to successful matches between pattern and input characters.
Except for the edges from state 7 to states 1 and 2, the left-going
edges correspond to mismatches. Some edges corresponding to mismatches
are omitted: by convention, if a state i has no outgoing edge labeled a
for some a ∈ ∑, then δ(i, a) = 0. (b) The corresponding transition
function δ, and the pattern string P = ababaca. The entries
corresponding to successful matches between pattern and input characters
are shown in blue. (c) The operation of the automaton on the text T =
abababacaba. Under each text character T[i] appears the state ϕ(T[:i])
that the automaton is in after processing the prefix T[:i]. The
substring of the pattern that occurs in the text is highlighted in blue.
The automaton finds this one occurrence of the pattern, ending in
position 9.

The suffix function σ is well defined since the empty string P[:0] = ϵ
is a suffix of every string. As examples, for the pattern P = ab, we
have σ(ε) = 0, σ(ccaca) = 1, and σ(ccab) = 2. For a pattern P of length
m, we have σ(x) = m if and only if P ⊐ x. From the definition of the
suffix function, x ⊐ y implies σ(x) ≤ σ(y) (see Exercise 32.3-4).

We are now ready to define the string-matching automaton that
corresponds to a given pattern P[1:m]:

- The state set Q is {0, 1, …, m}. The start state q₀ is state 0, and
  state m is the only accepting state.
- The transition function δ is defined, for any state q and character a,
  by

[art]

As the automaton consumes characters of the text T, it is trying to
build a match of the pattern P against the most recently seen characters
of T. At any time, the state number q gives the length of the longest
prefix of P that matches the most recently seen text characters.
Whenever the automaton reaches state m, the m most recently seen text
characters match the first m characters of P. Since P has length m,
reaching state m means that the m most recently seen text characters
match the entire pattern, so that the automaton has found a match.

With this intuition behind the design of the automaton, here is the
reasoning behind defining δ(q, a) = σ(P[:q]a). Suppose that the
automaton is in state q after reading the first i characters of the
text, that is, q = ϕ(T[:i]). The intuitive idea then says that q also
equals the length of the longest prefix of P that matches a suffix of
T[:i] or, equivalently, that q = σ(T[:i]). Thus, since ϕ(T[:i]) and
σ(T[:i]) both equal q, we will see (in Theorem 32.4 on page 973) that
the automaton maintains the following invariant:

[art]

If the automaton is in state q and reads the next character T[i + 1] =
a, then the transition should lead to the state corresponding to the
longest prefix of P that is a suffix of T[:i]a. That state is σ(T[:i]a),
and equation (32.5) gives ϕ(T[:i]a) = σ(T[:i]a). Because P[:q] is the
longest prefix of P that is a suffix of T[:i], the longest prefix of P
that is a suffix of T[:i]a has length not only σ(T[:i]a), but also
σ(P[:q]a), and so ϕ(T[:i]a) = σ(P[:q]a). (Lemma 32.3 on page 972 will
prove that σ(T[:i]a) = σ(P[:q]a).) Thus, when the automaton is in state
q, the transition function δ on character a should take the automaton to
state δ(q, a) = δ(ϕ(T[:i]), a) = ϕ(T[:i]a) = σ(P[:q]a) (with the last
equality following from equation (32.5)).

There are two cases to consider, depending on whether the next character
continues to match the pattern. In the first case, a = P[q + 1], so that
the character a continues to match the pattern. In this case, because
δ(q, a) = q + 1, the transition continues to go along the “spine” of the
automaton (the blue edges in Figure 32.6(a)). In the second case, a ≠
P[q + 1], so that a does not extend the match being built. In this case,
we need to find the longest prefix of P that is also a suffix of T[:i]a,
which will have length at most q. The preprocessing step matches the
pattern against itself when creating the string-matching automaton, so
that the transition function can quickly identify the longest such
smaller prefix of P.

Let’s look at an example. Consider state 5 in the string-matching
automaton of Figure 32.6. In state 5, the five most recently read
characters of T are ababa, the characters along the spine of the
automaton that reach state 5. If the next character of T is c, then the
most recently read characters of T are ababac, which is the prefix of P
with length 6. The automaton should continue along the spine to state 6.
This is the first case, in which the match continues, and δ(5, c) = 6.
To illustrate the second case, suppose that in state 5, the next
character of T is b, so the most recently read characters of T are
ababab. Here, the longest prefix of P that matches the most recently
read characters of T—that is, a suffix of the portion of T read so
far—is abab, with length 4, so δ(5, b) = 4.

To clarify the operation of a string-matching automaton, the simple and
efficient procedure FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER simulates the behavior of
such an automaton (represented by its transition function δ) in finding
occurrences of a pattern P of length m in an input text T[1:n]. As for
any string-matching automaton for a pattern of length m, the state set Q
is {0, 1, …, m}, the start state is 0, and the only accepting state is
state m. From the simple loop structure of FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER, you
can see that its matching time on a text string of length n is Θ(n),
assuming that each lookup of the transition function δ takes constant
time. This matching time, however, does not include the preprocessing
time required to compute the transition function. We address this
problem later, after first proving that the procedure
FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER operates correctly.

FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER(T, δ, n, m)

  --- -----------------------------------------
  1   q = 0
  2   for i = 1 to n
  3   q = δ(q, T[i])
  4   if q == m
  5   print “Pattern occurs with shift” i – m
  --- -----------------------------------------

Let’s examine how the automaton operates on an input text T[1:n]. We
will prove that the automaton is in state σ(T[:i]) after reading
character T[i]. Since σ(T[:i]) = m if and only if P ⊐ T[:i], the machine
is in the accepting state m if and only if it has just read the pattern
P. We start with two lemmas about the suffix function σ.

Lemma 32.2 (Suffix-function inequality)

For any string x and character a, we have σ(xa) ≤ σ(x) + 1.

[art]

Figure 32.7 An illustration for the proof of Lemma 32.2. The figure
shows that r ≤ σ(x) + 1, where r = σ(xa).

[art]

Figure 32.8 An illustration for the proof of Lemma 32.3. The figure
shows that r = σ(P[:q]a), where q = σ(x) and r = σ(xa).

Proof   Referring to Figure 32.7, let r = σ(xa). If r = 0, then the
conclusion σ(xa) = r ≤ σ(x)+1 is trivially satisfied since σ(x) is
nonnegative. Now assume that r > 0. Then, P[:r] ⊐ xa, by the definition
of σ. Thus, P[:r − 1] ⊐ x, by dropping the a from both the end of P[:r]
and the end of xa. Therefore, r – 1 ≤ σ(x), since σ(x) is the largest k
such that P[:k] ⊐ x, and thus σ(xa) = r ≤ σ(x) + 1.

▪

Lemma 32.3 (Suffix-function recursion lemma)

For any string x and character a, if q = σ(x), then σ(xa) = σ(P[:q]a).

Proof   The definition of σ gives that P[:q] ⊐ x. As Figure 32.8 shows,
we also have P[:q]a ⊐ xa. Let r = σ(xa). Then P[:r] ⊐ xa and, by Lemma
32.2, r ≤ q + 1. Thus, we have |P[:r]| = r ≤ q + 1 = |P[:q]a|. Since
P[:q]a ⊐ xa, P[:r] ⊐ xa, and |P[:r]| ≤ |P[:q]a|, Lemma 32.1 on page 959
implies that P[:r] ⊐ P[:q]a. Therefore, r ≤ (P[:q]a), that is, σ(xa) ≤
σ(P[:q]a). But we also have σ(P[:q]a) ≤ σ(xa), since P[:q]a ⊐ xa. Thus,
σ(xa) = σ(P[:q]a).

▪

We are now ready to prove the main theorem characterizing the behavior
of a string-matching automaton on a given input text. As noted above,
this theorem shows that the automaton is merely keeping track, at each
step, of the longest prefix of the pattern that is a suffix of what has
been read so far. In other words, the automaton maintains the invariant
(32.5).

Theorem 32.4

If ϕ is the final-state function of a string-matching automaton for a
given pattern P and T[1:n] is an input text for the automaton, then

ϕ(T[:i]) = σ(T[:i])

for i = 0, 1, …, n.

Proof   The proof is by induction on i. For i = 0, the theorem is
trivially true, since T[:0] = ε. Thus, ϕ(T[:0]) = 0 = σ(T[:0]).

Now assume that ϕ(T[:i]) = σ(T[:i]). We will prove that ϕ(T[:i + 1]) =
σ(T[:i + 1]). Let q denote ϕ(T[:i]), so that q = σ(T[:i]), and let a
denote T[i + 1]. Then,

  -------------- --- ---------------- -----------------------------------------
  ϕ(T[:i + 1])   =   ϕ(T[:i]a)        (by the definitions of T[:i + 1] and a)
                 =   δ(ϕ(T[:i]), a)   (by the definition of ϕ)
                 =   δ(q, a)          (by the definition of q)
                 =   σ(P[:q]a)        (by the definition (32.4) of δ)
                 =   σ(T[:i]a)        (by Lemma 32.3)
                 =   (T[:i + 1])      (by the definition of T[:i + 1]).
  -------------- --- ---------------- -----------------------------------------

▪

By Theorem 32.4, if the machine enters state q on line 3, then q is the
largest value such that P[:q] ⊐ T[:i]. Thus, in line 4, q = m if and
only if the machine has just read an occurrence of the pattern P.
Therefore, FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER operates correctly.

Computing the transition function

The procedure COMPUTE-TRANSITION-FUNCTION on the following page computes
the transition function δ from a given pattern P[1:m]. It computes δ(q,
a) in a straightforward manner according to its definition in equation
(32.4). The nested loops beginning on lines 1 and 2 consider all states
q and all characters a, and lines 3–6 set δ(q, a) to be the largest k
such that P[:k] ⊐ P[:q]a. The code starts with the largest conceivable
value of k, which is q+1, unless q = m, in which case k cannot be larger
than m. It then decreases k until P[:k] is a suffix of P[:q]a, which
must eventually occur, since P[:0] = ε is a suffix of every string.

COMPUTE-TRANSITION-FUNCTION(P, ∑, m)

  --- ---------------------------------------
  1   for q = 0 to m
  2   for each character a ∈ ∑
  3   k = min {m, q + 1}
  4   while P[:k] is not a suffix of P[:q]a
  5   k = k – 1
  6   δ(q, a) = k
  7   return δ
  --- ---------------------------------------

The running time of COMPUTE-TRANSITION-FUNCTION is O(m³ |∑|), because
the outer loops contribute a factor of m |∑|, the inner while loop can
run at most m + 1 times, and the test for whether P[:k] is a suffix of
P[:q]a on line 4 can require comparing up to m characters. Much faster
procedures exist. By utilizing some cleverly computed information about
the pattern P (see Exercise 32.4-8), the time required to compute δ from
P improves to O(m |∑|). This improved procedure for computing δ provides
a way to find all occurrences of a length-m pattern in a length-n text
over an alphabet ∑ with O(m |∑|) preprocessing time and Θ(n) matching
time.

Exercises

32.3-1

Draw a state-transition diagram for the string-matching automaton for
the pattern P = aabab over the alphabet ∑ = {a, b} and illustrate its
operation on the text string T = aaababaabaababaab.

32.3-2

Draw a state-transition diagram for the string-matching automaton for
the pattern P = ababbabbababbababbabb over the alphabet ∑ = {a, b}.

32.3-3

A pattern P is nonoverlappable if P[:k] ⊐ P[:q] implies k = 0 or k = q.
Describe the state-transition diagram of the string-matching automaton
for a nonoverlappable pattern.

32.3-4

Let x and y be prefixes of the pattern P. Prove that x ⊐ y implies σ(x)
≤ σ(y).

★ 32.3-5

Given two patterns P and P′, describe how to construct a finite
automaton that determines all occurrences of either pattern. Try to
minimize the number of states in your automaton.

32.3-6

Given a pattern P containing gap characters (see Exercise 32.1-4), show
how to build a finite automaton that can find an occurrence of P in a
text T in O(n) matching time, where n = |T|.

★ 32.4 The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm

Knuth, Morris, and Pratt developed a linear-time string matching
algorithm that avoids computing the transition function δ altogether.
Instead, the KMP algorithm uses an auxiliary function π, which it
precomputes from the pattern in Θ(m) time and stores in an array π[1:m].
The array π allows the algorithm to compute the transition function δ
efficiently (in an amortized sense) “on the fly” as needed. Loosely
speaking, for any state q = 0, 1, …, m and any character a ∈ ∑, the
value π[q] contains the information needed to compute δ(q, a) but that
does not depend on a. Since the array π has only m entries, whereas δ
has Θ(m |∑|) entries, the KMP algorithm saves a factor of |∑| in the
preprocessing time by computing π rather than δ. Like the procedure
FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER, once preprocessing has completed, the KMP
algorithm uses Θ(n) matching time.

The prefix function for a pattern

The prefix function π for a pattern encapsulates knowledge about how the
pattern matches against shifts of itself. The KMP algorithm takes
advantage of this information to avoid testing useless shifts in the
naive pattern-matching algorithm and to avoid precomputing the full
transition function δ for a string-matching automaton.

Consider the operation of the naive string matcher. Figure 32.9(a) shows
a particular shift s of a template containing the pattern P = ababaca
against a text T. For this example, q = 5 of the characters have matched
successfully, but the 6th pattern character fails to match the
corresponding text character. The information that q characters have
matched successfully determines the corresponding text characters.
Because these q text characters match, certain shifts must be invalid.
In the example of the figure, the shift s + 1 is necessarily invalid,
since the first pattern character (a) would be aligned with a text
character that does not match the first pattern character, but does
match the second pattern character (b). The shift s′ = s + 2 shown in
part (b) of the figure, however, aligns the first three pattern
characters with three text characters that necessarily match.

More generally, suppose that you know that P[:q] ⊐ T[:s + q] or,
equivalently, that P[1:q] = T[s + 1:s + q]. You want to shift P so that
some shorter prefix P[:k] of P matches a suffix of T[:s +q], if
possible. You might have more than one choice for how much to shift,
however. In Figure 32.9(b), shifting P by 2 positions works, so that
P[:3] ⊐ T[:s + q], but so does shifting P by 4 positions, so that P[:1]
⊐ T[:s +q] in Figure 32.9(c). If more than one shift amount works, you
should choose the smallest shift amount so that you do not miss any
potential matches. Put more precisely, you want to answer this question:

Given that pattern characters P[1:q] match text characters T[s + 1:s +
q] (that is, P[:q] ⊐ T[:s + q]), what is the least shift s′ > s such
that for some k < q,

[art]

(that is, P[:k] ⊐ T[:s′ + k]), where s′ + k = s + q?

Here’s another way to look at this question. If you know P[:q] ⊐ T[:s +
q], then how do you find the longest proper prefix P[:k] of P[:q] that
is also a suffix of T[:s + q]? These questions are equivalent because
given s and q, requiring s′ + k = s + q means that finding the smallest
shift s′ (2 in Figure 32.9(b)) is tantamount to finding the longest
prefix length k (3 in Figure 32.9(b)). If you add the difference q – k
in the lengths of these prefixes of P to the shift s, you get the new
shift s′, so that s′ = s + (q – k). In the best case, k = 0, so that s′
= s + q, immediately ruling out shifts s + 1, s + 2, …, s + q − 1. In
any case, at the new shift s′, it is redundant to compare the first k
characters of P with the corresponding characters of T, since equation
(32.6) guarantees that they match.

As Figure 32.9(d) demonstrates, you can precompute the necessary
information by comparing the pattern against itself. Since T[s′ + 1:s′ +
k] is part of the matched portion of the text, it is a suffix of the
string P[:q]. Therefore, think of equation (32.6) as asking for the
greatest k < q such that P[:k] ⊐ P[:q]. Then, the new shift s′ = s + (q
– k) is the next potentially valid shift. It will be convenient to
store, for each value of q, the number k of matching characters at the
new shift s′, rather than storing, say, the amount s′ – s to shift by.

Let’s look at the precomputed information a little more formally. For a
given pattern P[1:m], the prefix function for P is the function π : {1,
2, …, m} → {0, 1, …, m –} such that

π[q] = max{k : k < q and P[:k] ⊐ P[:q]}.

That is, π[q] is the length of the longest prefix of P that is a proper
suffix of P[:q]. Here is the complete prefix function π for the pattern
ababaca:

[art]

Figure 32.9 The prefix function π. (a) The pattern P = ababaca aligns
with a text T so that the first q = 5 characters match. Matching
characters, in blue, are connected by blue lines. (b) Knowing these
particular 5 matched characters (P[:5]) suffices to deduce that a shift
of s + 1 is invalid, but that a shift of s′ = s + 2 is consistent with
everything known about the text and therefore is potentially valid. The
prefix P[:k], where k = 3, aligns with the text seen so far. (c) A shift
of s + 4 is also potentially valid, but it leaves only the prefix P[:1]
aligned with the text seen so far. (d) To precompute useful information
for such deductions, compare the pattern with itself. Here, the longest
prefix of P that is also a proper suffix of P[:5] is P[:3]. The array π
represents this precomputed information, so that π[5] = 3. Given that q
characters have matched successfully at shift s, the next potentially
valid shift is at s′ = s + (q – π[q]) as shown in part (b).

[art]

The procedure KMP-MATCHER on the following page gives the
Knuth-Morris-Pratt matching algorithm. The procedure follows from
FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER for the most part. To compute π, KMP-MATCHER
calls the auxiliary procedure COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION. These two
procedures have much in common, because both match a string against the
pattern P: KMP-MATCHER matches the text T against P, and
COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION matches P against itself.

Next, let’s analyze the running times of these procedures. Then we’ll
prove them correct, which will be more complicated.

Running-time analysis

The running time of COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION is Θ(m), which we show by
using the aggregate method of amortized analysis (see Section 16.1). The
only tricky part is showing that the while loop of lines 5–6 executes
O(m) times altogether. Starting with some observations about k, we’ll
show that it makes at most m–1 iterations. First, line 3 starts k at 0,
and the only way that k increases is by the increment operation in line
8, which executes at most once per iteration of the for loop of lines
4–9. Thus, the total increase in k is at most m–1. Second, since k < q
upon entering the for loop and each iteration of the loop increments q,
we always have k < q. Therefore, the assignments in lines 2 and 9 ensure
that π[q] < q for all q = 1, 2, …, m, which means that each iteration of
the while loop decreases k. Third, k never becomes negative. Putting
these facts together, we see that the total decrease in k from the while
loop is bounded from above by the total increase in k over all
iterations of the for loop, which is m – 1. Thus, the while loop
iterates at most m – 1 times in all, and COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION runs in
Θ(m) time.

KMP-MATCHER(T, P, n, m)

+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
|   1         | π = COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION(P, m)                      |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
|   2         | q = 0                | // number of characters matched |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
|   3         | for i = 1 to n       | // scan the text from left to   |
|             |                      | right                           |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
|   4         | while q > 0 and P[q + 1] ≠ T[i]                        |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
|   5         | q = π[q]             | // next character does not      |
|             |                      | match                           |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
|   6         | if P[q + 1] == T[i]                                    |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
|   7         | q = q + 1            | // next character matches       |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
|   8         | if q == m            | // is all of P matched?         |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
|   9         | print “Pattern occurs with shift” i – m                |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| 10          | q = π[q]             | // look for the next match      |
+-------------+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION(P, m)                                        |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|   1         | let π[1:m] be a new array                              |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|   2         | π[1] = 0                                               |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|   3         | k = 0                                                  |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|   4         | for q = 2 to m                                         |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|   5         | while k > 0 and P[k + 1] ≠ P[q]                        |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|   6         | k = π[k]                                               |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|   7         | if P[k + 1] == P[q]                                    |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|   8         | k = k + 1                                              |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|   9         | π[q] = k                                               |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| 10          | return π                                               |
+-------------+--------------------------------------------------------+

Exercise 32.4-4 asks you to show, by a similar aggregate analysis, that
the matching time of KMP-MATCHER is Θ(n).

[art]

Figure 32.10 An illustration of Lemma 32.5 for the pattern P = ababaca
and q = 5. (a) The π function for the given pattern. Since π[5] = 3,
π[3] = 1, and π[1]= 0, iterating π gives π*[5] = {3, 1, 0}. (b) Sliding
the template containing the pattern P to the right and noting when some
prefix P[:k] of P matches up with some proper suffix of P[:5]. Matches
occur when k = 3, 1, and 0. In the figure, the first row gives P, and
the vertical red line is drawn just after P[:5]. Successive rows show
all the shifts of P that cause some prefix P[:k] of P to match some
suffix of P[:5]. Successfully matched characters are shown in blue. Blue
lines connect aligned matching characters. Thus, {k : k < 5 and P[:k] ⊐
P[:5]} = {3, 1, 0}. Lemma 32.5 claims that π*[q] = {k : k < q and P[:k]
⊐ P[:q]} for all q.

Compared with FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER, by using π rather than δ, the
KMP algorithm reduces the time for preprocessing the pattern from O(m
|∑|) to Θ(m), while keeping the actual matching time bounded by Θ(n).

Correctness of the prefix-function computation

We’ll see a little later that the prefix function π helps to simulate
the transition function δ in a string-matching automaton. But first, we
need to prove that the procedure COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION does indeed
compute the prefix function correctly. Doing so requires finding all
prefixes P[:k] that are proper suffixes of a given prefix P[:q]. The
value of π[q] gives us the length of the longest such prefix, but the
following lemma, illustrated in Figure 32.10, shows that iterating the
prefix function π generates all the prefixes P[:k] that are proper
suffixes of P[:q]. Let

π*[q] = {π[q], π⁽²⁾[q], π⁽³⁾[q], …, π^((t))[q]},

where π^((i))[q] is defined in terms of functional iteration, so that
π⁽⁰⁾[q] = q and π^((i))[q] = π[π^((i−1))[q]] for i ≥ 1 (so that π[q] =
π⁽¹⁾[q]), and where the sequence in π*[q] stops upon reaching π^((t))[q]
= 0 for some t ≥ 1.

Lemma 32.5 (Prefix-function iteration lemma)

Let P be a pattern of length m with prefix function π. Then, for q = 1,
2, …, m, we have π*[q] = {k : k < q and P[:k] ⊐ P[:q]}.

Proof   We first prove that π*[q] ⊆ {k : k < q and P[:k] ⊐ P[:q]} or,
equivalently,

[art]

If i ∈ π*[q], then i = π^((u))[q] for some u > 0. We prove equation
(32.7) by induction on u. For u = 1, we have i = π[q], and the claim
follows since i < q and P[:π[q]] ⊐ P[:q] by the definition of π. Now
consider some u ≥ 1 such that both π^((u))[q] and π^((u+1))[q] belong to
π*[q]. Let i = π^((u))[q], so that π[i] = π^((u+1))[q]. The inductive
hypothesis is that P[:i] ⊐ P[:q]. Because the relations < and ⊐ are
transitive, we have π[i] < i < q and P[:π[i]] ⊐ P[:i] ⊐ P[:q], which
establishes equation (32.7) for all i in π*[q]. Therefore, π*[q] ⊆ {k :
k < q and P[:k] ⊐ P[:q]}.

We now prove that {k : k < q and P[:k] ⊐ P[:q]} ⊆ π*[q] by
contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that the set {k : k < q and P[:k]
⊐ P[:q]} – π*[q] is nonempty, and let j be the largest number in the
set. Because π[q] is the largest value in {k : k < q and P[:k] ⊐ P[:q]}
and π*[q] ∈ π*[q], it must be the case that j < [q]. Having established
that π*[q] contains at least one integer greater than j, let j′ denote
the smallest such integer. (We can choose j′ = π[q] if no other number
in π*[q] is greater than j.) We have P[:j] ⊐ P[:q] because j ∈ {k : k <
q and P[:k] ⊐ P[:q]}, and from j′ ∈ π*[q] and equation (32.7), we have
P[:j′] ⊐ P[:q]. Thus, P[:j] ⊐ P[:j′] by Lemma 32.1, and j is the largest
value less than j′ with this property. Therefore, we must have π[j′] = j
and, since j′ ∈ π*[q], we must have j ∈ π*[q] as well. This
contradiction proves the lemma.

▪

The algorithm COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION computes π[q], in order, for q =
1, 2, …, m. Setting π[1] to 0 in line 2 of COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION is
certainly correct, since π[q] < q for all q. We’ll use the following
lemma and its corollary to prove that COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION computes
π[q] correctly for q > 1.

Lemma 32.6

Let P be a pattern of length m, and let π be the prefix function for P.
For q = 1, 2, …, m, if π[q] > 0, then π[q] – 1 ∈ π*[q – 1].

Proof   Let r = π[q] > 0, so that r < q and P[:r] ⊐ P[:q], and thus, r –
1 < q – 1 and P[:r – 1] ⊐ P[:q – 1] (by dropping the last character from
P[:r] and P[:q], which we can do because r > 0). By Lemma 32.5,
therefore, r – 1 ∈ π*[q – 1]. Thus, we have π[q] – 1 = r – 1 ∈ π*[q –
1].

▪

For q = 2, 3, …, m, define the subset E_(q–1) ⊆ π*[q – 1] by

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| E_(q–1)               | =                     | {k ∈ π*[q – 1]: P[k + |
|                       |                       | 1] = P[q]}            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | =                     | {k : k < q – 1 and    |
|                       |                       | P[:k] ⊐ P[:q – 1] and |
|                       |                       | P[k + 1] = P[q]}      |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       |                       | (by Lemma 32.5)       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | =                     | {k : k < q – 1 and    |
|                       |                       | P[:k + 1] ⊐ P[:q]}.   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

The set E_(q–1) consists of the values k < q – 1 for which P[:k] ⊐ P[:q
– 1] and for which, because P[k + 1] = P[q], we have P[:k + 1] ⊐ P[:q].
Thus, E_(q–1) consists of those values k ∈ π*[q – 1] such that extending
P[:k] to P[:k + 1] produces a proper suffix of P[:q].

Corollary 32.7

Let P be a pattern of length m, and let π be the prefix function for P.
Then, for q = 2, 3, …, m,

[art]

Proof   If E_(q–1) is empty, there is no k ∈ π*[q – 1] (including k = 0)
such that extending P[:k] to P[:k + 1] produces a proper suffix of
P[:q]. Therefore, π[q]= 0.

If, instead, E_(q–1) is nonempty, then for each k ∈ E_(q–1), we have k +
1 < q and P[:k + 1] ⊐ P[:q]. Therefore, the definition of π[q] gives

[art]

Note that π[q] > 0. Let r = π[q] – 1, so that r + 1 = π[q] > 0, and
therefore P[:r + 1] ⊐ P[:q]. If a nonempty string is a suffix of
another, then the two strings must have the same last character. Since
r + 1 > 0, the prefix P[:r + 1] is nonempty, and so P[r + 1] = P[q].
Furthermore, r ∈ π*[q – 1] by Lemma 32.6. Therefore, r ∈ E_(q–1), and so
π[q] – 1 = r ≤ max E_(q–1) or, equivalently,

[art]

Combining equations (32.8) and (32.9) completes the proof.

▪

We now finish the proof that COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION computes π
correctly. The key is to combine the definition of E_(q–1) with the
statement of Corollary 32.7, so that π[q] equals 1 plus the greatest
value of k in π*[q – 1] such that P[k + 1] = P[q]. First, in
COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION, k = π[q – 1] at the start of each iteration of
the for loop of lines 4–9. This condition is enforced by lines 2 and 3
when the loop is first entered, and it remains true in each successive
iteration because of line 9. Lines 5–8 adjust k so that it becomes the
correct value of π[q]. The while loop of lines 5–6 searches through all
values k ∈ π*[q – 1] in decreasing order to find the value of π[q]. The
loop terminates either because k reaches 0 or P[k + 1] = P[q]. Because
the “and” operator short-circuits, if the loop terminates because P[k +
1] = P[q], then k must have also been positive, and so k is the greatest
value in E_(q–1). In this case, lines 7–9 set π[q] to k + 1, according
to Corollary 32.7. If, instead, the while loop terminates because k = 0,
then there are two possibilities. If P[1] = P[q], then E_(q–1) = {0},
and lines 7–9 set both k and π[q] to 1. If k = 0 and P[1] ≠ P[q],
however, then E_(q–1) = ø;. In this case, line 9 sets π[q] to 0, again
according to Corollary 32.7, which completes the proof of the
correctness of COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION.

Correctness of the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm

You can think of the procedure KMP-MATCHER as a reimplemented version of
the procedure FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER, but using the prefix function π
to compute state transitions. Specifically, we’ll prove that in the ith
iteration of the for loops of both KMP-MATCHER and
FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER, the state q has the same value upon testing
for equality with m (at line 8 in KMP-MATCHER and at line 4 in
FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER). Once we have argued that KMP-MATCHER
simulates the behavior of FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER, the correctness of
KMP-MATCHER follows from the correctness of FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER
(though we’ll see a little later why line 10 in KMP-MATCHER is
necessary).

Before formally proving that KMP-MATCHER correctly simulates
FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER, let’s take a moment to understand how the
prefix function π replaces the δ transition function. Recall that when a
string-matching automaton is in state q and it scans a character a =
T[i], it moves to a new state δ(q, a). If a = P[q + 1], so that a
continues to match the pattern, then the state number is incremented:
δ(q, a) = q + 1. Otherwise, a ≠ P[q + 1], so that a does not continue to
match the pattern, and the state number does not increase: 0 ≤ δ(q, a) ≤
q. In the first case, when a continues to match, KMP-MATCHER moves to
state q + 1 without referring to the π function: the while loop test in
line 4 immediately comes up false, the test in line 6 comes up true, and
line 7 increments q.

The π function comes into play when the character a does not continue to
match the pattern, so that the new state δ(q, a) is either q or to the
left of q along the spine of the automaton. The while loop of lines 4–5
in KMP-MATCHER iterates through the states in π*[q], stopping either
when it arrives in a state, say q′, such that a matches P[q′ + 1] or q′
has gone all the way down to 0. If a matches P[q′ + 1], then line 7 sets
the new state to q′+1, which should equal δ(q, a) for the simulation to
work correctly. In other words, the new state δ(q, a) should be either
state 0 or a state numbered 1 more than some state in π*[q].

Let’s look at the example in Figures 32.6 and 32.10, which are for the
pattern P = ababaca. Suppose that the automaton is in state q = 5,
having matched ababa. The states in π*[5] are, in descending order, 3,
1, and 0. If the next character scanned is c, then you can see that the
automaton moves to state δ(5, c) = 6 in both FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER
(line 3) and KMP-MATCHER (line 7). Now suppose that the next character
scanned is instead b, so that the automaton should move to state δ(5, b)
= 4. The while loop in KMP-MATCHER exits after executing line 5 once,
and the automaton arrives in state q′ = π[5] = 3. Since P[q′ + 1] = P[4]
= b, the test in line 6 comes up true, and the automaton moves to the
new state q′ + 1 = 4 = δ(5, b). Finally, suppose that the next character
scanned is instead a, so that the automaton should move to state δ(5, a)
= 1. The first three times that the test in line 4 executes, the test
comes up true. The first time finds that P[6] = c ≠ a, and the automaton
moves to state π[5] = 3 (the first state in π*[5]). The second time
finds that P[4] = b ≠ a, and the automaton moves to state π[3] = 1 (the
second state in π*[5]). The third time finds that P[2] = b ≠ a, and the
automaton moves to state π[1] = 0 (the last state in π*[5]). The while
loop exits once it arrives in state q′ = 0. Now line 6 finds that P[q′ +
1] = P[1] = a, and line 7 moves the automaton to the new state q′ + 1 =
1 = δ(5, a).

Thus, the intuition is that KMP-MATCHER iterates through the states in
π*[q] in decreasing order, stopping at some state q′ and then possibly
moving to state q′+1. Although that might seem like a lot of work just
to simulate computing δ(q, a), bear in mind that asymptotically,
KMP-MATCHER is no slower than FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER.

We are now ready to formally prove the correctness of the
Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm. By Theorem 32.4, we have that q = σ(T[:i])
after each time line 3 of FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER executes. Therefore,
it suffices to show that the same property holds with regard to the for
loop in KMP-MATCHER. The proof proceeds by induction on the number of
loop iterations. Initially, both procedures set q to 0 as they enter
their respective for loops for the first time. Consider iteration i of
the for loop in KMP-MATCHER. By the inductive hypothesis, the state
number q equals σ(T[:i – 1]) at the start of the loop iteration. We need
to show that when line 8 is reached, the new value of q is σ(T[:i]).
(Again, we’ll handle line 10 separately.)

Considering q to be the state number at the start of the for loop
iteration, when KMP-MATCHER considers the character T[i], the longest
prefix of P that is a suffix of T[:i] is either P[:q + 1] (if P[q + 1] =
T[i]) or some prefix (not necessarily proper, and possibly empty) of
P[:q]. We consider separately the three cases in which σ(T[:i]) = 0,
σ(T[:i]) = q + 1, and 0 < σ(T[:i]) ≤ q.

- If σ(T[:i]) = 0, then P[:0] = ϵ is the only prefix of P that is a
  suffix of T[:i]. The while loop of lines 4–5 iterates through each
  value q′ in π*[q], but although P[:q′] ⊐ P[:q] ⊐ T[:i – 1] for every
  q′ ∈ π*[q] (because < are ⊐ are transitive relations), the loop never
  finds a q′ such that P[q′ + 1] = T[i]. The loop terminates when q
  reaches 0, and of course line 7 does not execute. Therefore, q = 0 at
  line 8, so that now q = σ(T[:i]).

- If σ(T[:i]) = q+1, then P[q+1] = T[i], and the while loop test in line
  4 fails the first time through. Line 7 executes, incrementing the
  state number to q + 1, which equals σ(T[:i]).

- If 0 < σ(T[:i]) ≤ q′, then the while loop of lines 4–5 iterates at
  least once, checking in decreasing order each value in π*[q] until it
  stops at some q′ < q. Thus, P[:q′] is the longest prefix of P[:q] for
  which P[q′ + 1] = T[i], so that when the while loop terminates, q′ + 1
  = σ(P[:q]T[i]). Since q = σ(T[:i – 1]), Lemma 32.3 implies that σ(T[:i
  – 1]T[i]) = σ(P[:q]T[i]). Thus we have

    -------- --- ------------------
    q′ + 1   =   σ(P[:q]T[i])
             =   σ(T[:i – 1]T[i])
             =   σ(T[:i])
    -------- --- ------------------

  when the while loop terminates. After line 7 increments q, the new
  state number q equals σ(T[:i]).

Line 10 is necessary in KMP-MATCHER, because otherwise, line 4 might try
to reference P[m + 1] after finding an occurrence of P. (The argument
that q = σ(T[:i – 1]) upon the next execution of line 4 remains valid by
the hint given in Exercise 32.4-8: that δ(m, a) = δ(π[m], a) or,
equivalently, σ(Pa) = σ(P[:π[m]]a) for any a ∈ ∑.) The remaining
argument for the correctness of the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm follows
from the correctness of FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER, since we have shown
that KMP-MATCHER simulates the behavior of FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER.

Exercises

32.4-1

Compute the prefix function π for the pattern ababbabbabbababbabb.

32.4-2

Give an upper bound on the size of π*[q] as a function of q. Give an
example to show that your bound is tight.

32.4-3

Explain how to determine the occurrences of pattern P in the text T by
examining the π function for the string PT (the string of length m+n
that is the concatenation of P and T).

32.4-4

Use an aggregate analysis to show that the running time of KMP-MATCHER
is Θ(n).

32.4-5

Use a potential function to show that the running time of KMP-MATCHER is
Θ(n).

32.4-6

Show how to improve KMP-MATCHER by replacing the occurrence of π in line
5 (but not line 10) by π′, where π′ is defined recursively for q = 1, 2,
…, m – 1 by the equation

[art]

Explain why the modified algorithm is correct, and explain in what sense
this change constitutes an improvement.

32.4-7

Give a linear-time algorithm to determine whether a text T is a cyclic
rotation of another string T′. For example, braze and zebra are cyclic
rotations of each other.

★ 32.4-8

Give an O(m |∑|)-time algorithm for computing the transition function δ
for the string-matching automaton corresponding to a given pattern P.
(Hint: Prove that δ(q, a) = δ(π[q], a) if q = m or P[q + 1] ≠ a.)

32.5    Suffix arrays

The algorithms we have seen thus far in this chapter can efficiently
find all occurrences of a pattern in a text. That is, however, all they
can do. This section presents a different approach—suffix arrays—with
which you can find all occurrences of a pattern in a text, but also
quite a bit more. A suffix array won’t find all occurrences of a pattern
as quickly as, say, the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, but its additional
flexibility makes it well worth studying.

[art]

Figure 32.11 The suffix array SA, rank array rank, longest common prefix
array LCP, and lexicographically sorted suffixes of the text T = ratatat
with length n = 7. The value of rank[i] indicates the position of the
suffix T[i:] in the lexicographically sorted order: rank[SA[i]] = i for
i = 1, 2, …, n. The rank array is used to compute the LCP array.

A suffix array is simply a compact way to represent the
lexicographically sorted order of all n suffixes of a length-n text.
Given a text T[1:n], let T[i:] denote the suffix T[i:n]. The suffix
array SA[1:n] of T is defined such that if SA[i] = j, then T[j:] is the
ith suffix of T in lexicographic order.³ That is, the ith suffix of T in
lexicographic order is T[SA[i]:]. Along with the suffix array, another
useful array is the longest common prefix array LCPOE[1:n]. The entry
LCP[i] gives the length of the longest common prefix between the ith and
(i – 1)st suffixes in the sorted order (with LCP[SA[1]] defined to be 0,
since there is no prefix lexicographically smaller than T[SA[1]:]).
Figure 32.11 shows the suffix array and longest common prefix array for
the 7-character text ratatat.

Given the suffix array for a text, you can search for a pattern via
binary search on the suffix array. Each occurrence of a pattern in the
text starts some suffix of the text, and because the suffix array is in
lexicographically sorted order, all occurrences of a pattern will appear
at the start of consecutive entries of the suffix array. For example, in
Figure 32.11, the three occurrences of at in ratatat appear in entries 1
through 3 of the suffix array. If you find the length-m pattern in the
length-n suffix array via binary search (taking O(m 1g n) time because
each comparison takes O(m) time), then you can find all occurrences of
the pattern in the text by searching backward and forward from that spot
until you find a suffix that does not start with the pattern (or you go
beyond the bounds of the suffix array). If the pattern occurs k times,
then the time to find all k occurrences is O(m 1g n + km).

With the longest common prefix array, you can find a longest repeated
substring, that is, the longest substring that occurs more than once in
the text. If LCP[i] contains a maximum value in the LCP array, then a
longest repeated substring appears in T[SA[i]:SA[i] + LCP[i] – 1]. In
the example of Figure 32.11, the LCP array has one maximum value: LCP[3]
= 4. Therefore, since SA[3] = 2, the longest repeated substring is
T[2:5] = atat. Exercise 32.5-3 asks you to use the suffix array and
longest common prefix array to find the longest common substrings
between two texts. Next, we’ll see how to compute the suffix array for
an n-character text in O(n 1g n) time and, given the suffix array and
the text, how to compute the longest common prefix array in Θ(n) time.

Computing the suffix array

There are several algorithms to compute the suffix array of a length-n
text. Some run in linear time, but are rather complicated. One such
algorithm is given in Problem 32-2. Here we’ll explore a simpler
algorithm that runs in Θ(n 1g n) time.

The idea behind the O(n 1g n)-time procedure COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY on the
following page is to lexicographically sort substrings of the text with
increasing lengths. The procedure makes several passes over the text,
with the substring length doubling each time. By the ⌈1g n⌉th pass, the
procedure is sorting all the suffixes, thereby gaining the information
needed to construct the suffix array. The key to attaining an O(n 1g
n)-time algorithm will be to have each pass after the first sort in
linear time, which will indeed be possible by using radix sort.

Let’s start with a simple observation. Consider any two strings, s₁ and
s₂. Decompose s₁ into [art] and [art], so that s₁ is [art] concatenated
with [art]. Likewise, let s₂ be [art] concatenated with [art]. Now,
suppose that [art] is lexicographically smaller than [art]. Then,
regardless of [art] and [art], it must be the case that s₁ is
lexicographically smaller than s₂. For example, let s₁ = aaz and s₂ =
aba, and decompose s₁ into [art] and [art] and s₂ into [art] and [art].
Because [art] is lexicographically smaller than [art], it follows that
s₁ is lexicographically smaller than s₂, even though [art] is
lexicographically smaller than [art].

Instead of comparing substrings directly, COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY
represents substrings of the text with integer ranks. Ranks have the
simple property that one substring is lexicographically smaller then
another if and only if it has a smaller rank. Identical substrings have
equal ranks.

Where do these ranks come from? Initially, the substrings being
considered are just single characters from the text. Assume that, as in
many programming languages, there is a function, ord, that maps a
character to its underlying encoding, which is a positive integer. The
ord function could be the ASCII or Unicode encodings or any other
function that produces a relative ordering of the characters. For
example if all the characters are known to be lowercase letters, then
ord(a) = 1, ord(b) = 2, …, ord(z) = 26 would work. Once the substrings
being considered contain multiple characters, their ranks will be
positive integers less than or equal to n, coming from their relative
order after being sorted. An empty substring always has rank 0, since it
is lexicographically less than any nonempty substring.

COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY(T, n)

+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   1              | allocate arrays substr-rank[1:n], rank[1:n], and  |
|                  | SA[1:n]                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   2              | for i = 1 to n                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   3              | substr-rank[i].left-rank = ord(T[i])              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   4              | if i < n                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   5              | substr-rank[i].right-rank = ord(T[i + 1])         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   6              | else substr-rank[i].right-rank = 0                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   7              | substr-rank[i].index = i                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   8              | sort the array substr-rank into monotonically     |
|                  | increasing order based on the left-rank           |
|                  | attributes, using the right-rank attributes to    |
|                  | break ties; if still a tie, the order does not    |
|                  | matter                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   9              | l = 2                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 10               | while l < n                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 11               | MAKE-RANKS(substr-rank, rank, n)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 12               | for i = 1 to n                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 13               | substr-rank[i].left-rank = rank[i]                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 14               | if i + l ≤ n                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 15               | substr-rank[i].right-rank = rank[i + l]           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 16               | else substr-rank[i].right-rank = 0                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 17               | substr-rank[i].index = i                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 18               | sort the array substr-rank into monotonically     |
|                  | increasing order based on the left-rank           |
|                  | attributes, using the right-rank attributes to    |
|                  | break ties; if still a tie, the order does not    |
|                  | matter                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 19               | l = 2l                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 20               | for i = 1 to n                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 21               | SA[i] = substr-rank[i].index                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 22               | return SA                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| MAKE-RANKS(substr-rank, rank, n)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   1              | r = 1                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   2              | rank[substr-rank[1].index] = r                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   3              | for i = 2 to n                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   4              | if substr-rank[i].left-rank ≠ substr-rank[i –     |
|                  | 1].left-rank                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|                  | or substr-rank[i].right-rank ≠ substr-rank[i –    |
|                  | 1].right-rank                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   5              | r = r + 1                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|   6              | rank[substr-rank[i].index] = r                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

[art]

Figure 32.12 The substr-rank array for indices i = 1, 2, …, 7 after the
for loop of lines 2–7 and after the sorting step in line 8 for input
string T = ratatat.

The COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY procedure uses objects internally to keep track
of the relative ordering of the substrings according to their ranks.
When considering substrings of a given length, the procedure creates and
sorts an array substr-rank[1:n] of n objects, each with the following
attributes:

- left-rank contains the rank of the left part of the substring.
- right-rank contains the rank of the right part of the substring.
- index contains the index into the text T of where the substring
  starts.

Before delving into the details of how the procedure works, let’s look
at how it operates on the input text ratatat, with n = 7. Assuming that
the ord function returns the ASCII code for a character, Figure 32.12
shows the substr-rank array after the for loop of lines 2–7 and then
after the sorting step in line 8. The left-rank and right-rank values
after lines 2–7 are the ranks of length-1 substrings in positions i and
i + 1, for i = 1, 2, …, n. These initial ranks are the ASCII values of
the characters. At this point, the left-rank and right-rank values give
the ranks of the left and right part of each substring of length 2.
Because the substring starting at index 7 consists of only one
character, its right part is empty and so its right-rank is 0. After the
sorting step in line 8, the substr-rank array gives the relative
lexicographic order of all the substrings of length 2, with starting
points of these substrings in the index attribute. For example, the
lexicographically smallest length-2 substring is at, which starts at
position substr-rank[1].index, which equals 2. This substring also
occurs at positions substr-rank[2].index = 4 and substr-rank[3].index =
6.

The procedure then enters the while loop of lines 10–19. The loop
variable l gives an upper bound on the length of substrings that have
been sorted thus far. Entering the while loop, therefore, the substrings
of length at most l = 2 are sorted. The call of MAKE-RANKS in line 11
gives each of these substrings its rank in the sorted order, from 1 up
to the number of unique length-2 substrings, based on the values it
finds in the substr-rank array. With l = 2, MAKE-RANKS sets rank[i] to
be the rank of the length-2 substring T[i:i + 1]. Figure 32.13 shows
these new ranks, which are not necessarily unique. For example, since
the length-2 substring at occurs at positions 2, 4, and 6, MAKE-RANKS
finds that substr-rank[1], substr-rank[2], and substr-rank[3] have equal
values in left-rank and in right-rank. Since substr-rank[1].index = 2,
substr-rank[2].index = 4, and substr-rank[3].index = 6, and since at is
the smallest substring in lexicographic order, MAKE-RANKS sets rank[2] =
rank[4] = rank[6] = 1.

[art]

Figure 32.13 The rank array after line 11 and the substr-rank array
after lines 12–17 and after line 18 in the first iteration of the while
loop of lines 10–19, where l = 2.

This iteration of the while loop will sort the substrings of length at
most 4 based on the ranks from sorting the substrings of length at most
2. The for loop of lines 12–17 reconstitutes the substr-rank array, with
substr-rank[i].left-rank based on rank[i] (the rank of the length-2
substring T[i:i+1]) and substr-rank[i].right-rank based on rank[i + 2]
(the rank of the length-2 substring T[i + 2:i + 3], which is 0 if this
substring starts beyond the end of the length-n text). Together, these
two ranks give the relative rank of the length-4 substring T[i:i + 3].
Figure 32.13 shows the effect of lines 12–17. The figure also shows the
result of sorting the substr-rank array in line 18, based on the
left-rank attribute, and using the right-rank attribute to break ties.
Now substr-rank gives the lexicographically sorted order of all
substrings with length at most 4.

The next iteration of the while loop, with l = 4, sorts the substrings
of length at most 8 based on the ranks from sorting the substrings of
length at most⁴ 4. Figure 32.14 shows the ranks of the length-4
substrings and the substr-rank array before and after sorting. This
iteration is the final one, since with the length n of the text equaling
7, the procedure has sorted all substrings.

[art]

Figure 32.14 The rank array after line 11 and the substr-rank array
after lines 12–17 and after line 18 in the second—and final—iteration of
the while loop of lines 10–19, where l = 4.

In general, as the loop variable l increases, more and more of the right
parts of the substrings are empty. Therefore, more of the right-rank
values are 0. Because i is at most n within the loop of lines 12–17, the
left part of each substring is always nonempty, and so all left-rank
values are always positive.

This example illuminates why the COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY procedure works.
The initial ranks established in lines 2–7 are simply the ord values of
the characters in the text, and so when line 8 sorts the substr-rank
array, its ordering corresponds to the lexicographic ordering of the
length-2 substrings. Each iteration of the while loop of lines 10–19
takes sorted substrings of length l and produces sorted substrings of
length 2l. Once l reaches or exceeds n, all substrings have been sorted.

Within an iteration of the while loop, the MAKE-RANKS procedure
“re-ranks” the substrings that were sorted, either by line 8 before the
first iteration or by line 18 in the previous iteration. MAKE-RANKS
takes a substr-rank array, which has been sorted, and fills in an array
rank[1:n] so that rank[i] is the rank of the ith substring represented
in the substr-rank array. Each rank is a positive integer, starting from
1, and going up to the number of unique substrings of length 2l.
Substrings with equal values of left-rank and right-rank receive the
same rank. Otherwise, a substring that is lexicographically smaller than
another appears earlier in the substr-rank array, and it receives a
smaller rank. Once the substrings of length 2l are re-ranked, line 18
sorts them by rank, preparing for the next iteration of the while loop.

Once l reaches or exceeds n and all substrings are sorted, the values in
the index attributes give the starting positions of the sorted
substrings. These indices are precisely the values that constitute the
suffix array.

Let’s analyze the running time of COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY. Lines 1–7 take
Θ(n) time. Line 8 takes O(n 1g n) time, using either merge sort (see
Section 2.3.1) or heapsort (see Chapter 6). Because the value of l
doubles in each iteration of the while loop of lines 10–19, this loop
makes ⌈1g n⌉ – 1 iterations. Within each iteration, the call of
MAKE-RANKS takes Θ(n) time, as does the for loop of lines 12–17. Line
18, like line 8, takes O(n 1g n) time, using either merge sort or
heapsort. Finally, the for loop of lines 20–21 takes Θ(n) time. The
total time works out to O(n 1g² n).

A simple observation allows us to reduce the running time to Θ(n 1g n).
The values of left-rank and right-rank being sorted in line 18 are
always integers in the range 0 to n. Therefore, radix sort can sort the
substr-rank array in Θ(n) time by first running counting sort (see
Chapter 8) based on right-rank and then running counting sort based on
left-rank. Now each iteration of the while loop of lines 10–19 takes
only Θ(n) time, giving a total time of Θ(n 1g n).

Exercise 32.5-2 asks you to make a simple modification to
COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY that allows the while loop of lines 10–19 to
iterate fewer than ⌈1g n⌉ – 1 times for certain inputs.

Computing the LCP array

Recall that LCP[i] is defined as the length of the longest common prefix
of the (i – 1)st and ith lexicographically smallest suffixes T[SA[i –
1]:] and T[SA[i]:]. Because T[SA[1]:] is the lexicographically smallest
suffix, we define LCP[1] to be 0.

In order to compute the LCP array, we need an array rank that is the
inverse of the SA array, just like the final rank array in
COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY: if SA[i] = j, then rank[j] = i. That is, we have
rank[SA[i]] = i for i = 1, 2, …, n. For a suffix T[i:], the value of
rank[i] gives the position of this suffix in the lexicographically
sorted order. Figure 32.11 includes the rank array for the ratatat
example. For example, the suffix tat is T[5:]. To find this suffix’s
position in the sorted order, look up rank[5] = 6.

To compute the LCP array, we will need to determine where in the
lexicographically sorted order a suffix appears, but with its first
character removed. The rank array helps. Consider the ith smallest
suffix, which is T[SA[i]:]. Dropping its first character gives the
suffix T[SA[i] + 1:], that is, the suffix starting at position SA[i] + 1
in the text. The location of this suffix in the sorted order is given by
rank[SA[i] + 1]. For example, for the suffix atat, let’s see where to
find tat (atat with its first character removed) in the
lexicographically sorted order. The suffix atat appears in position 2 of
the suffix array, and SA[2] = 4. Thus, rank[SA[2] + 1] = rank[5] = 6,
and sure enough the suffix tat appears in location 6 in the sorted
order.

The procedure COMPUTE-LCP on the next page produces the LCP array. The
following lemma helps show that the procedure is correct.

COMPUTE-LCP(T, SA, n)

+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   1 | allocate arrays rank[1:n] and LCP[1:n]                         |
+-----+----------------------------------------------------------------+
|   2 | for i = 1 to n                                                 |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   3 | rank[SA[i]] = i      | // by definition                        |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   4 | LCP[1] = 0           | // also by definition                   |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   5 | l = 0                | // initialize length of LCP             |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   6 | for i = 1 to n                                                 |
+-----+----------------------------------------------------------------+
|   7 | if rank[i] > 1                                                 |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   8 | j = SA[rank[i] – 1]  | // T[j:] precedes T[i:]                 |
|     |                      | lexicographically                       |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|   9 | m = max {i, j }                                                |
+-----+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10  | while m + l ≤ n and T[i + l] == T[j + l]                       |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 11  | l = l + 1            | // next character is in common prefix   |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 12  | LCP[rank[i]] = l     | // length of LCP of T[j:] and T[i:]     |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 13  | if l > 0                                                       |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 14  | l = l – 1            | // peel off first character of common   |
|     |                      | prefix                                  |
+-----+----------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 15  | return LCP                                                     |
+-----+----------------------------------------------------------------+

Lemma 32.8

Consider suffixes T[i – 1:] and T[i:], which appear at positions rank[i
– 1] and rank[i], respectively, in the lexicographically sorted order of
suffixes. If LCP[rank[i – 1]] = l > 1, then the suffix T[i:], which is
T[i – 1:] with its first character removed, has LCP[rank[i]] ≥ l – 1.

Proof   The suffix T[i – 1:] appears at position rank[i – 1] in the
lexicographically sorted order. The suffix immediately preceding it in
the sorted order appears at position rank[i – 1] – 1 and is T[SA[rank[i
– 1] – 1]:]. By assumption and the definition of the LCP array, these
two suffixes, T[SA[rank[i–1]–1]:] and T[i–1:], have a longest common
prefix of length l > 1. Removing the first character from each of these
suffixes gives the suffixes T[SA[rank[i – 1] – 1] + 1:] and T[i:],
respectively. These suffixes have a longest common prefix of length l
– 1. If T[SA[rank[i – 1] – 1] + 1:] immediately precedes T[i:] in the
lexicographically sorted order (that is, if rank[SA[rank[i – 1] – 1] +
1] = rank[i] – 1), then the lemma is proven.

So now assume that T[SA[rank[i – 1] – 1] + 1:] does not immediately
precede T[i:] in the sorted order. Since T[SA[rank[i – 1] – 1]:]
immediately precedes T[i–1:] and they have the same first l > 1
characters, T[SA[rank[i – 1] – 1] + 1:] must appear in the sorted order
somewhere before T[i:], with one or more other suffixes intervening.
Each of these suffixes must start with the same l – 1 characters as
T[SA[rank[i – 1] – 1] + 1:] and T[i:], for otherwise it would appear
either before T[SA[rank[i – 1] – 1] + 1:] or after T[i:]. Therefore,
whichever suffix appears in position rank[i] – 1, immediately before
T[i:], has at least its first l – 1 characters in common with T[i:].
Thus, LCP[rank[i]] ≥ l – 1.

▪

The COMPUTE-LCP procedure works as follows. After allocating the rank
and LCP arrays in line 1, lines 2–3 fill in the rank array and line 4
pegs LCP[1] to 0, per the definition of the LCP array.

The for loop of lines 6–14 fills in the rest of the LCP array going by
decreasing-length suffixes. That is, it fills the position of the LCP
array in the order rank[1], rank[2], rank[3], …, rank[n], with the
assignment occurring in line 12. Upon considering a suffix T[i:], line 8
determines the suffix T[j:] that immediately precedes T[i:] in the
lexicographically sorted order. At this point, the longest common prefix
of T[j:] and T[i:] has length at least l. This property certainly holds
upon the first iteration of the for loop, when l = 0. Assuming that line
12 sets LCP[rank[i]] correctly, line 14 (which decrements l if it is
positive) and Lemma 32.8 maintain this property for the next iteration.
The longest common prefix of T[j:] and T[i:] might be even longer than
the value of l at the start of the iteration, however. Lines 9–11
increment l for each additional character the prefixes have in common so
that it achieves the length of the longest common prefix. The index m is
set in line 9 and used in the test in line 10 to make sure that the test
T[i + l] == T[j + l] for extending the longest common prefix does not
run off the end of the text T. When the while loop of lines 10–11
terminates, l is the length of the longest common prefix of T[j:] and
T[i:].

As a simple aggregate analysis shows, the COMPUTE-LCP procedure runs in
Θ(n) time. Each of the two for loops iterates n times, and so it remains
only to bound the total number of iterations by the while loop of lines
10–11. Each iteration increases l by 1, and the test m + l ≤ n ensures
that l is always less than n. Because l has an initial value of 0 and
decreases at most n – 1 times in line 14, line 11 increments l fewer
than 2n times. Thus, COMPUTE-LCP takes Θ(n) time.

Exercises

32.5-1

Show the substr-rank and rank arrays before each iteration of the while
loop of lines 10–19 and after the last iteration of the while loop, the
suffix array SA returned, and the sorted suffixes when
COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY is run on the text hippityhoppity. Use the position
of each letter in the alphabet as its ord value, so that ord(b) = 2.
Then show the LCP array after each iteration of the for loop of lines
6–14 of COMPUTE-LCP given the text hippityhoppity and its suffix array.

32.5-2

For some inputs, the COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY procedure can produce the
correct result with fewer than ⌈1g n⌉ – 1 iterations of the while loop
of lines 10–19. Modify COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY (and, if necessary,
MAKE-RANKS) so that the procedure can stop before making all ⌈1g n⌉ – 1
iterations in some cases. Describe an input that allows the procedure to
make O(1) iterations. Describe an input that forces the procedure to
make the maximum number of iterations.

32.5-3

Given two texts, T₁ of length n₁ and T₂ of length n₂, show how to use
the suffix array and longest common prefix array to find all of the
longest common substrings, that is, the longest substrings that appear
in both T₁ and T₂. Your algorithm should run in O(n 1g n + kl) time,
where n = n₁ + n₂ and there are k such longest substrings, each with
length l.

32.5-4

Professor Markram proposes the following method to find the longest
palindromes in a string T[1:n] by using its suffix array and LCP array.
(Recall from Problem 14-2 that a palindrome is a nonempty string that
reads the same forward and backward.)

Let @ be a character that does not appear in T. Construct the text T′ as
the concatenation of T, @, and the reverse of T. Denote the length of T′
by n′ = 2n + 1. Create the suffix array SA and LCP array LCP for T′.
Since the indices for a palindrome and its reverse appear in consecutive
positions in the suffix array, find the entries with the maximum LCP
value LCP[i] such that SA[i – 1] = n′ – SA[i] – LCP[i] + 2. (This
constraint prevents a substring—and its reverse—from being construed as
a palindrome unless it really is one.) For each such index i, one of the
longest palindromes is T′[SA[i]:SA[i] + LCP[i] – 1].

For example, if the text T is unreferenced, with n = 12, then the text
T′ is unreferenced@decnerefernu, with n′ = 25 and the following suffix
array and LCP array:

[art]

The maximum LCP value is achieved at LCP[21] = 5, and SA[20] = 3 = n′ –
SA[21] – LCP[21] + 2. The suffixes of T′ starting at indices SA[20] and
SA[21] are referenced@decnerefernu and refernu, both of which start with
the length-5 palindrome refer.

Alas, this method is not foolproof. Give an input string T that causes
this method to give results that are shorter than the longest palindrome
contained within T, and explain why your input causes the method to
fail.

Problems

32-1     String matching based on repetition factors

Let y^(i) denote the concatenation of string y with itself i times. For
example, (ab)³ = ababab. We say that a string x ∈ ∑* has repetition
factor r if x = y^(r) for some string y ∈ ∑* and some r > 0. Let ρ(x)
denote the largest r such that x has repetition factor r.

a. Give an efficient algorithm that takes as input a pattern P[1:m] and
computes the value ρ(P[:i]) for i = 1, 2, …, m. What is the running time
of your algorithm?

b. For any pattern P[1:m], let ρ*(P) be defined as max {ρ(P[:i]) : 1 ≤ i
≤ m}. Prove that if the pattern P is chosen randomly from the set of all
binary strings of length m, then the expected value of ρ*(P) is O(1).

c. Argue that the procedure REPETITION-MATCHER correctly finds all
occurrences of pattern P[1:m] in text T[1:n] in O(ρ*(P)n + m) time.
(This algorithm is due to Galil and Seiferas. By extending these ideas
greatly, they obtained a linear-time string-matching algorithm that uses
only O(1) storage beyond what is required for P and T.)

REPETITION-MATCHER(T, P, n, m)

  ----- --------------------------------------
    1   k = 1 + ρ*(P)
    2   q = 0
    3   s = 0
    4   while s ≤ n – m
    5   if T[s + q + 1] == P[q + 1]
    6   q = q + 1
    7   if q == m
    8   print “Pattern occurs with shift” s
    9   if q == m or T[s + q + 1] ≠ P[q + 1]
  10    s = s + max {1, ⌈q/k⌉}
  11    q = 0
  ----- --------------------------------------

32-2     A linear-time suffix-array algorithm

In this problem, you will develop and analyze a linear-time
divide-and-conquer algorithm to compute the suffix array of a text
T[1:n]. As in Section 32.5, assume that each character in the text is
represented by an underlying encoding, which is a positive integer.

The idea behind the linear-time algorithm is to compute the suffix array
for the suffixes starting at 2/3 of the positions in the text, recursing
as needed, use the resulting information to sort the suffixes starting
at the remaining 1/3 of the positions, and then merge the sorted
information in linear time to produce the full suffix array.

For i = 1, 2, …, n, if i mod 3 equals 1 or 2, then i is a sample
position, and the suffixes starting at such positions are sample
suffixes. Positions 3, 6, 9, … are nonsample positions, and the suffixes
starting at nonsample positions are nonsample suffixes.

The algorithm sorts the sample suffixes, sorts the nonsample suffixes
(aided by the result of sorting the sample suffixes), and merges the
sorted sample and nonsample suffixes. Using the example text T =
bippityboppityboo, here is the algorithm in detail, listing substeps of
each of the above steps:

1. The sample suffixes comprise about 2/3 of the suffixes. Sort them by
the following substeps, which work with a heavily modified version of T
and may require recursion. In part (a) of this problem on page 999, you
will show that the orders of the suffixes of T and the suffixes of the
modified version of T are the same.

A. Construct two texts P₁ and P₂ made up of “metacharacters” that are
actually substrings of three consecutive characters from T. We delimit
each such metacharacter with parentheses. Construct

P₁ = (T[1:3])(T[4:6])(T[7:9]) ⋯ (T[n′:n′ + 2]),

where n′ is the largest integer congruent to 1, modulo 3, that is less
than or equal to n and T is extended beyond position n with the special
character Ø, with encoding 0. With the example text T =
bippityboppityboo, we get that

P₁ = (bip) (pit) (ybo) (ppi) (tyb) (ooØ).

Similarly, construct

P₂ = (T[2:4])(T[5:7])(T[8:10]) ⋯ (T[n″:n″ + 2]),

where n″ is the largest integer congruent to 2, modulo 3, that is less
than or equal to n. For our example, we have

P₂ = (ipp) (ity) (bop) (pit) (ybo) (oØØ).

[art]

Figure 32.15 Computed values when sorting the sample suffixes of the
linear-time suffix-array algorithm for the text T = bippityboppityboo.

If n is a multiple of 3, append the metacharacter (ØØØ) to the end of
P₁. In this way, P₁ is guaranteed to end with a metacharacter containing
Ø. (This property helps in part (a) of this problem.) The text P₂ may or
may not end with a metacharacter containing Ø.

B. Concatenate P₁ and P₂ to form a new text P. Figure 32.15 shows P for
our example, along with the corresponding positions of T.

C. Sort and rank the unique metacharacters of P, with ranks starting
from 1. In the example, P has 10 unique metacharacters: in sorted order,
they are (bip), (bop), (ipp), (ity), (oØØ), (ooØ), (pit), (ppi), (tyb),
(ybo). The metacharacters (pit) and (ybo) each appear twice.

D. As Figure 32.15 shows, construct a new “text” P′ by renaming each
metacharacter in P by its rank. If P contains k unique metacharacters,
then each “character” in P′ is an integer from 1 to k. The suffix arrays
for P and P′ are identical.

E. Compute the suffix array SA_(P′) of P′. If the characters of P′
(i.e., the ranks of metacharacters in P) are unique, then you can
compute its suffix array directly, since the ordering of the individual
characters gives the suffix array. Otherwise, recurse to compute the
suffix array of P′, treating the ranks in P′ as the input characters in
the recursive call. Figure 32.15 shows the suffix array SA_(P′) for our
example. Since the number of metacharacters in P, and hence the length
of P′, is approximately 2n/3, this recursive subproblem is smaller than
the current problem.

F. From SA_(P′) and the positions in T corresponding to the sample
positions, compute the list of positions of the sorted sample suffixes
of the original text T. Figure 32.15 shows the list of positions in T of
the sorted sample suffixes in our example.

2. The nonsample suffixes comprise about 1/3 of the suffixes. Using the
sorted sample suffixes, sort the nonsample suffixes by the following
substeps.

[art]

Figure 32.16 The ranks r₁ through r_(n+3) for the text T =
bippityboppityboo with n = 17.

G. Extending the text T by the two special characters ØØ, so that T now
has n + 2 characters, consider each suffix T[i:] for i = 1, 2, …, n + 2.
Assign a rank r_(i) to each suffix T[i:]. For the two special characters
ØØ, set r_(n+1) = r_(n+2) = 0. For the sample positions of T, base the
rank on the list of sorted sample positions of T. The rank is currently
undefined for the nonsample positions of T. For these positions, set
r_(i) = ☐. Figure 32.16 shows the ranks for T = bippityboppityboo with n
= 17.

H. Sort the nonsample suffixes by comparing tuples (T[i], r_(i+1)). In
our example, we get T[15:] < T[12:] < T[9:] < T[3:] < T[6:] because (b,
6) < (i, 10) < (o, 9) < (p, 8) < (t, 12).

3. Merge the sorted sets of suffixes. From the sorted set of suffixes,
determine the suffix array of T.

This completes the description of a linear-time algorithm for computing
suffix arrays. The following parts of this problem ask you to show that
certain steps of this algorithm are correct and to analyze the
algorithm’s running time.

a. Define a nonempty suffix at position i of the text P created in
substep B as all metacharacters from position i of P up to and including
the first metacharacter of P in which Ø appears or the end of P. In the
example shown in Figure 32.15, the nonempty suffixes of P starting at
positions 1, 4, and 11 of P are (bip) (pit) (ybo) (ppi) (tyb) (ooØ),
(ppi) (tyb) (ooØ), and (ybo) (oØØ), respectively. Prove that the order
of suffixes of P is the same as the order of its nonempty suffixes.
Conclude that the order of suffixes of P gives the order of the sample
suffixes of T. (Hint: If P contains duplicate metacharacters, consider
separately the cases in which two suffixes both start in P₁, both start
in P₂, and one starts in P₁ and the other starts in P₂. Use the property
that Ø appears in the last metacharacter of P₁.)

b. Show how to perform substep C in Θ(n) time, bearing in mind that in a
recursive call, the characters in T are actually ranks in P′ in the
caller.

c. Argue that the tuples in substep H are unique. Then show how to
perform this substep in Θ(n) time.

d. Consider two suffixes T[i:] and T[j:], where T[i:] is a sample suffix
and T[j:] is a nonsample suffix. Show how to determine in Θ(1) time
whether T[i:] is lexicographically smaller than T[j:]. (Hint: Consider
separately the cases in which i mod 3 = 1 and i mod 3 = 2. Compare
tuples whose elements are characters in T and ranks as shown in Figure
32.16. The number of elements per tuple may depend on whether i mod 3
equals 1 or 2.) Conclude that step 3 can be performed in Θ(n) time.

e. Justify the recurrence T(n) ≤ T (2n/3 + 2) + Θ(n) for the running
time of the full algorithm, and show that its solution is O(n). Conclude
that the algorithm runs in Θ(n) time.

32-3     Burrows-Wheeler transform

The Burrows-Wheeler transform, or BWT, for a text T is defined as
follows. First, append a new character that compares as
lexicographically less than every character of T, and denote this
character by $ and the resulting string by T′. Letting n be the length
of T′, create n rows of characters, where each row is one of the n
cyclic rotations of T′. Next, sort the rows lexicographically. The BWT
is then the string of n characters in the rightmost column, read top to
bottom.

For example, let T = rutabaga, so that T′ = rutabaga$. The cyclic
rotations are

rutabaga$

utabaga$r

tabaga$ru

abaga$rut

baga$ruta

aga$rutab

ga$rutaba

a$rutabag

$rutabaga

Sorting the rows and numbering the sorted rows gives

  --- -----------
  1   $rutabaga
  2   a$rutabag
  3   abaga$rut
  4   aga$rutab
  5   baga$ruta
  6   ga$rutaba
  7   rutabaga$
  8   tabaga$ru
  9   utabaga$r
  --- -----------

The BWT is the rightmost column, agtbaa$ur. (The row numbering will be
helpful in understanding how to compute the inverse BWT.)

The BWT has applications in bioinformatics, and it can also be a step in
text compression. That is because it tends to place identical characters
together, as in the BWT of rutabaga, which places two of the instances
of a together. When identical characters are placed together, or even
nearby, additional means of compressing become available. Following the
BWT, combinations of move-to-front encoding, run-length encoding, and
Huffman coding (see Section 15.3) can provide significant text
compression. Compression ratios with the BWT tend improve as the text
length increases.

a. Given the suffix array for T′, show how to compute the BWT in Θ(n)
time.

In order to decompress, the BWT must be invertible. Assuming that the
alphabet size is constant, the inverse BWT can be computed in Θ(n) time
from the BWT. Let’s look at the BWT of rutabaga, denoting it by
BWT[1:n]. Each character in the BWT has a unique lexicographic rank from
1 to n. Denote the rank of BWT[i] by rank[i]. If a character appears
multiple times in the BWT, each instance of the character has a rank 1
greater than the previous instance of the character. Here are BWT and
rank for rutabaga:

[art]

For example, rank[1] = 2 because BWT[1] = a and the only character that
precedes the first a lexicographically is $ (which we defined to precede
all other characters, so that $ has rank 1). Next, we have rank[2] = 6
because BWT[2] = g and five characters in the BWT precede g
lexicographically: $, the three instances of a, and b. Jumping ahead to
rank[5] = 3, that is because BWT[5] = a, and because this a is the
second instance of a in the BWT, its rank value is 1 greater than the
rank value for the previous instance of a, in position 1.

There is enough information in BWT and rank to reconstruct T′ from back
to front. Suppose that you know the rank r of a character c in T′. Then
c is the first character in row r of the sorted cyclic rotations. The
last character in row r must be the character that precedes c in T′. But
you know which character is the last character in row r, because it is
BWT[r]. To reconstruct T′ from back to front, start with $, which you
can find in BWT. Then work backward using BWT and rank to reconstruct
T′.

Let’s see how this strategy works for rutabaga. The last character of
T′, $, appears in position 7 of BWT. Since rank[7] = 1, row 1 of the
sorted cyclic rotations of T′ begins with $. The character that precedes
$ in T′ is the last character in row 1, which is BWT[1]: a. Now we know
that the last two characters of T′ are a$. Looking up rank[1], it equals
2, so that row 2 of the sorted cyclic rotations of T′ begins with a. The
last character in row 2 precedes a in T′, and that character is BWT[2] =
g. Now we know that the last three characters of T′ are ga$. Continuing
on, we have rank[2] = 6, so that row 6 of the sorted cyclic rotations
begins with g. The character preceding g in T′ is BWT[6] = a, and so the
last four characters of T′ are aga$. Because rank[6] = 4, a begins row 4
of the sorted cyclic rotations of T′. The character preceding a in T′ is
the last character in row 4, BWT[4] = b, and the last five characters of
T′ are baga$. And so on, until all n characters of T′ have been
identified, from back to front.

b. Given the array BWT[1:n], write pseudcode to compute the array
rank[1:n] in Θ(n) time, assuming that the alphabet size is constant.

c. Given the arrays BWT[1:n] and rank[1:n], write pseudocode to compute
T′ in Θ(n) time.

Chapter notes

The relation of string matching to the theory of finite automata is
discussed by Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5]. The Knuth-Morris-Pratt
algorithm [267] was invented independently by Knuth and Pratt and by
Morris, but they published their work jointly. Matiyasevich [317]
earlier discovered a similar algorithm, which applied only to an
alphabet with two characters and was specified for a Turing machine with
a two-dimensional tape. Reingold, Urban, and Gries [377] give an
alternative treatment of the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm. The
Rabin-Karp algorithm was proposed by Karp and Rabin [250]. Galil and
Seiferas [173] give an interesting deterministic linear-time
string-matching algorithm that uses only O(1) space beyond that required
to store the pattern and text.

The suffix-array algorithm in Section 32.5 is by Manber and Myers [312],
who first proposed the notion of suffix arrays. The linear-time
algorithm to compute the longest common prefix array presented here is
by Kasai et al. [252]. Problem 32-2 is based on the DC3 algorithm by
Kärkkäinen, Sanders, and Burkhardt [245]. For a survey of suffix-array
algorithms, see the article by Puglisi, Smyth, and Turpin [370]. To
learn more about the Burrows-Wheeler transform from Problem 32-3, see
the articles by Burrows and Wheeler [78] and Manzini [314].

¹ For suffix arrays, the preprocessing time of O(n 1g n) comes from the
algorithm presented in Section 32.5. It can be reduced to Θ(n) by using
the algorithm in Problem 32-2. The factor k in the matching time denotes
the number of occurrences of the pattern in the text.

² We write Θ(n – m + 1) instead of Θ(n – m) because s takes on n − m + 1
different values. The “+1” is significant in an asymptotic sense because
when m = n, computing the lone t_(s) value takes Θ(1) time, not Θ(0)
time.

³ Informally, lexicographic order is “alphabetical order” in the
underlying character set. A more precise definition of lexicographic
order appears in Problem 12-2 on page 327.

⁴ Why keep saying “length at most”? Because for a given value of l, a
substring of length l starting at position i is T[i:i + l – 1]. If i + l
− 1 > n, then the substring cuts off at the end of the text.

33        Machine-Learning Algorithms

Machine learning may be viewed as a subfield of artificial intelligence.
Broadly speaking, artificial intelligence aims to enable computers to
carry out complex perception and information-processing tasks with
human-like performance. The field of AI is vast and uses many different
algorithmic methods.

Machine learning is rich and fascinating, with strong ties to statistics
and optimization. Technology today produces enormous amounts of data,
providing myriad opportunities for machine-learning algorithms to
formulate and test hypotheses about patterns within the data. These
hypotheses can then be used to make predictions about the
characteristics or classifications in new data. Because machine learning
is particularly good with challenging tasks involving uncertainty, where
observed data follows unknown rules, it has markedly transformed fields
such as medicine, advertising, and speech recognition.

This chapter presents three important machine-learning algorithms:
k-means clustering, multiplicative weights, and gradient descent. You
can view each of these tasks as a learning problem, whereby an algorithm
uses the data collected so far to produce a hypothesis that describes
the regularities learned and/or makes predictions about new data. The
boundaries of machine learning are imprecise and evolving—some might say
that the k-means clustering algorithm should be called “data science”
and not “machine learning,” and gradient descent, though an immensely
important algorithm for machine learning, also has a multitude of
applications outside of machine learning (most notably for optimization
problems).

Machine learning typically starts with a training phase followed by a
prediction phase in which predictions are made about new data. For
online learning, the training and prediction phases are intermingled.
The training phase takes as input training data, where each input data
point has an associated output or label; the label might be a category
name or some real-valued attribute. It then produces as an output one or
more hypotheses about how the labels depend on the attributes of the
input data points. Hypotheses can take many forms, typically some type
of formula or algorithm. The learning algorithm used is often a form of
gradient descent. The prediction phase then uses the hypothesis on new
data in order to make predictions regarding the labels of new data
points.

The type of learning just described is known as supervised learning,
since it starts with a set of inputs that are each labeled. As an
example, consider a machine-learning algorithm to recognize spam emails.
The training data comprises a collection of emails, each of which is
labeled either “spam” or “not spam.” The machine-learning algorithm
frames a hypothesis, possibly a rule of the form “if an email has one of
a set of words, then it is likely to be spam.” Or it might learn rules
that assign a spam score to each word and then evaluates a document by
the sum of the spam scores of its constituent words, so that a document
with a total score above a certain threshold value is classified as
spam. The machine-learning algorithm can then predict whether a new
email is spam or not.

A second form of machine learning is unsupervised learning, where the
training data is unlabeled, as in the clustering problem of Section
33.1. Here the machine-learning algorithm produces hypotheses regarding
the centers of groups of input data points.

A third form of machine learning (not covered further here) is
reinforcement learning, where the machine-learning algorithm takes
actions in an environment, receives feedback for those actions from the
environment, and then updates its model of the environment based on the
feedback. The learner is in an environment that has some state, and the
actions of the learner have an effect on that state. Reinforcement
learning is a natural choice for situations such as game playing or
operating a self-driving car.

Sometimes the goal in a supervised machine-learning application is not
making accurate predictions of labels for new examples, but rather
performing causal inference: finding an explanatory model that describes
how the various features of an input data point affect its associated
label. Finding a model that fits a given set of training data well can
be tricky. It may involve sophisticated optimization methods that need
to balance between producing a hypothesis that fits the data well and
producing a hypothesis that is simple.

This chapter focuses on three problem domains: finding hypotheses that
group the input data points well (using a clustering algorithm),
learning which predictors (experts) to rely upon for making predictions
in an online learning problem (using the multiplicative-weights
algorithm), and fitting a model to data (using gradient descent).

Section 33.1 considers the clustering problem: how to divide a given set
of n training data points into a given number k of groups, or
“clusters,” based on a measure of how similar (or more accurately, how
dissimilar) points are to each other. The approach is iterative,
beginning with an arbitrary initial clustering and incorporating
successive improvements until no further improvements occur. Clustering
is often used as an initial step when working on a machine-learning
problem to discover what structure exists in the data.

Section 33.2 shows how to make online predictions quite accurately when
you have a set of predictors, often called “experts,” to rely on, many
of which might be poor predictors, but some of which are good
predictors. At first, you do not know which predictors are poor and
which are good. The goal is to make predictions on new examples that are
nearly as good as the predictions made by the best predictor. We study
an effective multiplicative-weights prediction method that associates a
positive real weight with each predictor and multiplicatively decreases
the weights associated with predictors when they make poor predictions.
The model in this section is online (see Chapter 27): at each step, we
do not know anything about the future examples. In addition, we are able
to make predictions even in the presence of adversarial experts, who are
collaborating against us, a situation that actually happens in
game-playing settings.

Finally, Section 33.3 introduces gradient descent, a powerful
optimization technique used to find parameter settings in
machine-learning models. Gradient descent also has many applications
outside of machine learning. Intuitively, gradient descent finds the
value that produces a local minimum for a function by “walking
downhill.” In a learning application, a “downhill step” is a step that
adjusts hypothesis parameters so that the hypothesis does better on the
given set of labeled examples.

This chapter makes extensive use of vectors. In contrast to the rest of
the book, vector names in this chapter appear in boldface, such as x, to
more clearly delineate which quantities are vectors. Components of
vectors do not appear in boldface, so if vector x has d dimensions, we
might write x = (x₁, x₂, …, x_(d)).

33.1    Clustering

Suppose that you have a large number of data points (examples), and you
wish to group them into classes based on how similar they are to each
other. For example, each data point might represent a celestial star,
giving its temperature, size, and spectral characteristics. Or, each
data point might represent a fragment of recorded speech. Grouping these
speech fragments appropriately might reveal the set of accents of the
fragments. Once a grouping of the training data points is found, new
data can be placed into an appropriate group, facilitating star-type
recognition or speech recognition.

These situations, along with many others, fall under the umbrella of
clustering. The input to a clustering problem is a set of n examples
(objects) and an integer k, with the goal of dividing the examples into
at most k disjoint clusters such that the examples in each cluster are
similar to each other. The clustering problem has several variations.
For example, the integer k might not be given, but instead arises out of
the clustering procedure. In this section we presume that k is given.

Feature vectors and similarity

Let’s formally define the clustering problem. The input is a set of
n examples. Each example has a set of attributes in common with all
other examples, though the attribute values may vary among examples. For
example, the clustering problem shown in Figure 33.1 clusters n = 49
examples—48 state capitals plus the District of Columbia—into k = 4
clusters. Each example has two attributes: the latitude and longitude of
the capital. In a given clustering problem, each example has d
attributes, with an example x specified by a d-dimensional feature
vector

x = (x₁, x₂, …, x_(d)).

Here, x_(a) for a = 1, 2, …, d is a real number giving the value of
attribute a for example x. We call x the point in ℝ^(d) representing the
example. For the example in Figure 33.1, each capital x has its latitude
in x₁ and its longitude in x₂.

In order to cluster similar points together, we need to define
similarity. Instead, let’s define the opposite: the dissimilarity Δ(x,
y) of points x and y is the squared Euclidean distance between them:

[art]

Of course, for Δ(x, y) to be well defined, all attribute values must be
present. If any are missing, then you might just ignore that example, or
you could fill in a missing attribute value with the median value for
that attribute.

The attribute values are often “messy” in other ways, so that some “data
cleaning” is necessary before the clustering algorithm is run. For
example, the scale of attribute values can vary widely across
attributes. In the example of Figure 33.1, the scales of the two
attributes vary by a factor of 2, since latitude ranges from −90 to +90
degrees but longitude ranges from −180 to +180 degrees. You can imagine
other scenarios where the differences in scales are even greater. If the
examples contain information about students, one attribute might be
grade-point average but another might be family income. Therefore, the
attribute values are usually scaled or normalized, so that no single
attribute can dominate the others when computing dissimilarities. One
way to do so is by scaling attribute values with a linear transform so
that the minimum value becomes 0 and the maximum value becomes 1. If the
attribute values are binary values, then no scaling may be needed.
Another option is scaling so that the values for each attribute have
mean 0 and unit variance. Sometimes it makes sense to choose the same
scaling rule for several related attributes (for example, if they are
lengths measured to the same scale).

[art]

Figure 33.1 The iterations of Lloyd’s procedure when clustering the
capitals of the lower 48 states and the District of Columbia into k = 4
clusters. Each capital has two attributes: latitude and longitude. Each
iteration reduces the value f, measuring the sum of squares of distances
of all capitals to their cluster centers, until the value of f does not
change. (a) The initial four clusters, with the capitals of Arkansas,
Kansas, Louisiana, and Tennessee chosen as centers. (b)–(k) Iterations
of Lloyd’s procedure. (l) The 11th iteration results in the same value
of f as the 10th iteration in part (k), and so the procedure terminates.

Also, the choice of dissimilarity measure is somewhat arbitrary. The use
of the sum of squared differences as in equation (33.1) is not required,
but it is a conventional choice and mathematically convenient. For the
example of Figure 33.1, you might use the actual distance between
capitals rather than equation (33.1).

Clusterings

With the notion of similarity (actually, dissimilarity) defined, let’s
see how to define clusters of similar points. Let S denote the given set
of n points in ℝ^(d). In some applications the points are not
necessarily distinct, so that S is a multiset rather than a set.

Because the goal is to create k clusters, we define a k-clustering of S
as a decomposition of S into a sequence 〈S⁽¹⁾, S⁽²⁾, …, S^((k))〉 of k
disjoint subsets, or clusters, so that

S = S⁽¹⁾ ⋃ S⁽²⁾ ⋃ ⋯ ⋃ S^((k)).

A cluster may be empty, for example if k > 1 but all of the points in S
have the same attribute values.

There are many ways to define a k-clustering of S and many ways to
evaluate the quality of a given k-clustering. We consider here only
k-clusterings of S that are defined by a sequence C of k centers

C = 〈c⁽¹⁾, c⁽²⁾, …, c^((k))〉,

where each center is a point in ℝ^(d), and the nearest-center rule says
that a point x may belong to cluster S^((ℓ)) if the center of no other
cluster is closer to x than the center c^((ℓ)) of S^((ℓ)):

x ∈ S^((ℓ)) only if Δ(x, c^((ℓ))) = min {Δ(x, c^((j))): 1 ≤ j ≤ k}.

A center can be anywhere, and not necessarily a point in S.

Ties are possible and must be broken so that each point lies in exactly
one cluster. In general, ties may be broken arbitrarily, although we’ll
need the property that we never change which cluster a point x is
assigned to unless the distance from x to its new cluster center is
strictly smaller than the distance from x to its old cluster center.
That is, if the current cluster has a center that is one of the closest
cluster centers to x, then don’t change which cluster x is assigned to.

The k-means problem is then the following: given a set S of n points and
a positive integer k, find a sequence C = 〈c⁽¹⁾, c⁽²⁾, …, c^((k))〉 of
k center points minimizing the sum f(S, C) of the squared distance from
each point to its nearest center, where

[art]

In the second line, the k-clustering 〈S⁽¹⁾,S⁽²⁾,…,S^((k))〉 is defined
by the centers C and the nearest-center rule. See Exercise 33.1-1 for an
alternative formulation based on pairwise interpoint distances.

Is there a polynomial-time algorithm for the k-means problem? Probably
not, because it is NP-hard [310]. As we’ll see in Chapter 34, NP-hard
problems have no known polynomial-time algorithm, but nobody has ever
proven that polynomial-time algorithms for NP-hard problems cannot
exist. Although we know of no polynomial-time algorithm that finds the
global minimum over all clusterings (according to equation (33.2)), we
can find a local minimum.

Lloyd [304] proposed a simple procedure that finds a sequence C of k
centers that yields a local minimum of f(S, C). A local minimum in the
k-means problem satisfies two simple properties: each cluster has an
optimal center (defined below), and each point is assigned to the
cluster (or one of the clusters) with the closest center. Lloyd’s
procedure finds a good clustering—possibly optimal—that satisfies these
two properties. These properties are necessary, but not sufficient, for
optimality.

Optimal center for a given cluster

In an optimal solution to the k-means problem, each center point must be
the centroid, or mean, of the points in its cluster. The centroid is a
d-dimensional point, where the value in each dimension is the mean of
the values of all the points in the cluster in that dimension (that is,
the mean of the corresponding attribute values in the cluster). That is,
if c^((ℓ)) is the centroid for cluster S^((ℓ)), then for attributes a =
1, 2, …, d, we have

[art]

Over all attributes, we write

[art]

Theorem 33.1

Given a nonempty cluster S^((ℓ)), its centroid (or mean) is the unique
choice for the cluster center c^((ℓ)) ∈ ℝ^(d) that minimizes

[art]

Proof   We wish to minimize, by choosing c^((ℓ)) ∈ ℝ^(d), the sum

[art]

For each attribute a, the term summed is a convex quadratic function in
[art]. To minimize this function, take its derivative with respect to
[art] and set it to 0:

[art]

or, equivalently,

[art]

Since the minimum is obtained uniquely when each coordinate of [art] is
the average of the corresponding coordinate for x ∈ S^((ℓ)), the overall
minimum is obtained when c^((ℓ)) is the centroid of the points x, as in
equation (33.3).

▪

Optimal clusters for given centers

The following theorem shows that the nearest-center rule—assigning each
point x to one of the clusters whose center is nearest to x—yields an
optimal solution to the k-means problem.

Theorem 33.2

Given a set S of n points and a sequence 〈c⁽¹⁾, c⁽²⁾, …, c^((k))〉 of k
centers, a clustering 〈S⁽¹⁾, S⁽²⁾, …, S^((k))〉 minimizes

[art]

if and only if it assigns each point x ∈ S to a cluster S^((ℓ)) that
minimizes Δ(x, c^((ℓ))).

Proof   The proof is straightforward: each point x ∈ S contributes
exactly once to the sum (33.4), and choosing to put x in a cluster whose
center is nearest minimizes the contribution from x.

▪

Lloyd’s procedure

Lloyd’s procedure just iterates two operations—assigning points to
clusters based on the nearest-center rule, followed by recomputing the
centers of clusters to be their centroids—until the results converge.
Here is Lloyd’s procedure:

Input: A set S of points in ℝ^(d), and a positive integer k.

Output: A k-clustering 〈S⁽¹⁾, S⁽²⁾, …, S^((k))〉 of S with a sequence
of centers 〈c⁽¹⁾, c⁽²⁾, …, c^((k))〉.

1.  Initialize centers: Generate an initial sequence 〈c⁽¹⁾, c⁽²⁾, …,
    c^((k))〉 of k centers by picking k points independently from S at
    random. (If the points are not necessarily distinct, see Exercise
    33.1-3.) Assign all points to cluster S⁽¹⁾ to begin.
2.  Assign points to clusters: Use the nearest-center rule to define the
    clustering 〈S⁽¹⁾, S⁽²⁾, …, S^((k))〉. That is, assign each point x
    ∈ S to a cluster S^((ℓ)) having a nearest center (breaking ties
    arbitrarily, but not changing the assignment for a point x unless
    the new cluster center is strictly closer to x than the old one).
3.  Stop if no change: If step 2 did not change the assignments of any
    points to clusters, then stop and return the clustering 〈S⁽¹⁾,
    S⁽²⁾, …, S^((k))〉 and the associated centers 〈c⁽¹⁾, c⁽²⁾, …,
    c^((k))〉. Otherwise, go to step 4.
4.  Recompute centers as centroids: For ℓ = 1, 2, …, k, compute the
    center c^((ℓ)) of cluster S^((ℓ)) as the centroid of the points in
    S^((ℓ)). (If S^((ℓ)) is empty, let c^((ℓ)) be the zero vector.) Then
    go to step 2.

It is possible for some of the clusters returned to be empty,
particularly if many of the input points are identical.

Lloyd’s procedure always terminates. By Theorem 33.1, recomputing the
centers of each cluster as the cluster centroid cannot increase f(S, C).
Lloyd’s procedure ensures that a point is reassigned to a different
cluster only when such an operation strictly decreases f(S, C). Thus
each iteration of Lloyd’s procedure, except the last iteration, must
strictly decrease f(S, C). Since there are only a finite number of
possible k-clusterings of S (at most k^(n)), the procedure must
terminate. Furthermore, once one iteration of Lloyd’s procedure yields
no decrease in f, further iterations would not change anything, and the
procedure can stop at this locally optimum assignment of points to
clusters.

If Lloyd’s procedure really required k^(n) iterations, it would be
impractical. In practice, it sometimes suffices to terminate the
procedure when the percentage decrease in f(S, C) in the latest
iteration falls below a predetermined threshold. Because Lloyd’s
procedure is guaranteed to find only a locally optimal clustering, one
approach to finding a good clustering is to run Lloyd’s procedure many
times with different randomly chosen initial centers, taking the best
result.

The running time of Lloyd’s procedure is proportional to the number T of
iterations. In one iteration, assigning points to clusters based on the
nearest-center rule requires O(dkn) time, and recomputing new centers
for each cluster requires O(dn) time (because each point is in one
cluster). The overall running time of the k-means procedure is thus
O(Tdkn).

Lloyd’s algorithm illustrates an approach common to many
machine-learning algorithms:

- First, define a hypothesis space in terms an appropriate sequence θ of
  parameters, so that each θ is associated with a specific hypothesis
  h_(θ). (For the k-means problem, θ is a dk-dimensional vector,
  equivalent to C, containing the d-dimensional center of each of the k
  clusters, and h_(θ) is the hypothesis that each data point x should be
  grouped with a cluster having a center closest to x.)
- Second, define a measure f(E, θ) describing how poorly hypothesis
  h_(θ) fits the given training data E. Smaller values of f(E, θ) are
  better, and a (locally) optimal solution (locally) minimizes f(E, θ).
  (For the k-means problem, f(E, θ) is just f(S, C).)
- Third, given a set of training data E, use a suitable optimization
  procedure to find a value of θ* that minimizes f(E, θ*), at least
  locally. (For the k-means problem, this value of θ* is the sequence C
  of k center points returned by Lloyd’s algorithm.)
- Return θ* as the answer.

In this framework, we see that optimization becomes a powerful tool for
machine learning. Using optimization in this way is flexible. For
example, regularization terms can be incorporated in the function to be
minimized, in order to penalize hypotheses that are “too complicated”
and that “overfit” the training data. (Regularization is a complex topic
that isn’t pursued further here.)

Examples

Figure 33.1 demonstrates Lloyd’s procedure on a set of n = 49 cities: 48
U.S. state capitals and the District of Columbia. Each city has d = 2
dimensions: latitude and longitude. The initial clustering in part (a)
of the figure has the initial cluster centers arbitrarily chosen as the
capitals of Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, and Tennessee. As the procedure
iterates, the value of the function f decreases, until the 11th
iteration in part (l), where it remains the same as in the 10th
iteration in part (k). Lloyd’s procedure then terminates with the
clusters shown in part (l).

As Figure 33.2 shows, Lloyd’s procedure can also apply to “vector
quantization.” Here, the goal is to reduce the number of distinct colors
required to represent a photograph, thereby allowing the photograph to
be greatly compressed (albeit in a lossy manner). In part (a) of the
figure, an original photograph 700 pixels wide and 500 pixels high uses
24 bits (three bytes) per pixel to encode a triple of red, green, and
blue (RGB) primary color intensities. Parts (b)–(e) of the figure show
the results of using Lloyd’s procedure to compress the picture from a
initial space of 2²⁴ possible values per pixel to a space of only k = 4,
k = 16, k = 64, or k = 256 possible values per pixel; these k values are
the cluster centers. The photograph can then be represented with only 2,
4, 6, or 8 bits per pixel, respectively, instead of the 24-bits per
pixel needed by the initial photograph. An auxiliary table, the
“palette,” accompanies the compressed image; it holds the k 24-bit
cluster centers and is used to map each pixel value to its 24-bit
cluster center when the photo is decompressed.

Exercises

33.1-1

Show that the objective function f(S, C) of equation (33.2) may be
alternatively written as

[art]

33.1-2

Give an example in the plane with n = 4 points and k = 2 clusters where
an iteration of Lloyd’s procedure does not improve f(S, C), yet the
k-clustering is not optimal.

33.1-3

When the input to Lloyd’s procedure contains many repeated points, a
different initialization procedure might be used. Describe a way to pick
a number of centers at random that maximizes the number of distinct
centers picked. (Hint: See Exercise 5.3-5.)

33.1-4

Show how to find an optimal k-clustering in polynomial time when there
is just one attribute (d = 1).

[art]

Figure 33.2 Using Lloyd’s procedure for vector quantization to compress
a photo by using fewer colors. (a) The original photo has 350,000 pixels
(700 × 500), each a 24-bit RGB (red/blue/green) triple of 8-bit values;
these pixels (colors) are the “points” to be clustered. Points repeat,
so there are only 79,083 distinct colors (less than 2²⁴). After
compression, only k distinct colors are used, so each pixel is
represented by only ⌈1g k⌉ bits instead of 24. A “palette” maps these
values back to 24-bit RGB values (the cluster centers). (b)–(e) The same
photo with k = 4, 16, 64, and 256 colors. (Photo from standuppaddle,
pixabay.com.)

33.2    Multiplicative-weights algorithms

This section considers problems that require you to make a series of
decisions. After each decision you receive feedback as to whether your
decision was correct. We will study a class of algorithms that are
called multiplicative-weights algorithms. This class of algorithms has a
wide variety of applications, including game playing in economics,
approximately solving linear-programming and multicommodity-flow
problems, and various applications in online machine learning. We
emphasize the online nature of the problem here: you have to make a
sequence of decisions, but some of the information needed to make the
ith decision appears only after you have already made the (i – 1)st
decision. In this section, we look at one particular problem, known as
“learning from experts,” and develop an example of a
multiplicative-weights algorithm, called the weighted-majority
algorithm.

Suppose that a series of events will occur, and you want to make
predictions about these events. For example, over a series of days, you
want to predict whether it is going to rain. Or perhaps you want to
predict whether the price of a stock will increase or decrease. One way
to approach this problem is to assemble a group of “experts” and use
their collective wisdom in order to make good predictions. Let’s denote
the experts, n of them, by E₁, E₂, …, E_(n), and let’s say that T events
are going to take place. Each event has an outcome of either 0 or 1,
with o^((t)) denoting the outcome of the tth event. Before event t, each
expert E^((i)) makes a prediction [art]. You, as the “learner,” then
take the set of n expert predictions for event t and produce a single
prediction p^((t)) ∈ {0, 1} of your own. You base your prediction only
on the predictions of the experts and anything you have learned about
the experts from their previous predictions. You do not use any
additional information about the event. Only after making your
prediction do you ascertain the outcome o^((t)) of event t. If your
prediction p^((t)) matches o^((t)), then you were correct; otherwise,
you made a mistake. The goal is to minimize the total number m of
mistakes, where [art]. You can also keep track of the number of mistakes
each expert makes: expert E_(i) makes m_(i) mistakes, where [art].

For example, suppose that you are following the price of a stock, and
each day you decide whether to invest in it for just that day by buying
it at the beginning of the day and selling it at the end of the day. If,
on some day, you buy the stock and it goes up, then you made the correct
decision, but if the stock goes down, then you made a mistake.
Similarly, if on some day, you do not buy the stock and it goes down,
then you made the correct decision, but if the stock goes up, then you
made a mistake. Since you would like to make as few mistakes as
possible, you use the advice of the experts to make your decisions.

We’ll assume nothing about the movement of the stock. We’ll also assume
nothing about the experts: the experts’ predictions could be correlated,
they could be chosen to deceive you, or perhaps some are not really
experts after all. What algorithm would you use?

Before designing an algorithm for this problem, we need to consider what
is a fair way to evaluate our algorithm. It is reasonable to expect that
our algorithm performs better when the expert predictions are better,
and that it performs worse when the expert predictions are worse. The
goal of the algorithm is to limit the number of mistakes you make to be
close to the number of mistakes that the best of the experts makes. At
first, this goal might seem impossible, because you do not know until
the end which expert is best. We’ll see, however, that by taking the
advice provided by all the experts into account, you can achieve this
goal. More formally, we use the notion of “regret,” which compares our
algorithm to the performance of the best expert (in hindsight) over all.
Letting m* = min {m_(i) : 1 ≤ i ≤ n} denote the number of mistakes made
by the best expert, the regret is m – m*. The goal is to design an
algorithm with low regret. (Regret can be negative, although it
typically isn’t, since it is rare that you do better than the best
expert.)

As a warm-up, let’s consider the case in which one of the experts makes
a correct prediction each time. Even without knowing who that expert is,
you can still achieve good results.

Lemma 33.3

Suppose that out of n experts, there is one who always makes the correct
prediction for all T events. Then there is an algorithm that makes at
most ⌈1g n⌉ mistakes.

Proof   The algorithm maintains a set S consisting of experts who have
not yet made a mistake. Initially, S contains all n experts. The
algorithm’s prediction is always the majority vote of the predictions of
the experts remaining in set S. In case of a tie, the algorithm makes
any prediction. After each outcome is learned, set S is updated to
remove all the experts who made an incorrect prediction about that
outcome.

We now analyze the algorithm. The expert who always makes the correct
prediction will always be in set S. Every time the algorithm makes a
mistake, at least half of the experts who were still in S also make a
mistake, and these experts are removed from S. If S′ is the set of
experts remaining after removing those who made a mistake, we have that
|S′| ≤ |S|/2. The size of S can be halved at most ⌈1g n⌉ times until |S|
= 1. From this point on, we know that the algorithm never makes a
mistake, since the set S consists only of the one expert who never makes
a mistake. Therefore, overall the algorithm makes at most ⌈1g n⌉
mistakes.

▪

Exercise 33.2-1 asks you to generalize this result to the case when
there is no expert who makes perfect predictions and show that, for any
set of experts, there is an algorithm that makes at most m* ⌈1g n⌉
mistakes. The generalized algorithm begins in the same way. The set S
might become empty at some point, however. If that ever happens, reset S
to contain all the experts and continue the algorithm.

You can substantially improve your prediction ability by not just
tracking which experts have not made any mistakes, or have not made any
mistakes recently, to a more nuanced evaluation of the quality of each
expert. The key idea is to use the feedback you receive to update your
evaluation of how much trust to put in each expert. As the experts make
predictions, you observe whether they were correct and decrease your
confidence in the experts who make more mistakes. In this way, you can
learn over time which experts are more reliable and which are less
reliable, and weight their predictions accordlingly. The change in
weights is accomplished via multiplication, hence the term
“multiplicative weights.”

The algorithm appears in the procedure WEIGHTED-MAJORITY on the
following page, which takes a set E = {E₁, E₂, …, E_(n)} of experts, a
number T of events, the number n of experts, and a parameter 0 < γ ≤ 1/2
that controls how the weights change. The algorithm maintains weights
[art] for i = 1, 2, …, n and t = 1, 2, …, T, where [art]. The for loop
of lines 1–2 sets the initial weights [art] to 1, capturing the idea
that with no knowledge, you trust each expert equally. Each iteration of
the main for loop of lines 3–18 does the following for an event t = 1,
2, …, T. Each expert E_(i) makes a prediction for event t in line 4.
Lines 5–8 compute upweight^((t)), the sum of the weights of the experts
who predict 1 for event t, and downweight^((t)), the sum of the weights
of the experts who predict 0 for the event. Lines 9–11 decide the
algorithm’s prediction p^((t)) for event t based on whichever weighted
sum is larger (breaking ties in favor of deciding 1). The outcome of
event t is revealed in line 12. Finally, lines 14–17 decrease the
weights of the experts who made an incorrect prediction for event t by
multiplying their weights by 1 – γ, leaving alone the weights of the
experts who correctly predicted the event’s outcome. Thus, the fewer
mistakes each expert makes, the higher that expert’s weight.

The WEIGHTED-MAJORITY procedure doesn’t do much worse than any expert.
In particular, it doesn’t do much worse than the best expert. To
quantify this claim, let m^((t)) be the number of mistakes made by the
procedure through event t, and let [art] be the number of mistakes made
by expert E_(i) through event t. The following theorem is the key.

WEIGHTED-MAJORITY(E, T, n, γ)

+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   1 | for i = 1 to n                                                |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   2 | [art]                         | // trust each expert equally  |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   3 | for t = 1 to T                                                |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|   4 | each expert E_(i) ∈ E makes a prediction [art]                |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   5 | [art]                         | // experts who predicted 1    |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   6 | [art]                         | // sum of weights of who      |
|     |                               | predicted 1                   |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   7 | [art]                         | // experts who predicted 0    |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   8 | [art]                         | // sum of weights of who      |
|     |                               | predicted 0                   |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|   9 | if upweight^((t)) ≥ downweight^((t))                          |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 10  | p^((t)) = 1                   | // algorithm predicts 1       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 11  | else p^((t)) = 0              | // algorithm predicts 0       |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 12  | outcome o^((t)) is revealed                                   |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13  | // If p^((t)) ≠ o^((t)), the algorithm made a mistake.        |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14  | for i = 1 to n                                                |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 15  | if [art]                      | // if expert E^((i)) made a   |
|     |                               | mistake …                     |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 16  | [art]                         | // … then decrease that       |
|     |                               | expert’s weight               |
+-----+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 17  | else [art]                                                    |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18  | return p^((t))                                                |
+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------+

Theorem 33.4

When running WEIGHTED-MAJORITY, we have, for every expert E_(i) and
every event T′ ≤ T,

[art]

Proof   Every time an expert E_(i) makes a mistake, its weight, which is
initially 1, is multiplied by 1 – γ, and so we have

[art]

for t = 1, 2, …, T.

We use a potential function [art], summing the weights for all n experts
after iteration t of the for loop of lines 3–18. Initially, we have W(0)
= n since all n weights start out with the value 1. Because each expert
belongs to either the set U or the set D (defined in lines 5 and 7 of
WEIGHTED-MAJORITY), we always have W(t) = upweight^((t)) +
downweight^((t)) after each execution of line 8.

Consider an iteration t in which the algorithm makes a mistake in its
prediction, which means that either the algorithm predicts 1 and the
outcome is 0 or the algorithm predicts 0 and the outcome is 1. Without
loss of generality, assume that the algorithm predicts 1 and the outcome
is 0. The algorithm predicted 1 because upweight^((t)) ≥
downweight^((t)) in line 9, which implies that

[art]

Each expert in U then has its weight multiplied by 1 – γ, and each
expert in D has its weight unchanged. Thus, we have

[art]

Therefore, for every iteration t in which the algorithm makes a mistake,
we have

[art]

In an iteration where the algorithm does not make a mistake, some of the
weights decrease and some remain unchanged, so that we have

[art]

Since there are m^((T′)) mistakes made through iteration T′, and W(1) =
n, we can repeatedly apply inequality (33.8) to iterations where the
algorithm makes a mistake and inequality (33.9) to iterations where the
algorithm does not make a mistake, obtaining

[art]

Because the function W is the sum of the weights and all weights are
positive, its value exceeds any single weight. Therefore, using equation
(33.6) we have, for any expert E_(i) and for any iteration T′ ≤ T,

[art]

Combining inequalities (33.10) and (33.11) gives

[art]

Taking the natural logarithm of both sides yields

[art]

We now use the Taylor series expansion to derive upper and lower bounds
on the logarithmic factors in inequality (33.12). The Taylor series for
ln(1+x) is given in equation (3.22) on page 67. Substituting −x for x,
we have that for 0 < x ≤ 1/2,

[art]

Since each term on the right-hand side is negative, we can drop all
terms except the first and obtain an upper bound of ln(1 – x) ≤ −x.
Since 0 < γ ≤ 1/2, we have

[art]

For the lower bound, Exercise 33.2-2 asks you to show that ln(1 – x) ≥
−x − x² when 0 < x ≤ 1/2, so that

[art]

Thus, we have

[art]

so that

[art]

Subtracting ln n from both sides of inequality (33.16) and then
multiplying both sides by −2/γ yields [art], thus proving the theorem.

▪

Theorem 33.4 applies to any expert and any event T′ ≤ T. In particular,
we can compare against the best expert after all events have occurred,
producing the following corollary.

Corollary 33.5

At the end of procedure WEIGHTED-MAJORITY, we have

[art]

▪

Let’s explore this bound. Assuming that [art], we can choose [art] and
plug into inequality (33.17) to obtain

[art]

and so the number of errors is at most twice the number of errors made
by the best expert plus a term that is often slower growing than m*.
Exercise 33.2-4 shows that you can decrease the bound on the number of
errors by a factor of 2 by using randomization, which leads to much
stronger bounds. In particular, the upper bound on regret (m – m*) is
reduced from (1 + 2γ)m* + (2 ln n)/γ to an expected value of ϵm* + (ln
n)/ϵ, where both γ and ϵ are at most 1/2. Numerically, we can see that
ifγ = 1/2, WEIGHTED-MAJORITY makes at most 3 times the number of errors
as the best expert, plus 4 ln n errors. As another example, suppose that
T = 1000 predictions are being made by n = 20 experts, and the best
expert is correct 95% of the time, making 50 errors. Then
WEIGHTED-MAJORITY makes at most 100(1+γ)+2 ln 20/γ errors. By choosing γ
= 1/4, WEIGHTED-MAJORITY makes at most 149 errors, or a success rate of
at least 85%.

Multiplicative weights methods typically refer to a broader class of
algorithms that includes WEIGHTED-MAJORITY. The outcomes and predictions
need not be only 0 or 1, but can be real numbers, and there can be a
loss associated with a particular outcome and prediction. The weights
can be updated by a multiplicative factor that depends on the loss, and
the algorithm can, given a set of weights, treat them as a distribution
on experts and use them to choose an expert to follow in each event.
Even in these more general settings, bounds similar to Theorem 33.4
hold.

Exercises

33.2-1

The proof of Lemma 33.3 assumes that some expert never makes a mistake.
It is possible to generalize the algorithm and analysis to remove this
assumption. The new algorithm begins in the same way. The set S might
become empty at some point, however. If that ever happens, reset S to
contain all the experts and continue the algorithm. Show that the number
of mistakes that this algorithm makes is at most m* ⌈1g n⌉.

33.2-2

Show that ln(1 – x) ≥ −x – x² when 0 < x ≤ 1/2. (Hint: Start with
equation (33.13), group all the terms after the first three, and use
equation (A.7) on page 1142.)

33.2-3

Consider a randomized variant of the algorithm given in the proof of
Lemma 33.3, in which some expert never makes a mistake. At each step,
choose an expert E_(i) uniformly at random from the set S and then make
the same predication as E_(i). Show that the expected number of mistakes
made by this algorithm is ⌈1g n⌉.

33.2-4

Consider a randomized version of WEIGHTED-MAJORITY. The algorithm is the
same, except for the prediction step, which interprets the weights as a
probability distribution over the experts and chooses an expert E_(i)
according to that distribution. It then chooses its prediction to be the
same as the prediction made by expert E_(i). Show that, for any 0 < ϵ <
1/2, the expected number of mistakes made by this algorithm is at most
(1 + ϵ)m* + (ln n)/ϵ.

33.3    Gradient descent

Suppose that you have a set {p₁, p₂, …, p_(n)} of points and you want to
find the line that best fits these points. For any line ℓ, there is a
distance d_(i) between each point p_(i) and the line. You want to find
the line that minimizes some function f(d₁, …, d_(n)). There are many
possible choices for the definition of distance and for the function f.
For example, the distance can be the projection distance to the line and
the function can be the sum of the squares of the distances. This type
of problem is common in data science and machine learning—the line is
the hypothesis that best describes the data—where the particular
definition of best is determined by the definition of distance and the
objective f. If the definition of distance and the function f are
linear, then we have a linear-programming problem, as discussed in
Chapter 29. Although the linear-programming framework captures several
important problems, many other problems, including various
machine-learning problems, have objectives and constraints that are not
necessarily linear. We need frameworks and algorithms to solve such
problems.

In this section, we consider the problem of optimizing a continuous
function and discuss one of the most popular methods to do so: gradient
descent. Gradient descent is a general method for finding a local
minimum of a function f : ℝ^(n) → ℝ, where informally, a local minimum
of a function f is a point x for which f(x) ≤ f(x′) for all x′ that are
“near” x. When the function is convex, it can find a point near the
global minimizer of f: an n-vector argument x = (x₁, x₂, …, x_(n)) such
that f(x) is minimum. For the intuitive idea behind gradient descent,
imagine being in a landscape of hills and valleys, and wanting to get to
a low point as quickly as possible. You survey the terrain and choose to
move in the direction that takes you downhill the fastest from your
current position. You move in that direction, but only for a short
while, because as you proceed, the terrain changes and you might need to
choose a different direction. So you stop, reevaluate the possible
directions and move another short distance in the steepest downhill
direction, which might differ from the direction of your previous
movement. You continue this process until you reach a point from which
all directions lead up. Such a point is a local minimum.

In order to make this informal procedure more formal, we need to define
the gradient of a function, which in the analogy above is a measure of
the steepness of the various directions. Given a function f : ℝ^(n) → ℝ,
its gradient ∇f is a function ∇f : ℝ^(n) → ℝ^(n) comprising n partial
derivatives: [art]. Analogous to the derivative of a function of a
single variable, the gradient can be viewed as a direction in which the
function value locally increases the fastest, and the rate of that
increase. This view is informal; in order to make it formal we would
have to define what local means and place certain conditions, such as
continuity or existence of derivatives, on the function. Nevertheless,
this view motivates the key step of gradient descent—move in the
direction opposite to the gradient, by a distance influenced by the
magnitude of the gradient.

The general procedure of gradient descent proceeds in steps. You start
at some initial point x⁽⁰⁾, which is an n-vector. At each step t, you
compute the value of the gradient of f at point x^((t)), that is,
(∇f)(x^((t))), which is also an n-vector. You then move in the direction
opposite to the gradient in each dimension at x^((t)) to arrive at the
next point x^((t+1)), which again is an n-vector. Because you moved in a
monotonically decreasing direction in each dimension, you should have
that f(x^((t+1))) ≤ f(x^((t))). Several details are needed to turn this
idea into an actual algorithm. The two main details are that you need an
initial point and that you need to decide how far to move in the
direction of the negative gradient. You also need to understand when to
stop and what you can conclude about the quality of the solution found.
We will explore these issues further in this section, for both
constrained minimization, where there are additional constraints on the
points, and unconstrained minimization, where there are none.

Unconstrained gradient descent

In order to gain intuition, let’s consider unconstrained gradient
descent in just one dimension, that is, when f is a function of a scalar
x, so that f : ℝ → ℝ. In this case, the gradient ∇f of f is just f′(x),
the derivative of f with respect to x. Consider the function f shown in
blue in Figure 33.3, with minimizer x* and starting point x⁽⁰⁾. The
gradient (derivative) f′(x⁽⁰⁾), shown in orange, has a negative slope,
so that a small step from x⁽⁰⁾ in the direction of increasing x results
in a point x′ for which f(x′) < f(x⁽⁰⁾). Too large a step, however,
results in a

[art]

Figure 33.3 A function f : ℝ → ℝ, shown in blue. Its gradient at point
x⁽⁰⁾, in orange, has a negative slope, and so a small increase in x from
x⁽⁰⁾ to x′ results in f(x′) < f(x⁽⁰⁾). Small increases in x from x⁽⁰⁾
head toward [art], which gives a local minimum. Too large an increase in
x can end up at x″, where f(x″) > f(x⁽⁰⁾). Small steps starting from
x⁽⁰⁾ and going only in the direction of decreasing values of f cannot
end up at the global minimizer x*.

point x″ for which f(x″) > f(x⁽⁰⁾), so this is a bad idea. Restricting
ourselves to small steps, where each one has f(x′) < f(x), eventually
results in getting close to point [art], which gives a local minimum. By
taking only small downhill steps, however, gradient descent has no
chance to get to the global minimizer x*, given the starting point x⁽⁰⁾.

We draw two observations from this simple example. First, gradient
descent converges toward a local minimum, and not necessarily a global
minimum. Second, the speed at which it converges and how it behaves are
related to properties of the function, to the initial point, and to the
step size of the algorithm.

The procedure GRADIENT-DESCENT on the facing page takes as input a
function f, an initial point x⁽⁰⁾ ∈ ℝ^(n), a fixed step-size multiplier
γ > 0, and a number T > 0 of steps to take. Each iteration of the for
loop of lines 2–4 performs a step by computing the n-dimensional
gradient at point x^((t)) and then moving distance γ in the opposite
direction in the n-dimensional space. The complexity of computing the
gradient depends on the function f and can sometimes be expensive. Line
3 sums the points visited. After the loop terminates, line 6 returns
x-avg, the average of all the points visited except for the last one,
x^((T)). It might seem more natural to return x^((T)), and in fact, in
many circumstances, you might prefer to have the function return
x^((T)). For the version we will analyze, however, we use x-avg.

GRADIENT-DESCENT(f, x⁽⁰⁾, γ, T)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | sum = 0                        | // n-dimensional vector,       |
|   |                                | initially all 0                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | for t = 0 to T – 1                                              |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | sum = sum + x^((t))            | // add each of n dimensions    |
|   |                                | into sum                       |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4 | x^((t+1)) = x^((t)) – γ ·      | // (∇f)(x^((t))), x^((t+1))    |
|   | (∇f)(x^((t)))                  | are n-dimensional              |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 5 | x-avg = sum/T                  | // divide each of n dimensions |
|   |                                | by T                           |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 6 | return x-avg                                                    |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

Figure 33.4 depicts how gradient descent ideally runs on a convex
1-dimensional function.¹ We’ll define convexity more formally below, but
the figure shows that each iteration moves in the direction opposite to
the gradient, with the distance moved being proportional to the
magnitude of the gradient. As the iterations proceed, the magnitude of
the gradient decreases, and thus the distance moved along the horizontal
axis decreases. After each iteration, the distance to the optimal point
x* decreases. This ideal behavior is not guaranteed to occur in general,
but the analysis in the remainder of this section formalizes when this
behavior occurs and quantifies the number of iterations needed. Gradient
descent does not always work, however. We have already seen that if the
function is not convex, gradient descent can converge to a local, rather
than global, minimum. We have also seen that if the step size is too
large, GRADIENT-DESCENT can overshoot the minimum and wind up farther
away. (It is also possible to overshoot the minimum and wind up closer
to the optimum.)

Analysis of unconstrained gradient descent for convex functions

Our analysis of gradient descent focuses on convex functions. Inequality
(C.29) on page 1194 defines a convex function of one variable, as shown
in Figure 33.5. We can extend that definition to a function f : ℝ^(n) →
ℝ and say that f is convex if for all x, y ∈ ℝ^(n) and for all 0 ≤ λ ≤
1, we have

[art]

(Inequalities (33.18) and (C.29) are the same, except for the dimensions
of x and y.) We also assume that our convex functions are closed² and
differentiable.

[art]

Figure 33.4 An example of running gradient descent on a convex function
f : ℝ → ℝ, shown in blue. Beginning at point x⁽⁰⁾, each iteration moves
in the direction opposite to the gradient, and the distance moved is
proportional to the magnitude of the gradient. Orange lines represent
the negative of the gradient at each point, scaled by the step size γ.
As the iterations proceed, the magnitude of the gradient decreases, and
the distance moved decreases correspondingly. After each iteration, the
distance to the optimal point x* decreases.

[art]

Figure 33.5 A convex function f : ℝ → ℝ, shown in blue, with local and
global minimizer x*. Because f is convex, f(λx + (1 – λ)y) ≤ λf(x) + (1
– λ)f(y) for any two values x and y and all 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1, shown for a
particular value of λ. Here, the orange line segment represents all
values λf(x) + (1 – λ)f(y) for 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1, and it is above the blue line.

A convex function has the property that any local minimum is also a
global minimum. To verify this property, consider inequality (33.18),
and suppose for the purpose of contradiction that x is a local minimum
but not a global minimum and y ≠ x is a global minimum, so f(y) < f(x).
Then we have

  ------------------ --- --------------------- -------------------------
  f(λx + (1 – λ)y)   ≤   λf(x) + (1 – λ)f(y)   (by inequality (33.18))
                     <   λf(x) + (1 – λ)f(x)   
                     =   f(x).                 
  ------------------ --- --------------------- -------------------------

Thus, letting approach 1, we see that there is another point near x, say
x′, such that f(x′) < f(x), so x is not a local minimum.

Convex functions have several useful properties. The first property,
whose proof we leave as Exercise 33.3-1, says that a convex function
always lies above its tangent hyperplane. In the context of gradient
descent, angle brackets denote the notation for inner product defined on
page 1219 rather than denoting a sequence.

Lemma 33.6

For any convex differentiable function f : ℝ^(n) → ℝ and for all x, y ∈
ℝ^(n), we have ≤ f(x) ≤ f(y) + 〈(∇f)(x), x – y〉.

▪

The second property, which Exercise 33.3-2 asks you to prove, is a
repeated application of the definition of convexity in inequality
(33.18).

Lemma 33.7

For any convex function f : ℝ^(n) → ℝ, for any integer T ≥ 1, and for
all x⁽⁰⁾, …, x^((T–1)) ∈ ℝ^(n), we have

[art]

▪

The left-hand side of inequality (33.19) is the value of f at the vector
x-avg that GRADIENT-DESCENT returns.

We now proceed to analyze GRADIENT-DESCENT. It might not return the
exact global minimizer x*. We use an error bound ϵ, and we want to
choose T so that f(x-avg) – f(x*) ≤ ϵ at termination. The value of ϵ
depends on the number T of iterations and two additional values. First,
since you expect it to be better to start close to the global minimizer,
ϵ is a function of

[art]

the euclidean norm (or distance, defined on page 1219) of the difference
between x⁽⁰⁾ and x*. The error bound ϵ is also a function of a quantity
we call L, which is an upper bound on the magnitude ∥(∇f)(x)∥ of the
gradient, so that

[art]

where x ranges over all the points x⁽⁰⁾, …, x^((T–1)) whose gradients
are computed by GRADIENT-DESCENT. Of course, we don’t know the values of
L and R, but for now let’s assume that we do. We’ll discuss later how to
remove these assumptions. The analysis of GRADIENT-DESCENT is summarized
in the following theorem.

Theorem 33.8

Let x* ∈ ℝ^(n) be the minimizer of a convex function f, and suppose that
an execution of GRADIENT-DESCENT(f, x⁽⁰⁾, γ, T) returns x-avg, where
[art] and R and L are defined in equations (33.20) and (33.21). Let
[art]. Then we have f(x-avg) – f(x*) ≤ ϵ.

▪

We now prove this theorem. We do not give an absolute bound on how much
progress each iteration makes. Instead, we use a potential function, as
in Section 16.3. Here, we define a potential Φ(t) after computing
x^((t)), such that Φ(t) ≥ 0 for t = 0, …, T. We define the amortized
progress in the iteration that computes x^((t)) as

[art]

Along with including the change in potential (Φ(t + 1) – Φ(t)), equation
(33.22) also subtracts the minimum value f(x*) because ultimately, you
care not about the values f(x^((t))) but about how close they are to
f(x*). Suppose that we can show that p(t) ≤ B for some value B and t =
0, …, T – 1. Then we can substitute for p(t) using equation (33.22),
giving

[art]

Summing inequality (33.23) over t = 0, …, T – 1 yields

[art]

Observing that we have a telescoping series on the right and regrouping
terms, we have that

[art]

Dividing by T and dropping the positive term Φ(T) gives

[art]

and thus we have

[art]

In other words, if we can show that p(t) ≤ B for some value B and choose
a potential function where Φ(0) is not too large, then inequality
(33.25) tells us how close the function value f(x-avg) is to the
function value f(x*) after T iterations. That is, we can set the error
bound ϵ to B + Φ(0)/T.

In order to bound the amortized progress, we need to come up with a
concrete potential function. Define the potential function Φ(t) by

[art]

that is, the potential function is proportional to the square of the
distance between the current point and the minimizer x*. With this
potential function in hand, the next lemma provides a bound on the
amortized progress made in any iteration of GRADIENT-DESCENT.

Lemma 33.9

Let x* ∈ ℝ^(n) be the minimizer of a convex function f, and consider an
execution of GRADIENT-DESCENT(f, x⁽⁰⁾, γ, T). Then for each point
x^((t)) computed by the procedure, we have that

[art]

Proof   We first bound the potential change Φ(t + 1) – Φ(t). Using the
definition of Φ(t) from equation (33.26), we have

[art]

From line 4 in GRADIENT-DESCENT, we know that

[art]

and so we would like to rewrite equation (33.27) to have x^((t+1)) –
x^((t)) terms. As Exercise 33.3-3 asks you to prove, for any two vectors
a, b ∈ ℝ^(n), we have

[art]

Letting a = x^((t)) – x* and b = x^((t+1)) – x^((t)), we can write the
right-hand side of equation (33.27) as [art]. Then we can express the
potential change as

[art]

and thus we have

[art]

We can now proceed to bound p(t). By the bound on the potential change
from inequality (33.31), and using the definition of L (inequality
(33.21)), we have

[art]

▪

sult in the following theorem

Having bounded the amortized progress in one step, we now analyze the
entire GRADIENT-DESCENT procedure, completing the proof of Theorem 33.8.

Proof of Theorem 33.8 Inequality (33.25) tells us that if we have an
upper bound of B for p(t), then we also have the bound f(x-avg) – f(x*)
≤ B + Φ(0)/T. By equations (33.20) and (33.26), we have that Φ(0) =
R²/(2γ). Lemma 33.9 gives us the upper bound of B = γL²/2, and so we
have

[art]

Our choice of [art] in the statement of Theorem 33.8 balances the two
terms, and we obtain

[art]

Since we chose [art] in the theorem statement, the proof is complete.

▪

Continuing under the assumption that we know R (from equation (33.20))
and L (from inequality (33.21)), we can think of the analysis in a
slightly different way. We can presume that we have a target accuracy ϵ
and then compute the number of iterations needed. That is, we can solve
[art] for T, obtaining T = R²L²/ϵ². The number of iterations thus
depends on the square of R and L and, most importantly, on 1/ϵ². (The
definition of L from inequality (33.21) depends on T, but we may know an
upper bound on L that doesn’t depend on the particular value of T.)
Thus, if you want to halve your error bound, you need to run four times
as many iterations.

It is quite possible that we don’t really know R and L, since you’d need
to know x* in order to know R (since R = ∥x⁽⁰⁾ – x*∥), and you might not
have an explicit upper bound on the gradient, which would provide L. You
can, however, interpret the analysis of gradient descent as a proof that
there is some step size for which the procedure makes progress toward
the minimum. You can then compute a step size for which f(x^((t))) –
f(x^((t+1))) is large enough. In fact, not having a fixed step size
multiplier can actually help in practice, as you are free to use any
step size s that achieves sufficient decrease in the value of f. You can
search for a step size that achieves a large decrease via a
binary-search-like routine, which is often called line search. For a
given function f and step size s, define the function g(x^((t)), s) =
f(x^((t))) – s(∇f)(x^((t))). Start with a small step size s for which
g(x^((t)), s) ≤ f(x^((t))). Then repeatedly double s until g(x^((t)),
2s) ≥ g(x^((t)), s), and then perform a binary search in the interval
[s, 2s]. This procedure can produce a step size that achieves a
significant decrease in the objective function. In other circumstances,
however, you may know good upper bounds on R and L, typically from
problem-specific information, which can suffice.

The dominant computational step in each iteration of the for loop of
lines 2–4 is computing the gradient. The complexity of computing and
evaluating a gradient varies widely, depending on the application at
hand. We’ll discuss several applications later.

Constrained gradient descent

We can adapt gradient descent for constrained minimization to minimize a
closed convex function f(x), subject to the additional requirement that
x ∈ K, where K is a closed convex body. A body K ⊆ ℝ^(n) is convex if
for all x, y ∈ K, the convex combination λx+(1–λ)y ∈ K for all 0 ≤ λ
≤ 1. A closed convex body contains its limit points. Somewhat
surprisingly, restricting to the constrained problem does not
significantly increase the number of iterations of gradient descent. The
idea is that you run the same algorithm, but in each iteration, check
whether the current point x^((t)) is still within the convex body K. If
it is not, just move to the closest point in K. Moving to the closest
point is known as projection. We formally define the projection ∏_(K)(x)
of a point x in n dimensions onto a convex body K as the point y ∈ K
such that ∥x – y∥ = min {∥x – z∥ : z ∈ K}. If we have x ∈ K, then
∏_(K)(x) = x.

This one change yields the procedure GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED, in
which line 4 of GRADIENT-DESCENT is replaced by two lines. It assumes
that x⁽⁰⁾ ∈ K. Line 4 of GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED moves in the
direction of the negative gradient, and line 5 projects back onto K. The
lemma that follows helps to show that when x* ∈ K, if the projection
step in line 5 moves from a point outside of K to a point in K, it
cannot be moving away from x*.

GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED(f, x⁽⁰⁾, γ, T, K)

+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 1 | sum = 0                        | // n-dimensional vector,       |
|   |                                | initially all 0                |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 2 | for t = 0 to T – 1                                              |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 3 | sum = sum + x^((t))            | // add each of n dimensions    |
|   |                                | into sum                       |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 4 | x′^((t+1)) = x^((t)) – γ ·     | // (∇f)(x^((t))), x′^((t+1))   |
|   | (∇f)(x^((t)))                  | are n-dimensional              |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 5 | x^((t+1)) = ∏_(K)(x^((t+1)))   | // project onto K              |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 6 | x-avg = sum/T                  | // divide each of n dimensions |
|   |                                | by T                           |
+---+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 7 | return x-avg                                                    |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

Lemma 33.10

Consider a convex body K ⊆ ℝ^(n) and points a ∈ K and b′ ∈ ℝ^(n). Let b
= ∏_(K)(b′). Then ∥b – a∥² ≤ ∥b′ – a∥².

Proof   If b′ ∈ K, then b = b′ and the claim is true. Otherwise, b′ ≠ b,
and as Figure 33.6 shows, we can extend the line segment between b and
b′ to a line ℓ. Let c be the projection of a onto ℓ. Point c may or may
not be in K, and if a is on the boundary of K, then c could coincide
with b. If c coincides with b (part (c) of the figure), then abb′ is a
right triangle, and so ∥b – a∥² ≤ ∥b′ – a∥². If c does not coincide with
b (parts (a) and (b) of the figure), then because of convexity, the
angle ∠abb′ must be obtuse. Because angle ∠abb′ is obtuse, b lies
between c and b′ on ℓ. Furthermore, because c is the projection of a
onto line ℓ, acb and acb′ must be right triangles. By the Pythagorean
theorem, we have that ∥b′ – a∥² = ∥a – c∥²+∥c – b′∥² and ∥b – a∥² = ∥a –
c∥²+∥c – b∥². Subtracting these two equations gives ∥b′ – a∥² – ∥b – a∥²
= ∥c – b′∥² – ∥c – b∥². Because b is between c and b′, we must have ∥c –
b′∥² ≥ ∥c – b∥², and thus ∥b′ – a∥² – ∥b – a∥² ≥ 0. The lemma follows.

[art]

Figure 33.6 Projecting a point b′ outside the convex body K to the
closest point b = ∏_(K)(b′) in K. Line ℓ is the line containing b and
b′, and point c is the projection of a onto ℓ. (a) When c is in K. (b)
When c is not in K. (c) When a is on the boundary of K and c coincides
with b.

▪

We can now repeat the entire proof for the unconstrained case and obtain
the same bounds. Lemma 33.10 with a = x*, b = x^((t+1)), and b′ =
x′^((t+1)) tells us that ∥x^((t+1))–x*∥² ≤ ∥x′^((t+1))–x*∥². We can
therefore derive an upper bound that matches inequality (33.31). We
continue to define Φ(t) as in equation (33.26), but noting that
x^((t+1)), computed in line 5 of GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED, has a
different meaning here from in inequality (33.31):

[art]

With the same upper bound on the change in the potential function as in
equation (33.30), the entire proof of Lemma 33.9 can proceed as before.
We can therefore conclude that the procedure
GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED has the same asymptotic complexity as
GRADIENT-DESCENT. We summarize this result in the following theorem.

Theorem 33.11

Let K ⊆ ℝ^(n) be a convex body, x* ∈ ℝ^(n) be the minimizer of a convex
function f over K, and [art], where R and L are defined in equations
(33.20) and (33.21). Suppose that the vector x-avg is returned by an
execution of GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED(f, x⁽⁰⁾, γ, T, K). Let [art].
Then we have f(x-avg) – f(x*) ≤ ϵ.

▪

Applications of gradient descent

Gradient descent has many applications to minimizing functions and is
widely used in optimization and machine learning. Here we sketch how it
can be used to solve linear systems. Then we discuss an application to
machine learning: prediction using linear regression.

In Chapter 28, we saw how to use Gaussian elimination to solve a system
of linear equations Ax = b, thereby computing x = A⁻¹b. If A is an n × n
matrix and b is a length-n vector, then the running time of Gaussian
elimination is Θ(n³), which for large matrices might be prohibitively
expensive. If an approximate solution is acceptable, however, you can
use gradient descent.

First, let’s see how to use gradient descent as a roundabout—and
admittedly inefficient—way to solve for x in the scalar equation ax = b,
where a, x, b ∈ ℝ. This equation is equivalent to ax – b = 0. If ax – b
is the derivative of a convex function f(x), then ax – b = 0 for the
value of x that minimizes f(x). Given f(x), gradient descent can then
determine this minimizer. Of course, f(x) is just the integral of ax –
b, that is, [art], which is convex if a ≥ 0. Therefore, one way to solve
ax = b for a ≥ 0 is to find the minimizer for [art] via gradient
descent.

We now generalize this idea to higher dimensions, where using gradient
descent may actually lead to a faster algorithm. One n-dimensional
analog is the function [art], where A is an n × n matrix. The gradient
of f with respect to x is the function Ax – b. To find the value of x
that minimizes f, we set the gradient of f to 0 and solve for x. Solving
Ax–b = 0 for x, we obtain x = A⁻¹b, Thus, minimizing f(x) is equivalent
to solving Ax = b. If f(x) is convex, then gradient descent can
approximately compute this minimum.

A 1-dimensional function is convex when its second derivative is
positive. The equivalent definition for a multidimensional function is
that it is convex when its Hessian matrix is positive-semidefinite (see
page 1222 for a definition), where the Hessian matrix (∇²f)(x) of a
function f(x) is the matrix in which entry (i, j) is the partial
derivative of f with respect to i and j:

[art]

Analogous to the 1-dimensional case, the Hessian of f is just A, and so
if A is a positive-semidefinite matrix, then we can use gradient descent
to find a point x where Ax ≈ b. If R and L are not too large, then this
method is faster than using Gaussian elimination.

Gradient descent in machine learning

As a concrete example of supervised learning for prediction, suppose
that you want to predict whether a patient will develop heart disease.
For each of m patients, you have n different attributes. For example,
you might have n = 4 and the four pieces of data are age, height, blood
pressure, and number of close family members with heart disease. Denote
the data for patient i as a vector x^((i)) ∈ ℝ^(n), with [art] giving
the jth entry in vector x^((i)). The label of patient i is denoted by a
scalar y^((i)) ∈ ℝ, signifying the severity of the patient’s heart
disease. The hypothesis should capture a relationship between the
x^((i)) values and y^((i)). For this example, we make the modeling
assumption that the relationship is linear, and therefore the goal is to
compute the “best” linear relationship between the x^((i)) values and
y^((i)): a linear function f : ℝ^(n) → ℝ such that f(x^((i))) ≈ y^((i))
for each patient i. Of course, no such function may exist, but you would
like one that comes as close as possible. A linear function f can be
defined by a vector of weights w = (w₀, w₁, …, w_(n)), with

[art]

When evaluating a machine-learning model, you need to measure how close
each value f(x^((i))) is to its corresponding label y^((i)). In this
example, we define the error e^((i)) ∈ ℝ associated with patient i as
e^((i)) = f(x^((i))) – y^((i)). The objective function we choose is to
minimize the sum of squares of the errors, which is

[art]

The objective function is typically called the loss function, and the
least-squares error given by equation (33.33) is just one example of
many possible loss functions. The goal is then, given the x^((i)) and
y^((i)) values, to compute the weights w₀, w₁, …, w_(n) so as to
minimize the loss function in equation (33.33). The variables here are
the weights w₀, w₁, …, w_(n) and not the x^((i)) or y^((i)) values.

This particular objective is sometimes known as a least-squares fit, and
the problem of finding a linear function to fit data and minimize the
least-squares error is called linear regression. Finding a least-squares
fit is also addressed in Section 28.3.

When the function f is linear, the loss function defined in equation
(33.33) is convex, because it is the sum of squares of linear functions,
which are themselves convex. Therefore, we can apply gradient descent to
compute a set of weights to approximately minimize the least-squares
error. The concrete goal of learning is to be able to make predictions
on new data. Informally, if the features are all reported in the same
units and are from the same range (perhaps from being normalized), then
the weights tend to have a natural interpretation because the features
of the data that are better predictors of the label have a larger
associated weight. For example, you would expect that, after
normalization, the weight associated with the number of family members
with heart disease would be larger than the weight associated with
height.

The computed weights form a model of the data. Once you have a model,
you can make predictions, so that given new data, you can predict its
label. In our example, given a new patient x′ who is not part of the
original training data set, you would still hope to predict the chance
that the new patient develops heart disease. You can do so by computing
the label f(x′), incorporating the weights computed by gradient descent.

For this linear-regression problem, the objective is to minimize the
expression in equation (33.33), which is a quadratic in each of the n+1
weights w_(j). Thus, entry j in the gradient is linear in w_(j).
Exercise 33.3-5 asks you to explicitly compute the gradient and see that
it can be computed in O(nm) time, which is linear in the input size.
Compared with the exact method of solving equation (33.33) in Chapter
28, which needs to invert a matrix, gradient descent is typically much
faster.

Section 33.1 briefly discussed regularization—the idea that a
complicated hypothesis should be penalized in order to avoid overfitting
the training data. Regularization often involves adding a term to the
objective function, but it can also be achieved by adding a constraint.
One way to regularize this example would be to explicitly limit the norm
of the weights, adding a constraint that ∥w∥ ≤ B for some bound B > 0.
(Recall again that the components of the vector w are the variables in
the present application.) Adding this constraint controls the complexity
of the model, as the number of values w_(j) that can have large absolute
value is now limited.

In order to run GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED for any problem, you need
to implement the projection step, as well as to compute bounds on R and
L. We conclude this section by describing these calculations for
gradient descent with the constraint ∥w∥ ≤ B. First, consider the
projection step in line 5. Suppose that the update in line 4 results in
a vector w′. The projection is implemented by computing ∏_(k)(w′) where
K is defined by ∥w∥ ≤ B. This particular projection can be accomplished
by simply scaling w′, since we know that closest point in K to w′ must
be the point along the vector whose norm is exactly B. The amount z by
which we need to scale w′ to hit the boundary of K is the solution to
the equation z ∥w′∥ = B, which is solved by z = B/∥w′∥. Hence line 5 is
implemented by computing w = w′B/∥w′∥. Because we always have ∥w∥ ≤ B,
Exercise 33.3-6 asks you to show that the upper bound on the magnitude L
of the gradient is O(B). We also get a bound on R, as follows. By the
constraint ∥w∥ ≤ B, we know that both ∥w⁽⁰⁾∥ ≤ B and ∥w*∥ ≤ B, and thus
∥w⁽⁰⁾ – w*∥ ≤ 2B. Using the definition of R in equation (33.20), we have
R = O(B). The bound [art] on the accuracy of the solution after T
iterations in Theorem 33.11 becomes [art].

Exercises

33.3-1

Prove Lemma 33.6. Start from the definition of a convex function given
in equation (33.18). (Hint: You can prove the statement when n = 1
first. The proof for general values of n is similar.)

33.3-2

Prove Lemma 33.7.

33.3-3

Prove equation (33.29). (Hint: The proof for n = 1 dimension is
straightforward. The proof for general values of n dimensions follows
along similar lines.)

33.3-4

Show that the function f in equation (33.32) is a convex function of the
variables w₀, w₁, …, w_(n).

33.3-5

Compute the gradient of expression (33.33) and explain how to evaluate
the gradient in O(nm) time.

33.3-6

Consider the function f defined in equation (33.32), and suppose that
you have a bound ∥w∥ ≤ B, as is considered in the discussion on
regularization. Show that L = O(B) in this case.

33.3-7

Equation (33.2) on page 1009 gives a function that, when minimized,
gives an optimal solution to the k-means problem. Explain how to use
gradient descent to solve the k-means problem.

Problems

33-1     Newton’s method

Gradient descent iteratively moves closer to a desired value (the
minimum) of a function. Another algorithm in this spirit is known as
Newton’s method, which is an iterative algorithm that finds the root of
a function. Here, we consider Newton’s method which, given a function f
: ℝ → ℝ, finds a value x* such that f(x* ) = 0. The algorithm moves
through a series of points x⁽⁰⁾, x⁽¹⁾, …. If the algorithm is currently
at a point x^((t)), then to find point x^((t+1)), it first takes the
equation of the line tangent to the curve at x = x^((t)),

y = f′(x^((t)))(x – x^((t))) + f(x^((t))).

It then uses the x-intercept of this line as the next point x^((t+1)).

a. Show that the algorithm described above can be summarized by the
update rule

[art]

We restrict our attention to some domain I and assume that f′(x) ≠ 0 for
all x ∈ I and that f″(x) is continuous. We also assume that the starting
point x⁽⁰⁾ is sufficiently close to x*, where “sufficiently close” means
that we can use only the first two terms of the Taylor expansion of
f(x*) about x⁽⁰⁾, namely

[art]

where γ⁽⁰⁾ is some value between x⁽⁰⁾ and x*. If the approximation in
equation (33.34) holds for x⁽⁰⁾, it also holds for any point closer to
x*.

b. Assume that the function f has exactly one point x* for which f(x*) =
0. Let ϵ^((t)) = |x^((t)) – x*|. Using the Taylor expansion in equation
(33.34), show that

[art]

where γ^((t)) is some value between x^((t)) and x*.

c. If

[art]

for some constant c and ϵ⁽⁰⁾ < 1, then we say that the function f has
quadratic convergence, since the error decreases quadratically. Assuming
that f has quadratic convergence, how many iterations are needed to find
a root of f(x) to an accuracy of δ? Your answer should include δ.

d. Suppose you wish to find a root of the function f(x) = (x – 3)²,
which is also the minimizer, and you start at x⁽⁰⁾ = 3.5. Compare the
number of iterations needed by gradient descent to find the minimizer
and Newton’s method to find the root.

33-2     Hedge

Another variant in the multiplicative-weights framework is known as
HEDGE. It differs from WEIGHTED MAJORITY in two ways. First, HEDGE makes
the prediction randomly—in iteration t, it assigns a probability [art]
to expert E_(i), where [art]. It then chooses an expert E_(i′) according
to this probability distribution and predicts according to E_(i′).
Second, the update rule is different. If an expert makes a mistake, line
16 updates that expert’s weight by the rule [art], for some 0 < ϵ < 1.
Show that the expected number of mistakes made by HEDGE, running for T
rounds, is at most m* + (ln n)/ϵ + ϵT.

33-3     Nonoptimality of Lloyd’s procedure in one dimension

Give an example to show that even in one dimension, Lloyd’s procedure
for finding clusters does not always return an optimum result. That is,
Lloyd’s procedure may terminate and return as a result a set C of
clusters that does not minimize f(S, C), even when S is a set of points
on a line.

33-4     Stochastic gradient descent

Consider the problem described in Section 33.3 of fitting a line f(x) =
ax + b to a given set of point/value pairs S = {(x₁, y₁), …, (x_(T),
y_(T))} by optimizing the choice of the parameters a and b using
gradient descent to find a best least-squares fit. Here we consider the
case where x is a real-valued variable, rather than a vector.

Suppose that you are not given the point/value pairs in S all at once,
but only one at a time in an online manner. Furthermore, the points are
given in random order. That is, you know that there are n points, but in
iteration t you are given only (x_(i), y_(i)) where i is independently
and randomly chosen from {1, …, T}.

You can use gradient descent to compute an estimate to the function. As
each point (x_(i), y_(i)) is considered, you can update the current
values of a and b by taking the derivative with respect to a and b of
the term of the objective function depending on (x_(i), y_(i)). Doing so
gives you a stochastic estimate of the gradient, and you can then take a
small step in the opposite direction.

Give pseudcode to implement this variant of gradient descent. What would
the expected value of the error be as a function of T, L, and R? (Hint:
Replicate the analysis of GRADIENT-DESCENT in Section 33.3 for this
variant.)

This procedure and its variants are known as stochastic gradient
descent.

Chapter notes

For a general introduction to artificial intelligence, we recommend
Russell and Norvig [391]. For a general introduction to machine
learning, we recommend Murphy [340].

Lloyd’s procedure for the k-means problem was first proposed by Lloyd
[304] and also later by Forgy [151]. It is sometimes called “Lloyd’s
algorithm” or the “Lloyd-Forgy algorithm.” Although Mahajan et al. [310]
showed that finding an optimal clustering is NP-hard, even in the plane,
Kanungo et al. [241] have shown that there is an approximation algorithm
for the k-means problem with approximation ratio 9 + ϵ, for any ϵ > 0.

The multiplicative-weights method is surveyed by Arora, Hazan, and Kale
[25]. The main idea of updating weights based on feedback has been
rediscovered many times. One early use is in game theory, where Brown
defined “Fictitious Play” [74] and conjectured its convergence to the
value of a zero-sum game. The convergence properties were established by
Robinson [382].

In machine learning, the first use of multiplicative weights was by
Littlestone in the Winnow algorithm [300], which was later extended by
Littlestone and Warmuth to the weighted-majority algorithm described in
Section 33.2 [301]. This work is closely connected to the boosting
algorithm, originally due to Freund and Shapire [159]. The
multiplicative-weights idea is also closely related to several more
general optimization algorithms, including the perceptron algorithm
[328] and algorithms for optimization problems such as packing linear
programs [177, 359].

The treatment of gradient descent in this chapter draws heavily on the
unpublished manuscript of Bansal and Gupta [35]. They emphasize the idea
of using a potential function and using ideas from amortized analysis to
explain gradient descent. Other presentations and analyses of gradient
descent include works by Bubeck [75], Boyd and Vanderberghe [69], and
Nesterov [343].

Gradient descent is known to converge faster when functions obey
stronger properties than general convexity. For example, a function f is
α-strongly convex if f(y) ≥ f(x) + 〈(∇f)(x), (y – x)〉 + α∥y – x∥ for
all x, y ∈ ℝ^(n). In this case, GRADIENT-DESCENT can use a variable step
size and return x^((T)). The step size at step t becomes γ_(t) =
1/(α(t + 1)), and the procedure returns a point such that f(x-avg) –
f(x*) ≤ L²/(α(T + 1)). This convergence is better than that of Theorem
33.8 because the number of iterations needed is linear, rather than
quadratic, in the desired error parameter ϵ, and because the performance
is independent of the initial point.

Another case in which gradient descent can be shown to perform better
than the analysis in Section 33.3 suggests is for smooth convex
functions. We say that a function is β-smooth if [art]. This inequality
goes in the opposite direction from the one for ≈-strong convexity.
Better bounds on gradient descent are possible here as well.

¹ Although the curve in Figure 33.4 looks concave, according to the
definition of convexity that we’ll see below, the function f in the
figure is convex.

² A function f : ℝ^(n) → ℝ is closed if, for each α ∈ ℝ, the set {x ∈
dom(f) : f(x) ≤ α} is closed, where dom(f) is the domain of f.

34        NP-Completeness

Almost all the algorithms we have studied thus far have been
polynomial-time algorithms: on inputs of size n, their worst-case
running time is O(n^(k)) for some constant k. You might wonder whether
all problems can be solved in polynomial time. The answer is no. For
example, there are problems, such as Turing’s famous “Halting Problem,”
that cannot be solved by any computer, no matter how long you’re willing
to wait for an answer.¹ There are also problems that can be solved, but
not in O(n^(k)) time for any constant k. Generally, we think of problems
that are solvable by polynomial-time algorithms as being tractable, or
“easy,” and problems that require superpolynomial time as being
intractable, or “hard.”

The subject of this chapter, however, is an interesting class of
problems, called the “NP-complete” problems, whose status is unknown. No
polynomial-time algorithm has yet been discovered for an NP-complete
problem, nor has anyone yet been able to prove that no polynomial-time
algorithm can exist for any one of them. This so-called P ≠ NP question
has been one of the deepest, most perplexing open research problems in
theoretical computer science since it was first posed in 1971.

Several NP-complete problems are particularly tantalizing because they
seem on the surface to be similar to problems that we know how to solve
in polynomial time. In each of the following pairs of problems, one is
solvable in polynomial time and the other is NP-complete, but the
difference between the problems appears to be slight:

Shortest versus longest simple paths: In Chapter 22, we saw that even
with negative edge weights, we can find shortest paths from a single
source in a directed graph G = (V, E) in O(VE) time. Finding a longest
simple path between two vertices is difficult, however. Merely
determining whether a graph contains a simple path with at least a given
number of edges is NP-complete.

Euler tour versus hamiltonian cycle: An Euler tour of a strongly
connected, directed graph G = (V, E) is a cycle that traverses each edge
of G exactly once, although it is allowed to visit each vertex more than
once. Problem 20-3 on page 583 asks you to show how to determine whether
a strongly connected, directed graph has an Euler tour and, if it does,
the order of the edges in the Euler tour, all in O(E) time. A
hamiltonian cycle of a directed graph G = (V, E) is a simple cycle that
contains each vertex in V. Determining whether a directed graph has a
hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete. (Later in this chapter, we’ll prove
that determining whether an undirected graph has a hamiltonian cycle is
NP-complete.)

2-CNF satisfiability versus 3-CNF satisfiability: Boolean formulas
contain binary variables whose values are 0 or 1; boolean connectives
such as ∧ (AND), ∨ (OR), and ¬ (NOT); and parentheses. A boolean formula
is satisfiable if there exists some assignment of the values 0 and 1 to
its variables that causes it to evaluate to 1. We’ll define terms more
formally later in this chapter, but informally, a boolean formula is in
k-conjunctive normal form, or k-CNF if it is the AND of clauses of ORs
of exactly k variables or their negations. For example, the boolean
formula (x₁ ∨ x₂) ∧ (¬x₁ ∨ x₃) ∧ (¬x₂ ∨ ¬x₃) is in 2-CNF (with
satisfying assignment x₁ = 1, x₂ = 0, and x₃ = 1). Although there is a
polynomial-time algorithm to determine whether a 2-CNF formula is
satisfiable, we’ll see later in this chapter that determining whether a
3-CNF formula is satisfiable is NP-complete.

NP-completeness and the classes P and NP

Throughout this chapter, we refer to three classes of problems: P, NP,
and NPC, the latter class being the NP-complete problems. We describe
them informally here, with formal definitions to appear later on.

The class P consists of those problems that are solvable in polynomial
time. More specifically, they are problems that can be solved in
O(n^(k)) time for some constant k, where n is the size of the input to
the problem. Most of the problems examined in previous chapters belong
to P.

The class NP consists of those problems that are “verifiable” in
polynomial time. What do we mean by a problem being verifiable? If you
were somehow given a “certificate” of a solution, then you could verify
that the certificate is correct in time polynomial in the size of the
input to the problem. For example, in the hamiltonian-cycle problem,
given a directed graph G = (V, E), a certificate would be a sequence
〈v₁, v₂, v₃, …, v_(|V|)〉 of |V| vertices. You could check in
polynomial time that the sequence contains each of the |V| vertices
exactly once, that (v_(i), v_(i+1)) ∈ E for i = 1, 2, 3, …, |V| − 1, and
that (v_(|V|), v₁) ∈ E. As another example, for 3-CNF satisfiability, a
certificate could be an assignment of values to variables. You could
check in polynomial time that this assignment satisfies the boolean
formula.

Any problem in P also belongs to NP, since if a problem belongs to P
then it is solvable in polynomial time without even being supplied a
certificate. We’ll formalize this notion later in this chapter, but for
now you can believe that P ⊆ NP. The famous open question is whether P
is a proper subset of NP.

Informally, a problem belongs to the class NPC—and we call it
NP-complete—if it belongs to NP and is as “hard” as any problem in NP.
We’ll formally define what it means to be as hard as any problem in NP
later in this chapter. In the meantime, we state without proof that if
any NP-complete problem can be solved in polynomial time, then every
problem in NP has a polynomial-time algorithm. Most theoretical computer
scientists believe that the NP-complete problems are intractable, since
given the wide range of NP-complete problems that have been studied to
date—without anyone having discovered a polynomial-time solution to any
of them—it would be truly astounding if all of them could be solved in
polynomial time. Yet, given the effort devoted thus far to proving that
NP-complete problems are intractable—without a conclusive outcome—we
cannot rule out the possibility that the NP-complete problems could turn
out to be solvable in polynomial time.

To become a good algorithm designer, you must understand the rudiments
of the theory of NP-completeness. If you can establish a problem as
NP-complete, you provide good evidence for its intractability. As an
engineer, you would then do better to spend your time developing an
approximation algorithm (see Chapter 35) or solving a tractable special
case, rather than searching for a fast algorithm that solves the problem
exactly. Moreover, many natural and interesting problems that on the
surface seem no harder than sorting, graph searching, or network flow
are in fact NP-complete. Therefore, you should become familiar with this
remarkable class of problems.

Overview of showing problems to be NP-complete

The techniques used to show that a particular problem is NP-complete
differ fundamentally from the techniques used throughout most of this
book to design and analyze algorithms. If you can demonstrate that a
problem is NP-complete, you are making a statement about how hard it is
(or at least how hard we think it is), rather than about how easy it is.
If you prove a problem NP-complete, you are saying that searching for
efficient algorithm is likely to be a fruitless endeavor. In this way,
NP-completeness proofs bear some similarity to the proof in Section 8.1
of an Ω(n lg n)-time lower bound for any comparison sort algorithm,
although the specific techniques used for showing NP-completeness differ
from the decision-tree method used in Section 8.1.

We rely on three key concepts in showing a problem to be NP-complete:

Decision problems versus optimization problems

Many problems of interest are optimization problems, in which each
feasible (i.e., “legal”) solution has an associated value, and the goal
is to find a feasible solution with the best value. For example, in a
problem that we call SHORTEST-PATH, the input is an undirected graph G
and vertices u and v, and the goal is to find a path from u to v that
uses the fewest edges. In other words, SHORTEST-PATH is the single-pair
shortest-path problem in an unweighted, undirected graph.
NP-completeness applies directly not to optimization problems, however,
but to decision problems, in which the answer is simply “yes” or “no”
(or, more formally, “1” or “0”).

Although NP-complete problems are confined to the realm of decision
problems, there is usually a way to cast a given optimization problem as
a related decision problem by imposing a bound on the value to be
optimized. For example, a decision problem related to SHORTEST-PATH is
PATH: given an undirected graph G, vertices u and v, and an integer k,
does a path exist from u to v consisting of at most k edges?

The relationship between an optimization problem and its related
decision problem works in your favor when you try to show that the
optimization problem is “hard.” That is because the decision problem is
in a sense “easier,” or at least “no harder.” As a specific example, you
can solve PATH by solving SHORTEST-PATH and then comparing the number of
edges in the shortest path found to the value of the decision-problem
parameter k. In other words, if an optimization problem is easy, its
related decision problem is easy as well. Stated in a way that has more
relevance to NP-completeness, if you can provide evidence that a
decision problem is hard, you also provide evidence that its related
optimization problem is hard. Thus, even though it restricts attention
to decision problems, the theory of NP-completeness often has
implications for optimization problems as well.

Reductions

The above notion of showing that one problem is no harder or no easier
than another applies even when both problems are decision problems.
Almost every NP-completeness proof takes advantage of this idea, as
follows. Consider a decision problem A, which you would like to solve in
polynomial time. We call the input to a particular problem an instance
of that problem. For example, in PATH, an instance is a particular graph
G, particular vertices u and v of G, and a particular integer k. Now
suppose that you already know how to solve a different decision problem
B in polynomial time. Finally, suppose that you have a procedure that
transforms any instance α of A into some instance β of B with the
following characteristics:

[art]

Figure 34.1 How to use a polynomial-time reduction algorithm to solve a
decision problem A in polynomial time, given a polynomial-time decision
algorithm for another problem B. In polynomial time, transform an
instance α of A into an instance β of B, solve B in polynomial time, and
use the answer for β as the answer for α.

- The transformation takes polynomial time.
- The answers are the same. That is, the answer for α is “yes” if and
  only if the answer for β is also “yes.”

We call such a procedure a polynomial-time reduction algorithm and, as
Figure 34.1 shows, it provides us a way to solve problem A in polynomial
time:

1.  Given an instance α of problem A, use a polynomial-time reduction
    algorithm to transform it to an instance β of problem B.
2.  Run the polynomial-time decision algorithm for B on the instance β.
3.  Use the answer for β as the answer for α.

As long as each of these steps takes polynomial time, all three together
do also, and so you have a way to decide on α in polynomial time. In
other words, by “reducing” solving problem A to solving problem B, you
use the “easiness” of B to prove the “easiness” of A.

Recalling that NP-completeness is about showing how hard a problem is
rather than how easy it is, you use polynomial-time reductions in the
opposite way to show that a problem is NP-complete. Let’s take the idea
a step further and show how you can use polynomial-time reductions to
show that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist for a particular
problem B. Suppose that you have a decision problem A for which you
already know that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist. (Ignore for
the moment how to find such a problem A.) Suppose further that you have
a polynomial-time reduction transforming instances of A to instances of
B. Now you can use a simple proof by contradiction to show that no
polynomial-time algorithm can exist for B. Suppose otherwise, that is,
suppose that B has a polynomial-time algorithm. Then, using the method
shown in Figure 34.1, you would have a way to solve problem A in
polynomial time, which contradicts the assumption that there is no
polynomial-time algorithm for A.

To prove that a problem B is NP-complete, the methodology is similar.
Although you cannot assume that there is absolutely no polynomial-time
algorithm for problem A, you prove that problem B is NP-complete on the
assumption that problem A is also NP-complete.

A first NP-complete problem

Because the technique of reduction relies on having a problem already
known to be NP-complete in order to prove a different problem
NP-complete, there must be some “first” NP-complete problem. We’ll use
the circuit-satisfiability problem, in which the input is a boolean
combinational circuit composed of AND, OR, and NOT gates, and the
question is whether there exists some set of boolean inputs to this
circuit that causes its output to be 1. Section 34.3 will prove that
this first problem is NP-complete.

Chapter outline

This chapter studies the aspects of NP-completeness that bear most
directly on the analysis of algorithms. Section 34.1 formalizes the
notion of “problem” and defines the complexity class P of
polynomial-time solvable decision problems. We’ll also see how these
notions fit into the framework of formal-language theory. Section 34.2
defines the class NP of decision problems whose solutions are verifiable
in polynomial time. It also formally poses the P ≠ NP question.

Section 34.3 shows how to relate problems via polynomial-time
“reductions.” It defines NP-completeness and sketches a proof that the
circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete. With one problem proven
NP-complete, Section 34.4 demonstrates how to prove other problems to be
NP-complete much more simply by the methodology of reductions. To
illustrate this methodology, the section shows that two
formula-satisfiability problems are NP-complete. Section 34.5 proves a
variety of other problems to be NP-complete by using reductions. You
will probably find several of these reductions to be quite creative,
because they convert a problem in one domain to a problem in a
completely different domain.

34.1    Polynomial time

Since NP-completeness relies on notions of solving a problem and
verifying a certificate in polynomial time, let’s first examine what it
means for a problem to be solvable in polynomial time.

Recall that we generally regard problems that have polynomial-time
solutions as tractable. Here are three reasons why:

1.  Although no reasonable person considers a problem that requires
    Θ(n¹⁰⁰) time to be tractable, few practical problems require time on
    the order of such a high-degree polynomial. The polynomial-time
    computable problems encountered in practice typically require much
    less time. Experience has shown that once the first polynomial-time
    algorithm for a problem has been discovered, more efficient
    algorithms often follow. Even if the current best algorithm for a
    problem has a running time of Θ(n¹⁰⁰), an algorithm with a much
    better running time will likely soon be discovered.
2.  For many reasonable models of computation, a problem that can be
    solved in polynomial time in one model can be solved in polynomial
    time in another. For example, the class of problems solvable in
    polynomial time by the serial random-access machine used throughout
    most of this book is the same as the class of problems solvable in
    polynomial time on abstract Turing machines.² It is also the same as
    the class of problems solvable in polynomial time on a parallel
    computer when the number of processors grows polynomially with the
    input size.
3.  The class of polynomial-time solvable problems has nice closure
    properties, since polynomials are closed under addition,
    multiplication, and composition. For example, if the output of one
    polynomial-time algorithm is fed into the input of another, the
    composite algorithm is polynomial. Exercise 34.1-5 asks you to show
    that if an algorithm makes a constant number of calls to
    polynomial-time subroutines and performs an additional amount of
    work that also takes polynomial time, then the running time of the
    composite algorithm is polynomial.

Abstract problems

To understand the class of polynomial-time solvable problems, you must
first have a formal notion of what a “problem” is. We define an abstract
problem Q to be a binary relation on a set I of problem instances and a
set S of problem solutions. For example, an instance for SHORTEST-PATH
is a triple consisting of a graph and two vertices. A solution is a
sequence of vertices in the graph, with perhaps the empty sequence
denoting that no path exists. The problem SHORTEST-PATH itself is the
relation that associates each instance of a graph and two vertices with
a shortest path in the graph that connects the two vertices. Since
shortest paths are not necessarily unique, a given problem instance may
have more than one solution.

This formulation of an abstract problem is more general than necessary
for our purposes. As we saw above, the theory of NP-completeness
restricts attention to decision problems: those having a yes/no
solution. In this case, we can view an abstract decision problem as a
function that maps the instance set I to the solution set {0, 1}. For
example, a decision problem related to SHORTEST-PATH is the problem PATH
that we saw earlier. If i = 〈G, u, v, k〉 is an instance of PATH, then
PATH(i) = 1 (yes) if G contains a path from u to v with at most k edges,
and PATH(i) = 0 (no) otherwise. Many abstract problems are not decision
problems, but rather optimization problems, which require some value to
be minimized or maximized. As we saw above, however, you can usually
recast an optimization problem as a decision problem that is no harder.

Encodings

In order for a computer program to solve an abstract problem, its
problem instances must appear in a way that the program understands. An
encoding of a set S of abstract objects is a mapping e from S to the set
of binary strings.³ For example, we are all familiar with encoding the
natural numbers ℕ = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4,…} as the strings {0, 1, 10, 11,
100,…}. Using this encoding, e(17) = 10001. If you have looked at
computer representations of keyboard characters, you probably have seen
the ASCII code, where, for example, the encoding of A is 01000001. You
can encode a compound object as a binary string by combining the
representations of its constituent parts. Polygons, graphs, functions,
ordered pairs, programs—all can be encoded as binary strings.

Thus, a computer algorithm that “solves” some abstract decision problem
actually takes an encoding of a problem instance as input. The size of
an instance i is just the length of its string, which we denote by |i|.
We call a problem whose instance set is the set of binary strings a
concrete problem. We say that an algorithm solves a concrete problem in
O(T (n)) time if, when it is provided a problem instance i of length n =
|i|, the algorithm can produce the solution in O(T (n)) time.⁴ A
concrete problem is polynomial-time solvable, therefore, if there exists
an algorithm to solve it in O(n^(k)) time for some constant k.

We can now formally define the complexity class P as the set of concrete
decision problems that are polynomial-time solvable.

Encodings map abstract problems to concrete problems. Given an abstract
decision problem Q mapping an instance set I to {0, 1}, an encoding e :
I → {0, 1}^(*) can induce a related concrete decision problem, which we
denote by e(Q).⁵ If the solution to an abstract-problem instance i ∈ I
is Q(i) ∈ {0, 1}, then the solution to the concrete-problem instance
e(i) ∈ {0, 1}^(*) is also Q(i). As a technicality, some binary strings
might represent no meaningful abstract-problem instance. For
convenience, assume that any such string maps arbitrarily to 0. Thus,
the concrete problem produces the same solutions as the abstract problem
on binary-string instances that represent the encodings of
abstract-problem instances.

We would like to extend the definition of polynomial-time solvability
from concrete problems to abstract problems by using encodings as the
bridge, ideally with the definition independent of any particular
encoding. That is, the efficiency of solving a problem should not depend
on how the problem is encoded. Unfortunately, it depends quite heavily
on the encoding. For example, suppose that the sole input to an
algorithm is an integer k, and suppose that the running time of the
algorithm is Θ(k). If the integer k is provided in unary—a string of k
1s—then the running time of the algorithm is O(n) on length-n inputs,
which is polynomial time. If the input k is provided using the more
natural binary representation, however, then the input length is n = ⌊lg
k⌋ + 1, so the size of the unary encoding is exponential in the size of
the binary encoding. With the binary representation, the running time of
the algorithm is Θ(k) = Θ(2^(n)), which is exponential in the size of
the input. Thus, depending on the encoding, the algorithm runs in either
polynomial or superpolynomial time.

The encoding of an abstract problem matters quite a bit to how we
understand polynomial time. We cannot really talk about solving an
abstract problem without first specifying an encoding. Nevertheless, in
practice, if we rule out “expensive” encodings such as unary ones, the
actual encoding of a problem makes little difference to whether the
problem can be solved in polynomial time. For example, representing
integers in base 3 instead of binary has no effect on whether a problem
is solvable in polynomial time, since we can convert an integer
represented in base 3 to an integer represented in base 2 in polynomial
time.

We say that a function f : {0, 1}^(*) → {0, 1}^(*) is polynomial-time
computable if there exists a polynomial-time algorithm A that, given any
input x ∈ {0, 1}^(*), produces as output f (x). For some set I of
problem instances, we say that two encodings e₁ and e₂ are polynomially
related if there exist two polynomial-time computable functions f₁₂ and
f₂₁ such that for any i ∈ I, we have f₁₂(e₁(i)) = e₂(i) and f₂₁(e₂(i)) =
e₁(i).⁶ That is, a polynomial-time algorithm can compute the encoding
e₂(i) from the encoding e₁(i), and vice versa. If two encodings e₁ and
e₂ of an abstract problem are polynomially related, whether the problem
is polynomial-time solvable or not is independent of which encoding we
use, as the following lemma shows.

Lemma 34.1

Let Q be an abstract decision problem on an instance set I, and let e₁
and e₂ be polynomially related encodings on I. Then, e₁(Q) ∈ P if and
only if e₂(Q) ∈ P.

Proof   We need only prove the forward direction, since the backward
direction is symmetric. Suppose, therefore, that e₁(Q) can be solved in
O(n^(k)) time for some constant k. Furthermore, suppose that for any
problem instance i, the encoding e₁(i) can be computed from the encoding
e₂(i) in O(n^(c)) time for some constant c, where n = |e₂(i)|. To solve
problem e₂(Q) on input e₂(i), first compute e₁(i) and then run the
algorithm for e₁(Q) on e₁(i). How long does this procedure take?
Converting encodings takes O(n^(c)) time, and therefore |e₁(i)| =
O(n^(c)), since the output of a serial computer cannot be longer than
its running time. Solving the problem on e₁(i) takes O(|e₁(i)|^(k)) =
O(n^(ck)) time, which is polynomial since both c and k are constants.

▪

Thus, whether an abstract problem has its instances encoded in binary or
base 3 does not affect its “complexity,” that is, whether it is
polynomial-time solvable or not. If instances are encoded in unary,
however, its complexity may change. In order to be able to converse in
an encoding-independent fashion, we generally assume that problem
instances are encoded in any reasonable, concise fashion, unless we
specifically say otherwise. To be precise, we assume that the encoding
of an integer is polynomially related to its binary representation, and
that the encoding of a finite set is polynomially related to its
encoding as a list of its elements, enclosed in braces and separated by
commas. (ASCII is one such encoding scheme.) With such a “standard”
encoding in hand, we can derive reasonable encodings of other
mathematical objects, such as tuples, graphs, and formulas. To denote
the standard encoding of an object, we enclose the object in angle
brackets. Thus, 〈G〉 denotes the standard encoding of a graph G.

As long as the encoding implicitly used is polynomially related to this
standard encoding, we can talk directly about abstract problems without
reference to any particular encoding, knowing that the choice of
encoding has no effect on whether the abstract problem is
polynomial-time solvable. From now on, we will generally assume that all
problem instances are binary strings encoded using the standard
encoding, unless we explicitly specify the contrary. We’ll also
typically neglect the distinction between abstract and concrete
problems. You should watch out for problems that arise in practice,
however, in which a standard encoding is not obvious and the encoding
does make a difference.

A formal-language framework

By focusing on decision problems, we can take advantage of the machinery
of formal-language theory. Let’s review some definitions from that
theory. An alphabet Σ is a finite set of symbols. A language L over Σ is
any set of strings made up of symbols from Σ. For example, if Σ = {0,
1}, the set L = {10, 11, 101, 111, 1011, 1101, 10001,…} is the language
of binary representations of prime numbers. We denote the empty string
by ε, the empty language by Ø, and the language of all strings over Σ by
Σ*. For example, if Σ = {0, 1}, then Σ* = {ε, 0, 1, 00, 01, 10, 11,
000,…} is the set of all binary strings. Every language L over Σ is a
subset of Σ*.

Languages support a variety of operations. Set-theoretic operations,
such as union and intersection, follow directly from the set-theoretic
definitions. We define the complement of a language L by L = Σ* − L. The
concatenation L₁L₂ of two languages L₁ and L₂ is the language

L = {x₁x₂ : x₁ ∈ L₁ and x₂ ∈ L₂}.

The closure or Kleene star of a language L is the language

L* = {ε} ∪ L ∪ L² ∪ L³ ∪ …,

where L^(k) is the language obtained by concatenating L to itself k
times.

From the point of view of language theory, the set of instances for any
decision problem Q is simply the set Σ*, where Σ = {0, 1}. Since Q is
entirely characterized by those problem instances that produce a 1 (yes)
answer, we can view Q as a language L over Σ = {0, 1}, where

L = {x ∈ Σ* : Q(x) = 1}.

For example, the decision problem PATH has the corresponding language

  ------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------
  PATH = {〈G, u, v, k〉:   G = (V, E) is an undirected graph,
                            u, v ∈ V,
                            k ≥ 0 is an integer, and
                            G contains a path from u to v with at most k edges}.
  ------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------

(Where convenient, we’ll sometimes use the same name—PATH in this
case—to refer to both a decision problem and its corresponding
language.)

The formal-language framework allows us to express concisely the
relation between decision problems and algorithms that solve them. We
say that an algorithm A accepts a string x ∈ {0, 1}* if, given input x,
the algorithm’s output A(x) is 1. The language accepted by an algorithm
A is the set of strings L = {x ∈ {0, 1}* : A(x) = 1}, that is, the set
of strings that the algorithm accepts. An algorithm A rejects a string x
if A(x) = 0.

Even if language L is accepted by an algorithm A, the algorithm does not
necessarily reject a string x ∉ L provided as input to it. For example,
the algorithm might loop forever. A language L is decided by an
algorithm A if every binary string in L is accepted by A and every
binary string not in L is rejected by A. A language L is accepted in
polynomial time by an algorithm A if it is accepted by A and if in
addition there exists a constant k such that for any length-n string x ∈
L, algorithm A accepts x in O(n^(k)) time. A language L is decided in
polynomial time by an algorithm A if there exists a constant k such that
for any length-n string x ∈ {0, 1}*, the algorithm correctly decides
whether x ∈ L in O(n^(k)) time. Thus, to accept a language, an algorithm
need only produce an answer when provided a string in L, but to decide a
language, it must correctly accept or reject every string in {0, 1}*.

As an example, the language PATH can be accepted in polynomial time. One
polynomial-time accepting algorithm verifies that G encodes an
undirected graph, verifies that u and v are vertices in G, uses
breadth-first search to compute a path from u to v in G with the fewest
edges, and then compares the number of edges on the path obtained with
k. If G encodes an undirected graph and the path found from u to v has
at most k edges, the algorithm outputs 1 and halts. Otherwise, the
algorithm runs forever. This algorithm does not decide PATH, however,
since it does not explicitly output 0 for instances in which a shortest
path has more than k edges. A decision algorithm for PATH must
explicitly reject binary strings that do not belong to PATH. For a
decision problem such as PATH, such a decision algorithm is
straightforward to design: instead of running forever when there is not
a path from u to v with at most k edges, it outputs 0 and halts. (It
must also output 0 and halt if the input encoding is faulty.) For other
problems, such as Turing’s Halting Problem, there exists an accepting
algorithm, but no decision algorithm exists.

We can informally define a complexity class as a set of languages,
membership in which is determined by a complexity measure, such as
running time, of an algorithm that determines whether a given string x
belongs to language L. The actual definition of a complexity class is
somewhat more technical.⁷

Using this language-theoretic framework, we can provide an alternative
definition of the complexity class P:

  ------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------
  P = {L ⊆ {0, 1}*:   there exists an algorithm A that decides L in polynomial time}.
  ------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------

In fact, as the following theorem shows, P is also the class of
languages that can be accepted in polynomial time.

Theorem 34.2

P = {L : L is accepted by a polynomial-time algorithm}.

Proof Because the class of languages decided by polynomial-time
algorithms is a subset of the class of languages accepted by
polynomial-time algorithms, we need only show that if L is accepted by a
polynomial-time algorithm, it is decided by a polynomial-time algorithm.
Let L be the language accepted by some polynomial-time algorithm A. We
use a classic “simulation” argument to construct another polynomial-time
algorithm A′ that decides L. Because A accepts L in O(n^(k)) time for
some constant k, there also exists a constant c such that A accepts L in
at most cn^(k) steps. For any input string x, the algorithm A′ simulates
cn^(k) steps of A. After simulating cn^(k) steps, algorithm A′ inspects
the behavior of A. If A has accepted x, then A′ accepts x by outputting
a 1. If A has not accepted x, then A′ rejects x by outputting a 0. The
overhead of A′ simulating A does not increase the running time by more
than a polynomial factor, and thus A′ is a polynomial-time algorithm
that decides L.

▪

The proof of Theorem 34.2 is nonconstructive. For a given language L ∈
P, we may not actually know a bound on the running time for the
algorithm A that accepts L. Nevertheless, we know that such a bound
exists, and therefore, that an algorithm A′ exists that can check the
bound, even though we may not be able to find the algorithm A′ easily.

Exercises

34.1-1

Define the optimization problem LONGEST-PATH-LENGTH as the relation that
associates each instance of an undirected graph and two vertices with
the number of edges in a longest simple path between the two vertices.
Define the decision problem LONGEST-PATH = {〈G, u, v, k〉 : G = (V, E)
is an undirected graph, u, v ∈ V, k ≥ 0 is an integer, and there exists
a simple path from u to v in G consisting of at least k edges}. Show
that the optimization problem LONGEST-PATH-LENGTH can be solved in
polynomial time if and only if LONGEST-PATH ∈ P.

34.1-2

Give a formal definition for the problem of finding the longest simple
cycle in an undirected graph. Give a related decision problem. Give the
language corresponding to the decision problem.

34.1-3

Give a formal encoding of directed graphs as binary strings using an
adjacency-matrix representation. Do the same using an adjacency-list
representation. Argue that the two representations are polynomially
related.

34.1-4

Is the dynamic-programming algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem that
is asked for in Exercise 15.2-2 a polynomial-time algorithm? Explain
your answer.

34.1-5

Show that if an algorithm makes at most a constant number of calls to
polynomial-time subroutines and performs an additional amount of work
that also takes polynomial time, then it runs in polynomial time. Also
show that a polynomial number of calls to polynomial-time subroutines
may result in an exponential-time algorithm.

34.1-6

Show that the class P, viewed as a set of languages, is closed under
union, intersection, concatenation, complement, and Kleene star. That
is, if L₁, L₂ ∈ P, then L₁ ∪ L₂ ∈ P, L₁ ∩ L₂ ∈ P, L₁L₂ ∈ P, L₁ ∈ P, and
[art].

34.2    Polynomial-time verification

Now, let’s look at algorithms that verify membership in languages. For
example, suppose that for a given instance 〈G, u, v, k〉 of the
decision problem PATH, you are also given a path p from u to v. You can
check whether p is a path in G and whether the length of p is at most k,
and if so, you can view p as a “certificate” that the instance indeed
belongs to PATH. For the decision problem PATH, this certificate doesn’t
seem to buy much. After all, PATH belongs to P—in fact, you can solve
PATH in linear time—and so verifying membership from a given certificate
takes as long as solving the problem from scratch. Instead, let’s
examine a problem for which we know of no polynomial-time decision
algorithm and yet, given a certificate, verification is easy.

Hamiltonian cycles

The problem of finding a hamiltonian cycle in an undirected graph has
been studied for over a hundred years. Formally, a hamiltonian cycle of
an undirected graph G = (V, E) is a simple cycle that contains each
vertex in V. A graph that contains a hamiltonian cycle is said to be
hamiltonian, and otherwise, it is nonhamiltonian. The name honors W. R.
Hamilton, who described a mathematical game on the dodecahedron (Figure
34.2(a)) in which one player sticks five pins in any five consecutive
vertices and the other player must complete the path to form a cycle
containing all the vertices.⁸ The dodecahedron is hamiltonian, and
Figure 34.2(a) shows one hamiltonian cycle. Not all graphs are
hamiltonian, however. For example, Figure 34.2(b) shows a bipartite
graph with an odd number of vertices. Exercise 34.2-2 asks you to show
that all such graphs are nonhamiltonian.

Here is how to define the hamiltonian-cycle problem, “Does a graph G
have a hamiltonian cycle?” as a formal language:

HAM-CYCLE = {〈G〉 : G is a hamiltonian graph}.

How might an algorithm decide the language HAM-CYCLE? Given a problem
instance 〈G〉, one possible decision algorithm lists all permutations
of the vertices of G and then checks each permutation to see whether it
is a hamiltonian cycle. What is the running time of this algorithm? It
depends on the encoding of the graph G. Let’s say that G is encoded as
its adjacency matrix. If the adjacency matrix contains n entries, so
that the length of the encoding of G equals n, then the number m of
vertices in the graph is [art]. There are m! possible permutations of
the vertices, and therefore the running time is [art], which is not
O(n^(k)) for any constant k. Thus, this naive algorithm does not run in
polynomial time. In fact, the hamiltonian-cycle problem is NP-complete,
as we’ll prove in Section 34.5.

[art]

Figure 34.2 (a) A graph representing the vertices, edges, and faces of a
dodecahedron, with a hamiltonian cycle shown by edges highlighted in
blue. (b) A bipartite graph with an odd number of vertices. Any such
graph is nonhamiltonian.

Verification algorithms

Consider a slightly easier problem. Suppose that a friend tells you that
a given graph G is hamiltonian, and then the friend offers to prove it
by giving you the vertices in order along the hamiltonian cycle. It
would certainly be easy enough to verify the proof: simply verify that
the provided cycle is hamiltonian by checking whether it is a
permutation of the vertices of V and whether each of the consecutive
edges along the cycle actually exists in the graph. You could certainly
implement this verification algorithm to run in O(n²) time, where n is
the length of the encoding of G. Thus, a proof that a hamiltonian cycle
exists in a graph can be verified in polynomial time.

We define a verification algorithm as being a two-argument algorithm A,
where one argument is an ordinary input string x and the other is a
binary string y called a certificate. A two-argument algorithm A
verifies an input string x if there exists a certificate y such that
A(x, y) = 1. The language verified by a verification algorithm A is

L = {x ∈ {0, 1}* : there exists y ∈ {0, 1}* such that A(x, y) = 1}.

Think of an algorithm A as verifying a language L if, for any string x ∈
L, there exists a certificate y that A can use to prove that x ∈ L.
Moreover, for any string x ∉ L, there must be no certificate proving
that x ∈ L. For example, in the hamiltonian-cycle problem, the
certificate is the list of vertices in some hamiltonian cycle. If a
graph is hamiltonian, the hamiltonian cycle itself offers enough
information to verify that the graph is indeed hamiltonian. Conversely,
if a graph is not hamiltonian, there can be no list of vertices that
fools the verification algorithm into believing that the graph is
hamiltonian, since the verification algorithm carefully checks the
so-called cycle to be sure.

The complexity class NP

The complexity class NP is the class of languages that can be verified
by a polynomial-time algorithm.⁹ More precisely, a language L belongs to
NP if and only if there exist a two-input polynomial-time algorithm A
and a constant c such that

  ------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
  L = {x ∈ {0, 1}*:   there exists a certificate y with |y| = O(|x|^(c))
                      such that A(x, y) = 1}.
  ------------------- ----------------------------------------------------

We say that algorithm A verifies language L in polynomial time.

From our earlier discussion about the hamiltonian-cycle problem, you can
see that HAM-CYCLE ∈ NP. (It is always nice to know that an important
set is nonempty.) Moreover, if L ∈ P, then L ∈ NP, since if there is a
polynomial-time algorithm to decide L, the algorithm can be converted to
a two-argument verification algorithm that simply ignores any
certificate and accepts exactly those input strings it determines to
belong to L. Thus, P ⊆ NP.

That leaves the question of whether P = NP. A definitive answer is
unknown, but most researchers believe that P and NP are not the same
class. Think of the class P as consisting of problems that can be solved
quickly and the class NP as consisting of problems for which a solution
can be verified quickly. You may have learned from experience that it is
often more difficult to solve a problem from scratch than to verify a
clearly presented solution, especially when working under time
constraints. Theoretical computer scientists generally believe that this
analogy extends to the classes P and NP, and thus that NP includes
languages that do not belong to P.

[art]

Figure 34.3 Four possibilities for relationships among complexity
classes. In each diagram, one region enclosing another indicates a
proper-subset relation. (a) P = NP = co-NP. Most researchers regard this
possibility as the most unlikely. (b) If NP is closed under complement,
then NP = co-NP, but it need not be the case that P = NP. (c) P = NP ∩
co-NP, but NP is not closed under complement. (d) NP ≠ co-NP and P ≠ NP
∩ co-NP. Most researchers regard this possibility as the most likely.

There is more compelling, though not conclusive, evidence that P ≠
NP—the existence of languages that are “NP-complete.” Section 34.3 will
study this class.

Many other fundamental questions beyond the P ≠ NP question remain
unresolved. Figure 34.3 shows some possible scenarios. Despite much work
by many researchers, no one even knows whether the class NP is closed
under complement. That is, does L ∈ NP imply L ∈ NP? We define the
complexity class co-NP as the set of languages L such that L ∈ NP, so
that the question of whether NP is closed under complement is also
whether NP = co-NP. Since P is closed under complement (Exercise
34.1-6), it follows from Exercise 34.2-9 (P ⊆ co-NP) that P ⊆ NP ∩
co-NP. Once again, however, no one knows whether P = NP ∩ co-NP or
whether there is some language in (NP ∩ co-NP) − P.

Thus our understanding of the precise relationship between P and NP is
woefully incomplete. Nevertheless, even though we might not be able to
prove that a particular problem is intractable, if we can prove that it
is NP-complete, then we have gained valuable information about it.

Exercises

34.2-1

Consider the language GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM = {〈G₁, G₂〉 : G₁ and G₂ are
isomorphic graphs}. Prove that GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM ∈ NP by describing a
polynomial-time algorithm to verify the language.

34.2-2

Prove that if G is an undirected bipartite graph with an odd number of
vertices, then G is nonhamiltonian.

34.2-3

Show that if HAM-CYCLE ∈ P, then the problem of listing the vertices of
a hamiltonian cycle, in order, is polynomial-time solvable.

34.2-4

Prove that the class NP of languages is closed under union,
intersection, concatenation, and Kleene star. Discuss the closure of NP
under complement.

34.2-5

Show that any language in NP can be decided by an algorithm with a
running time of [art] for some constant k.

34.2-6

A hamiltonian path in a graph is a simple path that visits every vertex
exactly once. Show that the language HAM-PATH = {〈G, u, v〉 : there is
a hamiltonian path from u to v in graph G} belongs to NP.

34.2-7

Show that the hamiltonian-path problem from Exercise 34.2-6 can be
solved in polynomial time on directed acyclic graphs. Give an efficient
algorithm for the problem.

34.2-8

Let ϕ be a boolean formula constructed from the boolean input variables
x₁, x₂, … , x_(k), negations (¬), ANDs (∧), ORs (∨), and parentheses.
The formula ϕ is a tautology if it evaluates to 1 for every assignment
of 1 and 0 to the input variables. Define TAUTOLOGY as the language of
boolean formulas that are tautologies. Show that TAUTOLOGY ∈ co-NP.

34.2-9

Prove that P ⊆ co-NP.

34.2-10

Prove that if NP ≠ co-NP, then P ≠ NP.

34.2-11

Let G be a connected, undirected graph with at least three vertices, and
let G³ be the graph obtained by connecting all pairs of vertices that
are connected by a path in G of length at most 3. Prove that G³ is
hamiltonian. (Hint: Construct a spanning tree for G, and use an
inductive argument.)

34.3    NP-completeness and reducibility

Perhaps the most compelling reason why theoretical computer scientists
believe that P ≠ NP comes from the existence of the class of NP-complete
problems. This class has the intriguing property that if any NP-complete
problem can be solved in polynomial time, then every problem in NP has a
polynomial-time solution, that is, P = NP. Despite decades of study,
though, no polynomial-time algorithm has ever been discovered for any
NP-complete problem.

The language HAM-CYCLE is one NP-complete problem. If there were an
algorithm to decide HAM-CYCLE in polynomial time, then every problem in
NP could be solved in polynomial time. The NP-complete languages are, in
a sense, the “hardest” languages in NP. In fact, if NP − P turns out to
be nonempty, we will be able to say with certainty that HAM-CYCLE ∈ NP −
P.

This section starts by showing how to compare the relative “hardness” of
languages using a precise notion called “polynomial-time reducibility.”
It then formally defines the NP-complete languages, finishing by
sketching a proof that one such language, called CIRCUIT-SAT, is
NP-complete. Sections 34.4 and 34.5 will use the notion of reducibility
to show that many other problems are NP-complete.

Reducibility

One way that sometimes works for solving a problem is to recast it as a
different problem. We call that strategy “reducing” one problem to
another. Think of a problem Q as being reducible to another problem Q′
if any instance of Q can be recast as an instance of Q′, and the
solution to the instance of Q′ provides a solution to the instance of Q.
For example, the problem of solving linear equations in an indeterminate
x reduces to the problem of solving quadratic equations. Given a
linear-equation instance ax + b = 0 (with solution x = −b/a), you can
transform it to the quadratic equation ax² + bx + 0 = 0. This quadratic
equation has the solutions [art], where c = 0, so that [art]. The
solutions are then x = (−b + b)/2a = 0 and x = (−b − b)/2a = −b/a,
thereby providing a solution to ax + b = 0. Thus, if a problem Q reduces
to another problem Q′, then Q is, in a sense, “no harder to solve” than
Q′.

[art]

Figure 34.4 A function f that reduces language L₁ to language L₂. For
any input x ∈ {0, 1}*, the question of whether x ∈ L₁ has the same
answer as the question of whether f (x) ∈ L₂.

Returning to our formal-language framework for decision problems, we say
that a language L₁ is polynomial-time reducible to a language L₂,
written L₁ ≤_(P) L₂, if there exists a polynomial-time computable
function f : {0, 1}* → {0, 1}* such that for all x ∈ {0, 1}*,

[art]

We call the function f the reduction function, and a polynomial-time
algorithm F that computes f is a reduction algorithm.

Figure 34.4 illustrates the idea of a reduction from a language L₁ to
another language L₂. Each language is a subset of {0, 1}*. The reduction
function f provides a mapping such that if x ∈ L₁, then f (x) ∈ L₂.
Moreover, if x ∉ L₁, then f (x) ∉ L₂. Thus, the reduction function maps
any instance x of the decision problem represented by the language L₁ to
an instance f (x) of the problem represented by L₂. Providing an answer
to whether f (x) ∈ L₂ directly provides the answer to whether x ∈ L₁.
If, in addition, f can be computed in polynomial time, it is a
polynomial-time reduction function.

Polynomial-time reductions give us a powerful tool for proving that
various languages belong to P.

Lemma 34.3

If L₁, L₂ ⊆ {0, 1}* are languages such that L₁ ≤_(P) L₂, then L₂ ∈ P
implies L₁ ∈ P.

[art]

Figure 34.5 The proof of Lemma 34.3. The algorithm F is a reduction
algorithm that computes the reduction function f from L₁ to L₂ in
polynomial time, and A₂ is a polynomial-time algorithm that decides L₂.
Algorithm A₁ decides whether x ∈ L₁ by using F to transform any input x
into f (x) and then using A₂ to decide whether f (x) ∈ L₂.

Proof   Let A₂ be a polynomial-time algorithm that decides L₂, and let F
be a polynomial-time reduction algorithm that computes the reduction
function f. We show how to construct a polynomial-time algorithm A₁ that
decides L₁.

Figure 34.5 illustrates how we construct A₁. For a given input x ∈ {0,
1}*, algorithm A₁ uses F to transform x into f (x), and then it uses A₂
to test whether f (x) ∈ L₂. Algorithm A₁ takes the output from algorithm
A₂ and produces that answer as its own output.

The correctness of A₁ follows from condition (34.1). The algorithm runs
in polynomial time, since both F and A₂ run in polynomial time (see
Exercise 34.1-5).

▪

NP-completeness

Polynomial-time reductions allow us to formally show that one problem is
at least as hard as another, to within a polynomial-time factor. That
is, if L₁ ≤_(P) L₂, then L₁ is not more than a polynomial factor harder
than L₂, which is why the “less than or equal to” notation for reduction
is mnemonic. We can now define the set of NP-complete languages, which
are the hardest problems in NP.

A language L ⊆ {0, 1}* is NP-complete if

1.  L ∈ NP, and
2.  L′ ≤_(P) L for every L′ ∈ NP.

If a language L satisfies property 2, but not necessarily property 1, we
say that L is NP-hard. We also define NPC to be the class of NP-complete
languages.

As the following theorem shows, NP-completeness is at the crux of
deciding whether P is in fact equal to NP.

Theorem 34.4

If any NP-complete problem is polynomial-time solvable, then P = NP.
Equivalently, if any problem in NP is not polynomial-time solvable, then
no NP-complete problem is polynomial-time solvable.

[art]

Figure 34.6 How most theoretical computer scientists view the
relationships among P, NP, and NPC. Both P and NPC are wholly contained
within NP, and P ∩ NPC = Ø.

Proof   Suppose that L ∈ P and also that L ∈ NPC. For any L′ ∈ NP, we
have L′ ≤_(P) L by property 2 of the definition of NP-completeness.
Thus, by Lemma 34.3, we also have that L′ ∈ P, which proves the first
statement of the theorem.

To prove the second statement, consider the contrapositive of the first
statement: if P ≠ NP, then there does not exist an NP-complete problem
that is polynomial-time solvable. But P ≠ NP means that there is some
problem in NP that is not polynomial-time solvable, and hence the second
statement is the contrapositive of the first statement.

▪

It is for this reason that research into the P ≠ NP question centers
around the NP-complete problems. Most theoretical computer scientists
believe that P ≠ NP, which leads to the relationships among P, NP, and
NPC shown in Figure 34.6. For all we know, however, someone may yet come
up with a polynomial-time algorithm for an NP-complete problem, thus
proving that P = NP. Nevertheless, since no polynomial-time algorithm
for any NP-complete problem has yet been discovered, a proof that a
problem is NP-complete provides excellent evidence that it is
intractable.

Circuit satisfiability

We have defined the notion of an NP-complete problem, but up to this
point, we have not actually proved that any problem is NP-complete. Once
we prove that at least one problem is NP-complete, polynomial-time
reducibility becomes a tool to prove other problems to be NP-complete.
Thus, we now focus on demonstrating the existence of an NP-complete
problem: the circuit-satisfiability problem.

Unfortunately, the formal proof that the circuit-satisfiability problem
is NP-complete requires technical detail beyond the scope of this text.
Instead, we’ll informally describe a proof that relies on a basic
understanding of boolean combinational circuits.

[art]

Figure 34.7 Three basic logic gates, with binary inputs and outputs.
Under each gate is the truth table that describes the gate’s operation.
(a) The NOT gate. (b) The AND gate. (c) The OR gate.

Boolean combinational circuits are built from boolean combinational
elements that are interconnected by wires. A boolean combinational
element is any circuit element that has a constant number of boolean
inputs and outputs and that performs a well-defined function. Boolean
values are drawn from the set {0, 1}, where 0 represents FALSE and 1
represents TRUE.

The boolean combinational elements appearing in the
circuit-satisfiability problem compute simple boolean functions, and
they are known as logic gates. Figure 34.7 shows the three basic logic
gates used in the circuit-satisfiability problem: the NOT gate (or
inverter), the AND gate, and the OR gate. The NOT gate takes a single
binary input x, whose value is either 0 or 1, and produces a binary
output z whose value is opposite that of the input value. Each of the
other two gates takes two binary inputs x and y and produces a single
binary output z.

The operation of each gate, or of any boolean combinational element, is
defined by a truth table, shown under each gate in Figure 34.7. A truth
table gives the outputs of the combinational element for each possible
setting of the inputs. For example, the truth table for the OR gate says
that when the inputs are x = 0 and y = 1, the output value is z = 1. The
symbol ¬ denotes the NOT function, ∧ denotes the AND function, and ∨
denotes the OR function. Thus, for example, 0 ∨ 1 = 1.

AND and OR gates are not limited to just two inputs. An AND gate’s
output is 1 if all of its inputs are 1, and its output is 0 otherwise.
An OR gate’s output is 1 if any of its inputs are 1, and its output is 0
otherwise.

A boolean combinational circuit consists of one or more boolean
combinational elements interconnected by wires. A wire can connect the
output of one element to the input of another, so that the output value
of the first element becomes an input value of the second. Figure 34.8
shows two similar boolean combinational circuits, differing in only one
gate. Part (a) of the figure also shows the values on the individual
wires, given the input 〈x₁ = 1, x₂ = 1, x₃ = 0〉. Although a single
wire may have no more than one combinational-element output connected to
it, it can feed several element inputs. The number of element inputs fed
by a wire is called the fan-out of the wire. If no element output is
connected to a wire, the wire is a circuit input, accepting input values
from an external source. If no element input is connected to a wire, the
wire is a circuit output, providing the results of the circuit’s
computation to the outside world. (An internal wire can also fan out to
a circuit output.) For the purpose of defining the
circuit-satisfiability problem, we limit the number of circuit outputs
to 1, though in actual hardware design, a boolean combinational circuit
may have multiple outputs.

[art]

Figure 34.8 Two instances of the circuit-satisfiability problem. (a) The
assignment 〈x₁ = 1, x₂ = 1, x₃ = 0〉 to the inputs of this circuit
causes the output of the circuit to be 1. The circuit is therefore
satisfiable. (b) No assignment to the inputs of this circuit can cause
the output of the circuit to be 1. The circuit is therefore
unsatisfiable.

Boolean combinational circuits contain no cycles. In other words, for a
given combinational circuit, imagine a directed graph G = (V, E) with
one vertex for each combinational element and with k directed edges for
each wire whose fan-out is k, where the graph contains a directed edge
(u, v) if a wire connects the output of element u to an input of element
v. Then G must be acyclic.

A truth assignment for a boolean combinational circuit is a set of
boolean input values. We say that a 1-output boolean combinational
circuit is satisfiable if it has a satisfying assignment: a truth
assignment that causes the output of the circuit to be 1. For example,
the circuit in Figure 34.8(a) has the satisfying assignment 〈x₁ = 1, x₂
= 1, x₃ = 0〉, and so it is satisfiable. As Exercise 34.3-1 asks you to
show, no assignment of values to x₁, x₂, and x₃ causes the circuit in
Figure 34.8(b) to produce a 1 output. Since it always produces 0, it is
unsatisfiable.

The circuit-satisfiability problem is, “Given a boolean combinational
circuit composed of AND, OR, and NOT gates, is it satisfiable?” In order
to pose this question formally, however, we must agree on a standard
encoding for circuits. The size of a boolean combinational circuit is
the number of boolean combinational elements plus the number of wires in
the circuit. We could devise a graph-like encoding that maps any given
circuit C into a binary string 〈C〉 whose length is polynomial in the
size of the circuit itself. As a formal language, we can therefore
define

CIRCUIT-SAT = {〈C〉 : C is a satisfiable boolean combinational
circuit}.

The circuit-satisfiability problem arises in the area of computer-aided
hardware optimization. If a subcircuit always produces 0, that
subcircuit is unnecessary: the designer can replace it by a simpler
subcircuit that omits all logic gates and provides the constant 0 value
as its output. You can see the value in having a polynomial-time
algorithm for this problem.

Given a circuit C, you can determine whether it is satisfiable by simply
checking all possible assignments to the inputs. Unfortunately, if the
circuit has k inputs, then you would have to check up to 2^(k) possible
assignments. When the size of C is polynomial in k, checking all
possible assignments to the inputs takes Ω(2^(k)) time, which is
superpolynomial in the size of the circuit.¹⁰ In fact, as we have
claimed, there is strong evidence that no polynomial-time algorithm
exists that solves the circuit-satisfiability problem because circuit
satisfiability is NP-complete. We break the proof of this fact into two
parts, based on the two parts of the definition of NP-completeness.

Lemma 34.5

The circuit-satisfiability problem belongs to the class NP.

Proof   We provide a two-input, polynomial-time algorithm A that can
verify CIRCUIT-SAT. One of the inputs to A is (a standard encoding of) a
boolean combinational circuit C. The other input is a certificate
corresponding to an assignment of a boolean value to each of the wires
in C. (See Exercise 34.3-4 for a smaller certificate.)

The algorithm A works as follows. For each logic gate in the circuit, it
checks that the value provided by the certificate on the output wire is
correctly computed as a function of the values on the input wires. Then,
if the output of the entire circuit is 1, algorithm A outputs 1, since
the values assigned to the inputs of C provide a satisfying assignment.
Otherwise, A outputs 0.

Whenever a satisfiable circuit C is input to algorithm A, there exists a
certificate whose length is polynomial in the size of C and that causes
A to output a 1. Whenever an unsatisfiable circuit is input, no
certificate can fool A into believing that the circuit is satisfiable.
Algorithm A runs in polynomial time, and with a good implementation,
linear time suffices. Thus, CIRCUIT-SAT is verifiable in polynomial
time, and CIRCUIT-SAT ∈ NP.

▪

The second part of proving that CIRCUIT-SAT is NP-complete is to show
that the language is NP-hard: that every language in NP is
polynomial-time reducible to CIRCUIT-SAT. The actual proof of this fact
is full of technical intricacies, and so instead we’ll sketch the proof
based on some understanding of the workings of computer hardware.

A computer program is stored in the computer’s memory as a sequence of
instructions. A typical instruction encodes an operation to be
performed, addresses of operands in memory, and an address where the
result is to be stored. A special memory location, called the program
counter, keeps track of which instruction is to be executed next. The
program counter automatically increments when each instruction is
fetched, thereby causing the computer to execute instructions
sequentially. Certain instructions can cause a value to be written to
the program counter, however, which alters the normal sequential
execution and allows the computer to loop and perform conditional
branches.

At any point while a program executes, the computer’s memory holds the
entire state of the computation. (Consider the memory to include the
program itself, the program counter, working storage, and any of the
various bits of state that a computer maintains for bookkeeping.) We
call any particular state of computer memory a configuration. When an
instruction executes, it transforms the configuration. Think of an
instruction as mapping one configuration to another. The computer
hardware that accomplishes this mapping can be implemented as a boolean
combinational circuit, which we denote by M in the proof of the
following lemma.

Lemma 34.6

The circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-hard.

Proof   Let L be any language in NP. We’ll describe a polynomial-time
algorithm F computing a reduction function f that maps every binary
string x to a circuit C = f (x) such that x ∈ L if and only if C ∈
CIRCUIT-SAT.

Since L ∈ NP, there must exist an algorithm A that verifies L in
polynomial time. The algorithm F that we construct uses the two-input
algorithm A to compute the reduction function f.

Let T (n) denote the worst-case running time of algorithm A on length-n
input strings, and let k ≥ 1 be a constant such that T (n) = O(n^(k))
and the length of the certificate is O(n^(k)). (The running time of A is
actually a polynomial in the total input size, which includes both an
input string and a certificate, but since the length of the certificate
is polynomial in the length n of the input string, the running time is
polynomial in n.)

[art]

Figure 34.9 The sequence of configurations produced by an algorithm A
running on an input x and certificate y. Each configuration represents
the state of the computer for one step of the computation and, besides
A, x, and y, includes the program counter (PC), auxiliary machine state,
and working storage. Except for the certificate y, the initial
configuration c₀ is constant. A boolean combinational circuit M maps
each configuration to the next configuration. The output is a
distinguished bit in the working storage.

The basic idea of the proof is to represent the computation of A as a
sequence of configurations. As Figure 34.9 illustrates, consider each
configuration as comprising a few parts: the program for A, the program
counter and auxiliary machine state, the input x, the certificate y, and
working storage. The combinational circuit M, which implements the
computer hardware, maps each configuration c_(i) to the next
configuration c_(i+1), starting from the initial configuration c₀.
Algorithm A writes its output—0 or 1—to some designated location by the
time it finishes executing. After A halts, the output value never
changes. Thus, if the algorithm runs for at most T (n) steps, the output
appears as one of the bits in c_(T)(n).

The reduction algorithm F constructs a single combinational circuit that
computes all configurations produced by a given initial configuration.
The idea is to paste together T (n) copies of the circuit M. The output
of the ith circuit, which produces configuration c_(i), feeds directly
into the input of the (i +1)st circuit. Thus, the configurations, rather
than being stored in the computer’s memory, simply reside as values on
the wires connecting copies of M.

Recall what the polynomial-time reduction algorithm F must do. Given an
input x, it must compute a circuit C = f (x) that is satisfiable if and
only if there exists a certificate y such that A(x, y) = 1. When F
obtains an input x, it first computes n = |x| and constructs a
combinational circuit C′ consisting of T (n) copies of M. The input to
C′ is an initial configuration corresponding to a computation on A(x,
y), and the output is the configuration c_(T)(n).

Algorithm F modifies circuit C′ slightly to construct the circuit C = f
(x). First, it wires the inputs to C′ corresponding to the program for
A, the initial program counter, the input x, and the initial state of
memory directly to these known values. Thus, the only remaining inputs
to the circuit correspond to the certificate y. Second, it ignores all
outputs from C′, except for the one bit of c_(T)(n) corresponding to the
output of A. This circuit C, so constructed, computes C(y) = A(x, y) for
any input y of length O(n^(k)). The reduction algorithm F, when provided
an input string x, computes such a circuit C and outputs it.

We need to prove two properties. First, we must show that F correctly
computes a reduction function f. That is, we must show that C is
satisfiable if and only if there exists a certificate y such that A(x,
y) = 1. Second, we must show that F runs in polynomial time.

To show that F correctly computes a reduction function, suppose that
there exists a certificate y of length O(n^(k)) such that A(x, y) = 1.
Then, upon applying the bits of y to the inputs of C, the output of C is
C(y) = A(x, y) = 1. Thus, if a certificate exists, then C is
satisfiable. For the other direction, suppose that C is satisfiable.
Hence, there exists an input y to C such that C(y) = 1, from which we
conclude that A(x, y) = 1. Thus, F correctly computes a reduction
function.

To complete the proof sketch, we need to show that F runs in time
polynomial in n = |x|. First, the number of bits required to represent a
configuration is polynomial in n. Why? The program for A itself has
constant size, independent of the length of its input x. The length of
the input x is n, and the length of the certificate y is O(n^(k)). Since
the algorithm runs for at most O(n^(k)) steps, the amount of working
storage required by A is polynomial in n as well. (We implicitly assume
that this memory is contiguous. Exercise 34.3-5 asks you to extend the
argument to the situation in which the locations accessed by A are
scattered across a much larger region of memory and the particular
pattern of scattering can differ for each input x.)

The combinational circuit M implementing the computer hardware has size
polynomial in the length of a configuration, which is O(n^(k)), and
hence, the size of M is polynomial in n. (Most of this circuitry
implements the logic of the memory system.) The circuit C consists of
O(n^(k)) copies of M, and hence it has size polynomial in n. The
reduction algorithm F can construct C from x in polynomial time, since
each step of the construction takes polynomial time.

▪

The language CIRCUIT-SAT is therefore at least as hard as any language
in NP, and since it belongs to NP, it is NP-complete.

Theorem 34.7

The circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete.

Proof   Immediate from Lemmas 34.5 and 34.6 and from the definition of
NP-completeness.

▪

Exercises

34.3-1

Verify that the circuit in Figure 34.8(b) is unsatisfiable.

34.3-2

Show that the ≤_(P) relation is a transitive relation on languages. That
is, show that if L₁ ≤_(P) L₂ and L₂ ≤_(P) L₃, then L₁ ≤_(P) L₃.

34.3-3

Prove that L ≤_(P) L if and only if L ≤_(P) L.

34.3-4

Show that an alternative proof of Lemma 34.5 can use a satisfying
assignment as a certificate. Which certificate makes for an easier
proof?

34.3-5

The proof of Lemma 34.6 assumes that the working storage for algorithm A
occupies a contiguous region of polynomial size. Where does the proof
exploit this assumption? Argue that this assumption does not involve any
loss of generality.

34.3-6

A language L is complete for a language class C with respect to
polynomial-time reductions if L ∈ C and L′ ≤_(P) L for all L′ ∈ C. Show
that Ø and {0, 1}* are the only languages in P that are not complete for
P with respect to polynomial-time reductions.

34.3-7

Show that, with respect to polynomial-time reductions (see Exercise
34.3-6), L is complete for NP if and only if L is complete for co-NP.

34.3-8

The reduction algorithm F in the proof of Lemma 34.6 constructs the
circuit C = f (x) based on knowledge of x, A, and k. Professor Sartre
observes that the string x is input to F, but only the existence of A,
k, and the constant factor implicit in the O(n^(k)) running time is
known to F (since the language L belongs to NP), not their actual
values. Thus, the professor concludes that F cannot possibly construct
the circuit C and that the language CIRCUIT-SAT is not necessarily
NP-hard. Explain the flaw in the professor’s reasoning.

34.4    NP-completeness proofs

The proof that the circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete showed
directly that L ≤_(P) CIRCUIT-SAT for every language L ∈ NP. This
section shows how to prove that languages are NP-complete without
directly reducing every language in NP to the given language. We’ll
explore examples of this methodology by proving that various
formula-satisfiability problems are NP-complete. Section 34.5 provides
many more examples.

The following lemma provides a foundation for showing that a given
language is NP-complete.

Lemma 34.8

If L is a language such that L′ ≤_(P) L for some L′ ∈ NPC, then L is
NP-hard. If, in addition, we have L ∈ NP, then L ∈ NPC.

Proof   Since L′ is NP-complete, for all L″ ∈ NP, we have L″ ≤_(P) L′.
By supposition, we have L′ ≤_(P) L, and thus by transitivity (Exercise
34.3-2), we have L″ ≤_(P) L, which shows that L is NP-hard. If L ∈ NP,
we also have L ∈ NPC.

▪

In other words, by reducing a known NP-complete language L′ to L, we
implicitly reduce every language in NP to L. Thus, Lemma 34.8 provides a
method for proving that a language L is NP-complete:

1.  Prove L ∈ NP.

2.  Prove that L is NP-hard:

    a. Select a known NP-complete language L′.

    b. Describe an algorithm that computes a function f mapping every
    instance x ∈ {0, 1}* of L′ to an instance f (x) of L.

    c. Prove that the function f satisfies x ∈ L′ if and only if f (x) ∈
    L for all x ∈ {0, 1}*.

    d. Prove that the algorithm computing f runs in polynomial time.

This methodology of reducing from a single known NP-complete language is
far simpler than the more complicated process of showing directly how to
reduce from every language in NP. Proving CIRCUIT-SAT ∈ NPC furnishes a
starting point. Knowing that the circuit-satisfiability problem is
NP-complete makes it much easier to prove that other problems are
NP-complete. Moreover, as the catalog of known NP-complete problems
grows, so will the choices for languages from which to reduce.

Formula satisfiability

To illustrate the reduction methodology, let’s see an NP-completeness
proof for the problem of determining whether a boolean formula, not a
circuit, is satisfiable. This problem has the historical honor of being
the first problem ever shown to be NP-complete.

We formulate the (formula) satisfiability problem in terms of the
language SAT as follows. An instance of SAT is a boolean formula ϕ
composed of

1.  n boolean variables: x₁, x₂, … , x_(n);
2.  m boolean connectives: any boolean function with one or two inputs
    and one output, such as ∧ (AND), ∨ (OR), ¬ (NOT), → (implication), ↔
    (if and only if); and
3.  parentheses. (Without loss of generality, assume that there are no
    redundant parentheses, i.e., a formula contains at most one pair of
    parentheses per boolean connective.)

We can encode a boolean formula ϕ in a length that is polynomial in n +
m. As in boolean combinational circuits, a truth assignment for a
boolean formula ϕ is a set of values for the variables of ϕ, and a
satisfying assignment is a truth assignment that causes it to evaluate
to 1. A formula with a satisfying assignment is a satisfiable formula.
The satisfiability problem asks whether a given boolean formula is
satisfiable, which we can express in formal-language terms as

SAT = {〈ϕ〉 : ϕ is a satisfiable boolean formula}.

As an example, the formula

ϕ = ((x₁ → x₂) ∨ ¬((¬x₁ ↔ x₃) ∨ x₄)) ∧ ¬x₂

has the satisfying assignment 〈x₁ = 0, x₂ = 0, x₃ = 1, x₄ = 1〉, since

[art]

and thus this formula ϕ belongs to SAT.

The naive algorithm to determine whether an arbitrary boolean formula is
satisfiable does not run in polynomial time. A formula with n variables
has 2^(n) possible assignments. If the length of 〈ϕ〉 is polynomial in
n, then checking every assignment requires Ω(2^(n)) time, which is
superpolynomial in the length of 〈ϕ〉. As the following theorem shows,
a polynomial-time algorithm is unlikely to exist.

Theorem 34.9

Satisfiability of boolean formulas is NP-complete.

Proof   We start by arguing that SAT ∈ NP. Then we prove that SAT is
NP-hard by showing that CIRCUIT-SAT ≤_(P) SAT, which by Lemma 34.8 will
prove the theorem.

To show that SAT belongs to NP, we show that a certificate consisting of
a satisfying assignment for an input formula ϕ can be verified in
polynomial time. The verifying algorithm simply replaces each variable
in the formula with its corresponding value and then evaluates the
expression, much as we did in equation (34.2) above. This task can be
done in polynomial time. If the expression evaluates to 1, then the
algorithm has verified that the formula is satisfiable. Thus, SAT
belongs to NP.

To prove that SAT is NP-hard, we show that CIRCUIT-SAT ≤_(P) SAT. In
other words, we need to show how to reduce any instance of circuit
satisfiability to an instance of formula satisfiability in polynomial
time. We can use induction to express any boolean combinational circuit
as a boolean formula. We simply look at the gate that produces the
circuit output and inductively express each of the gate’s inputs as
formulas. We then obtain the formula for the circuit by writing an
expression that applies the gate’s function to its inputs’ formulas.

[art]

Figure 34.10 Reducing circuit satisfiability to formula satisfiability.
The formula produced by the reduction algorithm has a variable for each
wire in the circuit and a clause for each logic gate.

Unfortunately, this straightforward method does not amount to a
polynomial-time reduction. As Exercise 34.4-1 asks you to show, shared
subformulas—which arise from gates whose output wires have fan-out of 2
or more—can cause the size of the generated formula to grow
exponentially. Thus, the reduction algorithm must be somewhat more
clever.

Figure 34.10 illustrates how to overcome this problem, using as an
example the circuit from Figure 34.8(a). For each wire x_(i) in the
circuit C, the formula ϕ has a variable x_(i). To express how each gate
operates, construct a small formula involving the variables of its
incident wires. The formula has the form of an “if and only if” (↔),
with the variable for the gate’s output on the left and on the right a
logical expression encapsulating the gate’s function on its inputs. For
example, the operation of the output AND gate (the rightmost gate in the
figure) is x₁₀ ↔ (x₇ ∧ x₈ ∧ x₉). We call each of these small formulas a
clause.

The formula ϕ produced by the reduction algorithm is the AND of the
circuit-output variable with the conjunction of clauses describing the
operation of each gate. For the circuit in the figure, the formula is

  --------- --- -------------------------
  ϕ = x₁₀   ∧   (x₄ ↔ ¬x₃)
            ∧   (x₅ ↔ (x₁ ∨ x₂))
            ∧   (x₆ ↔ ¬x₄)
            ∧   (x₇ ↔ (x₁ ∧ x₂ ∧ x₄))
            ∧   (x₈ ↔ (x₅ ∨ x₆))
            ∧   (x₉ ↔ (x₆ ∨ x₇))
            ∧   (x₁₀ ↔ (x₇ ∧ x₈ ∧ x₉)).
  --------- --- -------------------------

Given a circuit C, it is straightforward to produce such a formula ϕ in
polynomial time.

Why is the circuit C satisfiable exactly when the formula ϕ is
satisfiable? If C has a satisfying assignment, then each wire of the
circuit has a well-defined value, and the output of the circuit is 1.
Therefore, when wire values are assigned to variables in ϕ, each clause
of ϕ evaluates to 1, and thus the conjunction of all evaluates to 1.
Conversely, if some assignment causes ϕ to evaluate to 1, the circuit C
is satisfiable by an analogous argument. Thus, we have shown that
CIRCUIT-SAT ≤_(P) SAT, which completes the proof.

▪

3-CNF satisfiability

Reducing from formula satisfiability gives us an avenue to prove many
problems NP-complete. The reduction algorithm must handle any input
formula, though, and this requirement can lead to a huge number of cases
to consider. Instead, it is usually simpler to reduce from a restricted
language of boolean formulas. Of course, the restricted language must
not be polynomial-time solvable. One convenient language is 3-CNF
satisfiability, or 3-CNF-SAT.

In order to define 3-CNF satisfiability, we first need to define a few
terms. A literal in a boolean formula is an occurrence of a variable
(such as x₁) or its negation (¬x₁). A clause is the OR of one or more
literals, such as x₁ ∨ ¬x₂ ∨ ¬x₃. A boolean formula is in conjunctive
normal form, or CNF, if it is expressed as an AND of clauses, and it’s
in 3-conjunctive normal form, or 3-CNF, if each clause contains exactly
three distinct literals.

For example, the boolean formula

(x₁ ∨ ¬x₁ ∨ ¬x₂) ∧ (x₃ ∨ x₂ ∨ x₄) ∧ (¬x₁ ∨ ¬x₃ ∨ ¬x₄)

is in 3-CNF. The first of its three clauses is (x₁ ∨ ¬x₁ ∨ ¬x₂), which
contains the three literals x₁, ¬x₁, and ¬x₂.

The language 3-CNF-SAT consists of encodings of boolean formulas in
3-CNF that are satisfiable. The following theorem shows that a
polynomial-time algorithm that can determine the satisfiability of
boolean formulas is unlikely to exist, even when they are expressed in
this simple normal form.

Theorem 34.10

Satisfiability of boolean formulas in 3-conjunctive normal form is
NP-complete.

Proof   The argument from the proof of Theorem 34.9 to show that SAT ∈
NP applies equally well here to show that 3-CNF-SAT ∈ NP. By Lemma 34.8,
therefore, we need only show that SAT ≤_(P) 3-CNF-SAT.

[art]

Figure 34.11 The tree corresponding to the formula ϕ = ((x₁ →x₂)∨¬((¬x₁
↔ x₃)∨x₄))∧¬x₂.

We break the reduction algorithm into three basic steps. Each step
progressively transforms the input formula ϕ closer to the desired
3-conjunctive normal form.

The first step is similar to the one used to prove CIRCUIT-SAT ≤_(P) SAT
in Theorem 34.9. First, construct a binary “parse” tree for the input
formula ϕ, with literals as leaves and connectives as internal nodes.
Figure 34.11 shows such a parse tree for the formula

[art]

If the input formula contains a clause such as the OR of several
literals, use associativity to parenthesize the expression fully so that
every internal node in the resulting tree has just one or two children.
The binary parse tree is like a circuit for computing the function.

Mimicking the reduction in the proof of Theorem 34.9, introduce a
variable y_(i) for the output of each internal node. Then rewrite the
original formula ϕ as the AND of the variable at the root of the parse
tree and a conjunction of clauses describing the operation of each node.
For the formula (34.3), the resulting expression is

  --------- --- --------------------
  ϕ′ = y₁   ∧   (y₁ ↔ (y₂ ∧ ¬x₂))
            ∧   (y₂ ↔ (y₃ ∨ y₄))
            ∧   (y₃ ↔ (x₁ → x₂))
            ∧   (y₄ ↔ ¬y₅)
            ∧   (y₅ ↔ (y₆ ∨ x₄))
            ∧   (y₆ ↔ (¬x₁ ↔ x₃)).
  --------- --- --------------------

[art]

Figure 34.12 The truth table for the clause (y₁ ↔ (y₂ ∧ ¬x₂)).

The formula ϕ′ thus obtained is a conjunction of clauses [art], each of
which has at most three literals. These clauses are not yet ORs of three
literals.

The second step of the reduction converts each clause [art] into
conjunctive normal form. Construct a truth table for [art] by evaluating
all possible assignments to its variables. Each row of the truth table
consists of a possible assignment of the variables of the clause,
together with the value of the clause under that assignment. Using the
truth-table entries that evaluate to 0, build a formula in disjunctive
normal form (or DNF)—an OR of ANDs—that is equivalent to ¬ [art]. Then
negate this formula and convert it into a CNF formula [art] by using
DeMorgan’s laws for propositional logic,

  ---------- --- ----------
  ¬(a ∧ b)   =   ¬a ∨ ¬b,
  ¬(a ∨ b)   =   ¬a ∧ ¬b,
  ---------- --- ----------

to complement all literals, change ORs into ANDs, and change ANDs into
ORs.

In our example, the clause [art] converts into CNF as follows. The truth
table for [art] appears in Figure 34.12. The DNF formula equivalent to ¬
[art] is

(y₁ ∧ y₂ ∧ x₂) ∨ (y₁ ∧ ¬y₂ ∧ x₂) ∨ (y₁ ∧ ¬y₂ ∧ ¬x₂) ∨ (¬y₁ ∧ y₂ ∧ ¬x₂).

Negating and applying DeMorgan’s laws yields the CNF formula

[art]

which is equivalent to the original clause [art].

At this point, each clause [art] of the formula ϕ′ has been converted
into a CNF formula [art], and thus ϕ′ is equivalent to the CNF formula
ϕ″ consisting of the conjunction of the [art]. Moreover, each clause of
ϕ″ has at most three literals.

The third and final step of the reduction further transforms the formula
so that each clause has exactly three distinct literals. From the
clauses of the CNF formula ϕ″, construct the final 3-CNF formula ϕ‴.
This formula also uses two auxiliary variables, p and q. For each clause
C_(i) of ϕ″, include the following clauses in ϕ‴:

- If C_(i) contains three distinct literals, then simply include C_(i)
  as a clause of ϕ‴.
- If C_(i) contains exactly two distinct literals, that is, if C_(i) =
  (l₁ ∨ l₂), where l₁ and l₂ are literals, then include (l₁ ∨ l₂ ∨ p) ∧
  (l₁ ∨ l₂ ∨ ¬p) as clauses of ϕ‴. The literals p and ¬p merely fulfill
  the syntactic requirement that each clause of ϕ‴ contain exactly three
  distinct literals. Whether p = 0 or p = 1, one of the clauses is
  equivalent to l₁ ∨ l₂, and the other evaluates to 1, which is the
  identity for AND.
- If C_(i) contains just one distinct literal l, then include (l ∨p
  ∨q)∧(l ∨ p ∨ ¬q) ∧ (l ∨ ¬p ∨ q) ∧ (l ∨ ¬p ∨ ¬q) as clauses of ϕ‴.
  Regardless of the values of p and q, one of the four clauses is
  equivalent to l, and the other three evaluate to 1.

We can see that the 3-CNF formula ϕ‴ is satisfiable if and only if ϕ is
satisfiable by inspecting each of the three steps. Like the reduction
from CIRCUIT-SAT to SAT, the construction of ϕ′ from ϕ in the first step
preserves satisfiability. The second step produces a CNF formula ϕ″ that
is algebraically equivalent to ϕ′. Then the third step produces a 3-CNF
formula ϕ‴ that is effectively equivalent to ϕ″, since any assignment to
the variables p and q produces a formula that is algebraically
equivalent to ϕ″.

We must also show that the reduction can be computed in polynomial time.
Constructing ϕ′ from ϕ introduces at most one variable and one clause
per connective in ϕ. Constructing ϕ″ from ϕ′ can introduce at most eight
clauses into ϕ″ for each clause from ϕ′, since each clause of ϕ′
contains at most three variables, and the truth table for each clause
has at most 2³ = 8 rows. The construction of ϕ‴ from ϕ″ introduces at
most four clauses into ϕ‴ for each clause of ϕ″. Thus the size of the
resulting formula ϕ‴ is polynomial in the length of the original
formula. Each of the constructions can be accomplished in polynomial
time.

▪

Exercises

34.4-1

Consider the straightforward (nonpolynomial-time) reduction in the proof
of Theorem 34.9. Describe a circuit of size n that, when converted to a
formula by this method, yields a formula whose size is exponential in n.

34.4-2

Show the 3-CNF formula that results upon using the method of Theorem
34.10 on the formula (34.3).

34.4-3

Professor Jagger proposes to show that SAT ≤_(P) 3-CNF-SAT by using only
the truth-table technique in the proof of Theorem 34.10, and not the
other steps. That is, the professor proposes to take the boolean formula
ϕ, form a truth table for its variables, derive from the truth table a
formula in 3-DNF that is equivalent to ¬ϕ, and then negate and apply
DeMorgan’s laws to produce a 3-CNF formula equivalent to ϕ. Show that
this strategy does not yield a polynomial-time reduction.

34.4-4

Show that the problem of determining whether a boolean formula is a
tautology is complete for co-NP. (Hint: See Exercise 34.3-7.)

34.4-5

Show that the problem of determining the satisfiability of boolean
formulas in disjunctive normal form is polynomial-time solvable.

34.4-6

Someone gives you a polynomial-time algorithm to decide formula
satisfiability. Describe how to use this algorithm to find satisfying
assignments in polynomial time.

34.4-7

Let 2-CNF-SAT be the set of satisfiable boolean formulas in CNF with
exactly two literals per clause. Show that 2-CNF-SAT ∈ P. Make your
algorithm as efficient as possible. (Hint: Observe that x ∨ y is
equivalent to ¬x → y. Reduce 2-CNF-SAT to an efficiently solvable
problem on a directed graph.)

34.5    NP-complete problems

NP-complete problems arise in diverse domains: boolean logic, graphs,
arithmetic, network design, sets and partitions, storage and retrieval,
sequencing and scheduling, mathematical programming, algebra and number
theory, games and puzzles, automata and language theory, program
optimization, biology, chemistry, physics, and more. This section uses
the reduction methodology to provide NP-completeness proofs for a
variety of problems drawn from graph theory and set partitioning.

[art]

Figure 34.13 The structure of NP-completeness proofs in Sections 34.4
and 34.5. All proofs ultimately follow by reduction from the
NP-completeness of CIRCUIT-SAT.

Figure 34.13 outlines the structure of the NP-completeness proofs in
this section and Section 34.4. We prove each language in the figure to
be NP-complete by reduction from the language that points to it. At the
root is CIRCUIT-SAT, which we proved NP-complete in Theorem 34.7. This
section concludes with a recap of reduction strategies.

34.5.1    The clique problem

A clique in an undirected graph G = (V, E) is a subset V′ ⊆ V of
vertices, each pair of which is connected by an edge in E. In other
words, a clique is a complete subgraph of G. The size of a clique is the
number of vertices it contains. The clique problem is the optimization
problem of finding a clique of maximum size in a graph. The
corresponding decision problem asks simply whether a clique of a given
size k exists in the graph. The formal definition is

CLIQUE = {〈G, k〉 : G is a graph containing a clique of size k}.

A naive algorithm for determining whether a graph G = (V, E) with |V|
vertices contains a clique of size k lists all k-subsets of V and checks
each one to see whether it forms a clique. The running time of this
algorithm is [art], which is polynomial if k is a constant. In general,
however, k could be near |V|/2, in which case the algorithm runs in
superpolynomial time. Indeed, an efficient algorithm for the clique
problem is unlikely to exist.

Theorem 34.11

The clique problem is NP-complete.

Proof   First, we show that CLIQUE ∈ NP. For a given graph G = (V, E),
use the set V′ ⊆ V of vertices in the clique as a certificate for G. To
check whether V′ is a clique in polynomial time, check whether, for each
pair u, v ∈ V′, the edge (u, v) belongs to E.

We next prove that 3-CNF-SAT ≤_(P) CLIQUE, which shows that the clique
problem is NP-hard. You might be surprised that the proof reduces an
instance of 3-CNF-SAT to an instance of CLIQUE, since on the surface
logical formulas seem to have little to do with graphs.

The reduction algorithm begins with an instance of 3-CNF-SAT. Let ϕ = C₁
∧ C₂ ∧ ⋯ ∧ C_(k) be a boolean formula in 3-CNF with k clauses. For r =
1, 2, … , k, each clause C_(r) contains exactly three distinct literals:
[art], and [art]. We will construct a graph G such that ϕ is satisfiable
if and only if G contains a clique of size k.

We construct the undirected graph G = (V, E) as follows. For each clause
[art] in ϕ, place a triple of vertices [art], and [art] into V. Add edge
[art] into E if both of the following hold:

- [art] and [art] are in different triples, that is, r ≠ s, and
- their corresponding literals are consistent, that is, [art] is not the
  negation of [art].

We can build this graph from ϕ in polynomial time. As an example of this
construction, if

ϕ = (x₁ ∨ ¬x₂ ∨ ¬x₃) ∧ (¬x₁ ∨ x₂ ∨ x₃) ∧ (x₁ ∨ x₂ ∨ x₃),

then G is the graph shown in Figure 34.14.

We must show that this transformation of ϕ into G is a reduction. First,
suppose that ϕ has a satisfying assignment. Then each clause C_(r)
contains at least one literal [art] that is assigned 1, and each such
literal corresponds to a vertex [art]. Picking one such “true” literal
from each clause yields a set V′ of k vertices. We claim that V′ is a
clique. For any two vertices [art], where r ≠ s, both corresponding
literals [art] and [art] map to 1 by the given satisfying assignment,
and thus the literals cannot be complements. Thus, by the construction
of G, the edge [art] belongs to E.

Conversely, suppose that G contains a clique V′ of size k. No edges in G
connect vertices in the same triple, and so V′ contains exactly one
vertex per triple. If [art], then assign 1 to the corresponding literal
[art]. Since G contains no edges between inconsistent literals, no
literal and its complement are both assigned 1. Each clause is
satisfied, and so ϕ is satisfied. (Any variables that do not correspond
to a vertex in the clique may be set arbitrarily.)

▪

[art]

Figure 34.14 The graph G derived from the 3-CNF formula ϕ = C₁ ∧ C₂ ∧
C₃, where C₁ = (x₁ ∨ ¬x₂ ∨ ¬x₃), C₂ = (¬x₁ ∨ x₂ ∨ x₃), and C₃ = (x₁ ∨ x₂
∨ x₃), in reducing 3-CNF-SAT to CLIQUE. A satisfying assignment of the
formula has x₂ = 0, x₃ = 1, and x₁ set to either 0 or 1. This assignment
satisfies C₁ with ¬x₂, and it satisfies C₂ and C₃ with x₃, corresponding
to the clique with blue vertices.

In the example of Figure 34.14, a satisfying assignment of ϕ has x₂ = 0
and x₃ = 1. A corresponding clique of size k = 3 consists of the
vertices corresponding to ¬x₂ from the first clause, x₃ from the second
clause, and x₃ from the third clause. Because the clique contains no
vertices corresponding to either x₁ or ¬x₁, this satisfying assignment
can set x₁ to either 0 or 1.

The proof of Theorem 34.11 reduced an arbitrary instance of 3-CNF-SAT to
an instance of CLIQUE with a particular structure. You might think that
we have shown only that CLIQUE is NP-hard in graphs in which the
vertices are restricted to occur in triples and in which there are no
edges between vertices in the same triple. Indeed, we have shown that
CLIQUE is NP-hard only in this restricted case, but this proof suffices
to show that CLIQUE is NP-hard in general graphs. Why? If there were a
polynomial-time algorithm that solves CLIQUE on general graphs, it would
also solve CLIQUE on restricted graphs.

The opposite approach—reducing instances of 3-CNF-SAT with a special
structure to general instances of CLIQUE—does not suffice, however. Why
not? Perhaps the instances of 3-CNF-SAT that we choose to reduce from
are “easy,” and so we would not have reduced an NP-hard problem to
CLIQUE.

Moreover, the reduction uses the instance of 3-CNF-SAT, but not the
solution. We would have erred if the polynomial-time reduction had
relied on knowing whether the formula ϕ is satisfiable, since we do not
know how to decide whether ϕ is satisfiable in polynomial time.

[art]

Figure 34.15 Reducing CLIQUE to VERTEX-COVER. (a) An undirected graph G
= (V, E) with clique V′ = {u, v, x, y}, shown in blue. (b) The graph G
produced by the reduction algorithm that has vertex cover V − V′ = {w,
z}, in blue.

34.5.2    The vertex-cover problem

A vertex cover of an undirected graph G = (V, E) is a subset V′ ⊆ V such
that if (u, v) ∈ E, then u ∈ V′ or v ∈ V′ (or both). That is, each
vertex “covers” its incident edges, and a vertex cover for G is a set of
vertices that covers all the edges in E. The size of a vertex cover is
the number of vertices in it. For example, the graph in Figure 34.15(b)
has a vertex cover {w, z} of size 2.

The vertex-cover problem is to find a vertex cover of minimum size in a
given graph. For this optimization problem, the corresponding decision
problem asks whether a graph has a vertex cover of a given size k. As a
language, we define

VERTEX-COVER = {〈G, k〉 : graph G has a vertex cover of size k}.

The following theorem shows that this problem is NP-complete.

Theorem 34.12

The vertex-cover problem is NP-complete.

Proof   We first show that VERTEX-COVER ∈ NP. Given a graph G = (V, E)
and an integer k, the certificate is the vertex cover V′ ⊆ V itself. The
verification algorithm affirms that |V′| = k, and then it checks, for
each edge (u, v) ∈ E, that u ∈ V′ or v ∈ V′. It is easy to verify the
certificate in polynomial time.

To prove that the vertex-cover problem is NP-hard, we reduce from the
clique problem, showing that CLIQUE ≤_(P) VERTEX-COVER. This reduction
relies on the notion of the complement of a graph. Given an undirected
graph G = (V, E), we define the complement of G as a graph G = (V, E),
where E = {(u, v) : u, v ∈ V, u ≠ v, and (u, v) ∉ E}. In other words, G
is the graph containing exactly those edges that are not in G. Figure
34.15 shows a graph and its complement and illustrates the reduction
from CLIQUE to VERTEX-COVER.

The reduction algorithm takes as input an instance 〈G, k〉 of the
clique problem and computes the complement G in polynomial time. The
output of the reduction algorithm is the instance 〈G, |V| − k〉 of the
vertex-cover problem. To complete the proof, we show that this
transformation is indeed a reduction: the graph G contains a clique of
size k if and only if the graph G has a vertex cover of size |V| − k.

Suppose that G contains a clique V′ ⊆ V with |V′| = k. We claim that V −
V′ is a vertex cover in G. Let (u, v) be any edge in E. Then, (u, v) ∉
E, which implies that at least one of u or v does not belong to V′,
since every pair of vertices in V′ is connected by an edge of E.
Equivalently, at least one of u or v belongs to V − V′, which means that
edge (u, v) is covered by V − V′. Since (u, v) was chosen arbitrarily
from E, every edge of E is covered by a vertex in V −V′. Hence the set V
− V′, which has size |V| − k, forms a vertex cover for G.

Conversely, suppose that G has a vertex cover V′ ⊆ V, where |V′| = |V| −
k. Then for all u, v ∈ V, if (u, v) ∈ E, then u ∈ V′ or v ∈ V′ or both.
The contrapositive of this implication is that for all u, v ∈ V, if u ∉
V′ and v ∉ V′, then (u, v) ∈ E. In other words, V − V′ is a clique, and
it has size |V|−|V′| = k.

▪

Since VERTEX-COVER is NP-complete, we don’t expect to find a
polynomial-time algorithm for finding a minimum-size vertex cover.
Section 35.1 presents a polynomial-time “approximation algorithm,”
however, which produces “approximate” solutions for the vertex-cover
problem. The size of a vertex cover produced by the algorithm is at most
twice the minimum size of a vertex cover.

Thus, you shouldn’t give up hope just because a problem is NP-complete.
You might be able to design a polynomial-time approximation algorithm
that obtains near-optimal solutions, even though finding an optimal
solution is NP-complete. Chapter 35 gives several approximation
algorithms for NP-complete problems.

34.5.3    The hamiltonian-cycle problem

We now return to the hamiltonian-cycle problem defined in Section 34.2.

Theorem 34.13

The hamiltonian cycle problem is NP-complete.

[art]

Figure 34.16 The gadget used in reducing the vertex-cover problem to the
hamiltonian-cycle problem. An edge (u, v) of graph G corresponds to
gadget Γ_(uv) in the graph G′ created in the reduction. (a) The gadget,
with individual vertices labeled. (b)–(d) The paths highlighted in blue
are the only possible ones through the gadget that include all vertices,
assuming that the only connections from the gadget to the remainder of
G′ are through vertices [u, v, 1], [u, v, 6], [v, u, 1], and [v, u, 6].

Proof   We first show that HAM-CYCLE ∈ NP. Given an undirected graph G =
(V, E), the certificate is the sequence of |V| vertices that makes up
the hamiltonian cycle. The verification algorithm checks that this
sequence contains each vertex in V exactly once and that with the first
vertex repeated at the end, it forms a cycle in G. That is, it checks
that there is an edge between each pair of consecutive vertices and
between the first and last vertices. This certificate can be verified in
polynomial time.

We now prove that VERTEX-COVER ≤_(P) HAM-CYCLE, which shows that
HAM-CYCLE is NP-complete. Given an undirected graph G = (V, E) and an
integer k, we construct an undirected graph G′ = (V′, E′) that has a
hamiltonian cycle if and only if G has a vertex cover of size k. We
assume without loss of generality that G contains no isolated vertices
(that is, every vertex in V has at least one incident edge) and that k ≤
|V|. (If an isolated vertex belongs to a vertex cover of size k, then
there also exists a vertex cover of size k − 1, and for any graph, the
entire set V is always a vertex cover.)

Our construction uses a gadget, which is a piece of a graph that
enforces certain properties. Figure 34.16(a) shows the gadget we use.
For each edge (u, v) ∈ E, the constructed graph G′ contains one copy of
this gadget, which we denote by Γ_(uv). We denote each vertex in Γ_(uv)
by [u, v, i] or [v, u, i], where 1 ≤ i ≤ 6, so that each gadget Γ_(uv)
contains 12 vertices. Gadget Γ_(uv) also contains the 14 edges shown in
Figure 34.16(a).

Along with the internal structure of the gadget, we enforce the
properties we want by limiting the connections between the gadget and
the remainder of the graph G′ that we construct. In particular, only
vertices [u, v, 1], [u, v, 6], [v, u, 1], and [v, u, 6] will have edges
incident from outside Γ_(uv). Any hamiltonian cycle of G′ must traverse
the edges of Γ_(uv) in one of the three ways shown in Figures
34.16(b)–(d). If the cycle enters through vertex [u, v, 1], it must exit
through vertex [u, v, 6], and it either visits all 12 of the gadget’s
vertices (Figure 34.16(b)) or the six vertices [u, v, 1] through [u, v,
6] (Figure 34.16(c)). In the latter case, the cycle will have to reenter
the gadget to visit vertices [v, u, 1] through [v, u, 6]. Similarly, if
the cycle enters through vertex [v, u, 1], it must exit through vertex
[v, u, 6], and either it visits all 12 of the gadget’s vertices (Figure
34.16(d)) or it visits the six vertices [v, u, 1] through [v, u, 6] and
reenters to visit [u, v, 1] through [u, v, 6] (Figure 34.16(c)). No
other paths through the gadget that visit all 12 vertices are possible.
In particular, it is impossible to construct two vertex-disjoint paths,
one of which connects [u, v, 1] to [v, u, 6] and the other of which
connects [v, u, 1] to [u, v, 6], such that the union of the two paths
contains all of the gadget’s vertices.

The only other vertices in V′ other than those of gadgets are selector
vertices s₁, s₂, … , s_(k). We’ll use edges incident on selector
vertices in G′ to select the k vertices of the cover in G.

In addition to the edges in gadgets, E′ contains two other types of
edges, which Figure 34.17 shows. First, for each vertex u ∈ V, edges
join pairs of gadgets in order to form a path containing all gadgets
corresponding to edges incident on u in G. We arbitrarily order the
vertices adjacent to each vertex u ∈ V as u⁽¹⁾, u⁽²⁾, … ,
u^((degree(u))), where degree(u) is the number of vertices adjacent to
u. To create a path in G′ through all the gadgets corresponding to edges
incident on u, E′ contains the edges {([u, u^((i)), 6], [u, u^((i+1)),
1]) : 1 ≤ i ≤ degree(u) − 1}. In Figure 34.17, for example, we order the
vertices adjacent to w as 〈x, y, z〉, and so graph G′ in part (b) of
the figure includes the edges ([w, x, 6], [w, y, 1]) and ([w, y, 6], [w,
z, 1]). The vertices adjacent to x are ordered as 〈w, y〉, so that G′
includes the edge ([x, w, 6], [x, y, 1]). For each vertex u ∈ V, these
edges in G′ fill in a path containing all gadgets corresponding to edges
incident on u in G.

The intuition behind these edges is that if vertex u ∈ V belongs to the
vertex cover of G, then G′ contains a path from [u, u⁽¹⁾, 1] to [u,
u^((degree(u))), 6] that “covers” all gadgets corresponding to edges
incident on u. That is, for each of these gadgets, say [art], the path
either includes all 12 vertices (if u belongs to the vertex cover but
u^((i)) does not) or just the six vertices [u, u^((i)), 1] through [u,
u^((i)), 6] (if both u and u^((i)) belong to the vertex cover).

The final type of edge in E′ joins the first vertex [u, u⁽¹⁾, 1] and the
last vertex [u, u^((degree(u))), 6] of each of these paths to each of
the selector vertices. That is, E′ includes the edges

  -------------------------------------------------------------
  {(s_(j), [u, u⁽¹⁾, 1]) : u ∈ V and 1 ≤ j ≤ k}
  ∪ {(s_(j), [u, u^((degree(u))), 6]) : u ∈ V and 1 ≤ j ≤ k}.
  -------------------------------------------------------------

[art]

Figure 34.17 Reducing an instance of the vertex-cover problem to an
instance of the hamiltonian-cycle problem. (a) An undirected graph G
with a vertex cover of size 2, consisting of the blue vertices w and y.
(b) The undirected graph G′ produced by the reduction, with the
hamiltonian cycle corresponding to the vertex cover highlighted in blue.
The vertex cover {w, y} corresponds to edges (s₁, [w, x, 1]) and (s₂,
[y, x, 1]) appearing in the hamiltonian cycle.

Next we show that the size of G′ is polynomial in the size of G, and
hence it takes time polynomial in the size of G to construct G′. The
vertices of G′ are those in the gadgets, plus the selector vertices.
With 12 vertices per gadget, plus k ≤ |V | selector vertices, G′
contains a total of

  ------ --- --------------
  |V′|   =   12 |E| + k
         ≤   12 |E| + |V|
  ------ --- --------------

vertices. The edges of G′ are those in the gadgets, those that go
between gadgets, and those connecting selector vertices to gadgets. Each
gadget contains 14 edges, totaling 14 |E| in all gadgets. For each
vertex u ∈ V, graph G′ has degree(u) − 1 edges going between gadgets, so
that summed over all vertices in V,

[art]

edges go between gadgets. Finally, G′ has two edges for each pair
consisting of a selector vertex and a vertex of V, totaling 2k |V| such
edges. The total number of edges of G′ is therefore

  ------ --- -------------------------------------
  |E′|   =   (14 |E|) + (2 |E| − |V|) + (2k |V|)
         =   16 |E| + (2k − 1) |V|
         ≤   16 |E| + (2 |V| − 1) |V|.
  ------ --- -------------------------------------

Now we show that the transformation from graph G to G′ is a reduction.
That is, we must show that G has a vertex cover of size k if and only if
G′ has a hamiltonian cycle.

Suppose that G = (V, E) has a vertex cover V* ⊆ V, where |V*| = k. Let
V* = {u₁, u₂, … , u_(k)}. As Figure 34.17 shows, we can construct a
hamiltonian cycle in G′ by including the following edges¹¹ for each
vertex u_(j) ∈ V*. Start by including edges [art], which connect all
gadgets corresponding to edges incident on u_(j). Also include the edges
within these gadgets as Figures 34.16(b)–(d) show, depending on whether
the edge is covered by one or two vertices in V*. The hamiltonian cycle
also includes the edges

[art]

By inspecting Figure 34.17, you can verify that these edges form a
cycle, where u₁ = w and u₂ = y. The cycle starts at s₁, visits all
gadgets corresponding to edges incident on u₁, then visits s₂, visits
all gadgets corresponding to edges incident on u₂, and so on, until it
returns to s₁. The cycle visits each gadget either once or twice,
depending on whether one or two vertices of V* cover its corresponding
edge. Because V* is a vertex cover for G, each edge in E is incident on
some vertex in V*, and so the cycle visits each vertex in each gadget of
G′. Because the cycle also visits every selector vertex, it is
hamiltonian.

Conversely, suppose that G′ = (V′, E′) contains a hamiltonian cycle C ⊆
E′. We claim that the set

[art]

is a vertex cover for G.

We first argue that the set V* is well defined, that is, for each
selector vertex s_(j), exactly one of the incident edges in the
hamiltonian cycle C is of the form (s_(j), [u, u⁽¹⁾, 1]) for some vertex
u ∈ V. To see why, partition the hamiltonian cycle C into maximal paths
that start at some selector vertex s_(i), visit one or more gadgets, and
end at some selector vertex s_(j) without passing through any other
selector vertex. Let’s call each of these maximal paths a “cover path.”
Let P be one such cover path, and orient it going from s_(i) to s_(j).
If P contains the edge (s_(i), [u, u⁽¹⁾, 1]) for some vertex u ∈ V, then
we have shown that one edge incident on s_(i) has the required form.
Assume, then, that P contains the edge (s_(i), [v, v^((degree(v))), 6])
for some vertex v ∈ V. This path enters a gadget from the bottom, as
drawn in Figures 34.16 and 34.17, and it leaves from the top. It might
go through several gadgets, but it always enters from the bottom of a
gadget and leaves from the top. The only edges incident on vertices at
the top of a gadget either go to the bottoms of other gadgets or to
selector vertices. Therefore, after the last gadget in the series of
gadgets visited by P, the edge taken must go to a selector vertex s_(j),
so that P contains an edge of the form (s_(j), [u, u⁽¹⁾, 1]), where [u,
u⁽¹⁾, 1] is a vertex at the top of some gadget. To see that not both
edges incident on s_(j) have this form, simply reverse the direction of
traversing P in the above argument.

Having established that the set V* is well defined, let’s see why it is
a vertex cover for G. We have already established that each cover path
starts at some s_(i), takes the edge (s_(i), [u, u⁽¹⁾, 1]) for some
vertex u ∈ V, passes through all the gadgets corresponding to edges in E
incident on u, and then ends at some selector vertex s_(j). (This
orientation is the reverse of the orientation in the paragraph above.)
Let’s call this cover path P_(u), and by equation (34.4), the vertex
cover V* includes u. Each gadget visited by P_(u) must be Γ_(uv) or
Γ_(vu) for some v ∈ V. For each gadget visited by P_(u), its vertices
are visited by either one or two cover paths. If they are visited by one
cover path, then edge (u, v) ∈ E is covered in G by vertex u. If two
cover paths visit the gadget, then the other cover path must be P_(v),
which implies that v ∈ V*, and edge (u, v) ∈ E is covered by both u and
v. Because each vertex in each gadget is visited by some cover path, we
see that each edge in E is covered by some vertex in V*.

▪

34.5.4    The traveling-salesperson problem

In the traveling-salesperson problem, which is closely related to the
hamiltonian-cycle problem, a salesperson must visit n cities. Let’s
model the problem as a complete graph with n vertices, so that the
salesperson wishes to make a tour, or hamiltonian cycle, visiting each
city exactly once and finishing at the starting city. The salesperson
incurs a nonnegative integer cost c(i, j) to travel from city i to city
j. In the optimization version of the problem, the salesperson wishes to
make the tour whose total cost is minimum, where the total cost is the
sum of the individual costs along the edges of the tour. For example, in
Figure 34.18, a minimum-cost tour is 〈u, w, v, x, u〉, with cost 7. The
formal language for the corresponding decision problem is

[art]

Figure 34.18 An instance of the traveling-salesperson problem. Edges
highlighted in blue represent a minimum-cost tour, with cost 7.

  --------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  TSP = {〈G, c, k〉:   G = (V, E) is a complete graph,
                        c is a function from V × V → ℕ,
                        k ∈ ℕ, and
                        G has a traveling-salesperson tour with cost at most k}.
  --------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------

The following theorem shows that a fast algorithm for the
traveling-salesperson problem is unlikely to exist.

Theorem 34.14

The traveling-salesperson problem is NP-complete.

Proof   We first show that TSP ∈ NP. Given an instance of the problem,
the certificate is the sequence of n vertices in the tour. The
verification algorithm checks that this sequence contains each vertex
exactly once, sums up the edge costs, and checks that the sum is at most
k. This process can certainly be done in polynomial time.

To prove that TSP is NP-hard, we show that HAM-CYCLE ≤_(P) TSP. Given an
instance G = (V, E) of HAM-CYCLE, construct an instance of TSP by
forming the complete graph G′ = (V, E′), where E′ = {(i, j) : i, j ∈ V
and i ≠ j }, with the cost function c defined as

[art]

(Because G is undirected, it contains no self-loops, and so c(v, v) = 1
for all vertices v ∈ V.) The instance of TSP is then 〈G′, c, 0〉, which
can be created in polynomial time.

We now show that graph G has a hamiltonian cycle if and only if graph G′
has a tour of cost at most 0. Suppose that graph G has a hamiltonian
cycle H. Each edge in H belongs to E and thus has cost 0 in G′. Thus, H
is a tour in G′ with cost 0. Conversely, suppose that graph G′ has a
tour H′ of cost at most 0. Since the costs of the edges in E′ are 0 and
1, the cost of tour H′ is exactly 0 and each edge on the tour must have
cost 0. Therefore, H′ contains only edges in E. We conclude that H′ is a
hamiltonian cycle in graph G.

▪

34.5.5    The subset-sum problem

We next consider an arithmetic NP-complete problem. The subset-sum
problem takes as inputs a finite set S of positive integers and an
integer target t > 0. It asks whether there exists a subset S′ ⊆ S whose
elements sum to exactly t. For example, if S = {1, 2, 7, 14, 49, 98,
343, 686, 2409, 2793, 16808, 17206, 117705, 117993} and t = 138457, then
the subset S′ = {1, 2, 7, 98, 343, 686, 2409, 17206, 117705} is a
solution.

As usual, we express the problem as a language:

SUBSET-SUM = {〈S, t〉 : there exists a subset S′ ⊆ S such that t =
Σ_(s∈S′) S}.

As with any arithmetic problem, it is important to recall that our
standard encoding assumes that the input integers are coded in binary.
With this assumption in mind, we can show that the subset-sum problem is
unlikely to have a fast algorithm.

Theorem 34.15

The subset-sum problem is NP-complete.

Proof   To show that SUBSET-SUM ∈ NP, for an instance 〈S, t〉 of the
problem, let the subset S′ be the certificate. A verification algorithm
can check whether t = Σ_(s∈S′) S in polynomial time.

We now show that 3-CNF-SAT ≤_(P) SUBSET-SUM. Given a 3-CNF formula ϕ
over variables x₁, x₂, … , x_(n) with clauses C₁, C₂, … , C_(k), each
containing exactly three distinct literals, the reduction algorithm
constructs an instance 〈S, t〉 of the subset-sum problem such that ϕ is
satisfiable if and only if there exists a subset of S whose sum is
exactly t. Without loss of generality, we make two simplifying
assumptions about the formula ϕ. First, no clause contains both a
variable and its negation, for such a clause is automatically satisfied
by any assignment of values to the variables. Second, each variable
appears in at least one clause, because it does not matter what value is
assigned to a variable that appears in no clauses.

The reduction creates two numbers in set S for each variable x_(i) and
two numbers in S for each clause C_(j). The numbers will be represented
in base 10, with each number containing n + k digits and each digit
corresponding to either one variable or one clause. Base 10 (and other
bases, as we shall see) has the property we need of preventing carries
from lower digits to higher digits.

[art]

Figure 34.19 The reduction of 3-CNF-SAT to SUBSET-SUM. The formula in
3-CNF is ϕ = C₁∧C₂∧C₃∧C₄, where C₁ = (x₁∨¬x₂∨¬x₃), C₂ = (¬x₁∨¬x₂∨¬x₃),
C₃ = (¬x₁∨¬x₂∨x₃), and C₄ = (x₁ ∨ x₂ ∨ x₃). A satisfying assignment of ϕ
is 〈x₁ = 0, x₂ = 0, x₃ = 1〉. The set S produced by the reduction
consists of the base-10 numbers shown: reading from top to bottom, S =
{1001001, 1000110, 100001, 101110, 10011, 11100, 1000, 2000, 100, 200,
10, 20, 1, 2}. The target t is 1114444. The subset S′ ⊆ S is shaded
blue, and it contains [art], and v₃, corresponding to the satisfying
assignment. Subset S′ also contains slack variables s₁, [art], s₃, s₄,
and [art] to achieve the target value of 4 in the digits labeled by C₁
through C₄.

As Figure 34.19 shows, we construct set S and target t as follows. Label
each digit position by either a variable or a clause. The least
significant k digits are labeled by the clauses, and the most
significant n digits are labeled by variables.

- The target t has a 1 in each digit labeled by a variable and a 4 in
  each digit labeled by a clause.

- For each variable x_(i), set S contains two integers v_(i) and [art].
  Each of v_(i) and [art] has a 1 in the digit labeled by x_(i) and 0s
  in the other variable digits. If literal x_(i) appears in clause
  C_(j), then the digit labeled by C_(j) in v_(i) contains a 1. If
  literal ¬x_(i) appears in clause C_(j), then the digit labeled by
  C_(j) in [art] contains a 1. All other digits labeled by clauses in
  v_(i) and [art] are 0.

  All v_(i) and [art] values in set S are unique. Why? For ℓ ≠ i, no
  v_(ℓ) or [art] values can equal v_(i) and [art] in the most
  significant n digits. Furthermore, by our simplifying assumptions
  above, no v_(i) and [art] can be equal in all k least significant
  digits. If v_(i) and [art] were equal, then x_(i) and ¬x_(i) would
  have to appear in exactly the same set of clauses. But we assume that
  no clause contains both x_(i) and ¬x_(i) and that either x_(i) or
  ¬x_(i) appears in some clause, and so there must be some clause C_(j)
  for which v_(i) and [art] differ.

- For each clause C_(j), set S contains two integers s_(j) and [art].
  Each of s_(j) and [art] has 0s in all digits other than the one
  labeled by C_(j). For s_(j), there is a 1 in the C_(j) digit, and
  [art] has a 2 in this digit. These integers are “slack variables,”
  which we use to get each clause-labeled digit position to add to the
  target value of 4.

  Simple inspection of Figure 34.19 demonstrates that all s_(j) and
  [art] values in S are unique in set S.

The greatest sum of digits in any one digit position is 6, which occurs
in the digits labeled by clauses (three 1s from the v_(i) and [art]
values, plus 1 and 2 from the s_(j) and [art] values). Interpreting
these numbers in base 10, therefore, no carries can occur from lower
digits to higher digits.¹²

The reduction can be performed in polynomial time. The set S consists of
2n + 2k values, each of which has n + k digits, and the time to produce
each digit is polynomial in n + k. The target t has n + k digits, and
the reduction produces each in constant time.

Let’s now show that the 3-CNF formula ϕ is satisfiable if and only if
there exists a subset S′ ⊆ S whose sum is t. First, suppose that ϕ has a
satisfying assignment. For i = 1, 2, … , n, if x_(i) = 1 in this
assignment, then include v_(i) in S′. Otherwise, include [art]. In other
words, S′ includes exactly the v_(i) and [art] values that correspond to
literals with the value 1 in the satisfying assignment. Having included
either v_(i) or [art], but not both, for all i, and having put 0 in the
digits labeled by variables in all s_(j) and [art], we see that for each
variable-labeled digit, the sum of the values of S′ must be 1, which
matches those digits of the target t. Because each clause is satisfied,
the clause contains some literal with the value 1. Therefore, each digit
labeled by a clause has at least one 1 contributed to its sum by a v_(i)
or [art] value in S′. In fact, one, two, or three literals may be 1 in
each clause, and so each clause-labeled digit has a sum of 1, 2, or 3
from the v_(i) and [art] values in S′. In Figure 34.19 for example,
literals ¬x₁, ¬x₂, and x₃ have the value 1 in a satisfying assignment.
Each of clauses C₁ and C₄ contains exactly one of these literals, and so
together [art], and v₃ contribute 1 to the sum in the digits for C₁ and
C₄. Clause C₂ contains two of these literals, and [art], and v₃
contribute 2 to the sum in the digit for C₂. Clause C₃ contains all
three of these literals, and [art], and v₃ contribute 3 to the sum in
the digit for C₃. To achieve the target of 4 in each digit labeled by
clause C_(j), include in S′ the appropriate nonempty subset of slack
variables {s_(j), [art] }. In Figure 34.19, S′ includes s₁, [art], s₃,
s₄, and [art]. Since S′ matches the target in all digits of the sum, and
no carries can occur, the values of S′ sum to t.

Now suppose that some subset S′ ⊆ S sums to t. The subset S′ must
include exactly one of v_(i) and [art] for each i = 1, 2, … , n, for
otherwise the digits labeled by variables would not sum to 1. If v_(i) ∈
S′, then set x_(i) = 1. Otherwise, [art], and set x_(i) = 0. We claim
that every clause C_(j), for j = 1, 2, … , k, is satisfied by this
assignment. To prove this claim, note that to achieve a sum of 4 in the
digit labeled by C_(j), the subset S′ must include at least one v_(i) or
[art] value that has a 1 in the digit labeled by C_(j), since the
contributions of the slack variables s_(j) and [art] together sum to at
most 3. If S′ includes a [art] that has a 1 in C_(j)’s position, then
the literal x_(i) appears in clause C_(j). Since x_(i) = 1 when v_(i) ∈
S′, clause C_(j) is satisfied. If S′ includes a [art] that has a 1 in
that position, then the literal ¬x_(i) appears in C_(j). Since x_(i) = 0
when [art] ∈ S′, clause C_(j) is again satisfied. Thus, all clauses of ϕ
are satisfied, which completes the proof.

▪

34.5.6    Reduction strategies

From the reductions in this section, you can see that no single strategy
applies to all NP-complete problems. Some reductions are
straightforward, such as reducing the hamiltonian-cycle problem to the
traveling-salesperson problem. Others are considerably more complicated.
Here are a few things to keep in mind and some strategies that you can
often bring to bear.

Pitfalls

Make sure that you don’t get the reduction backward. That is, in trying
to show that problem Y is NP-complete, you might take a known
NP-complete problem X and give a polynomial-time reduction from Y to X.
That is the wrong direction. The reduction should be from X to Y, so
that a solution to Y gives a solution to X.

Remember also that reducing a known NP-complete problem X to a problem Y
does not in itself prove that Y is NP-complete. It proves that Y is
NP-hard. In order to show that Y is NP-complete, you additionally need
to prove that it’s in NP by showing how to verify a certificate for Y in
polynomial time.

Go from general to specific

When reducing problem X to problem Y, you always have to start with an
arbitrary input to problem X. But you are allowed to restrict the input
to problem Y as much as you like. For example, when reducing 3-CNF
satisfiability to the subset-sum problem, the reduction had to be able
to handle any 3-CNF formula as its input, but the input to the
subset-sum problem that it produced had a particular structure: 2n + 2k
integers in the set, and each integer was formed in a particular way.
The reduction did not need to produce every possible input to the
subset-sum problem. The point is that one way to solve the 3-CNF
satisfiability problem transforms the input into an input to the
subset-sum problem and then uses the answer to the subset-sum problem as
the answer to the 3-CNF satisfiability problem.

Take advantage of structure in the problem you are reducing from

When you are choosing a problem to reduce from, you might consider two
problems in the same domain, but one problem has more structure than the
other. For example, it’s almost always much easier to reduce from 3-CNF
satisfiability than to reduce from formula satisfiability. Boolean
formulas can be arbitrarily complicated, but you can exploit the
structure of 3-CNF formulas when reducing.

Likewise, it is usually more straightforward to reduce from the
hamiltonian-cycle problem than from the traveling-salesperson problem,
even though they are so similar. That’s because you can view the
hamiltonian-cycle problem as taking a complete graph but with edge
weights of just 0 or 1, as they would appear in the adjacency matrix. In
that sense, the hamiltonian-cycle problem has more structure than the
traveling-salesperson problem, in which edge weights are unrestricted.

Look for special cases

Several NP-complete problems are just special cases of other NP-complete
problems. For example, consider the decision version of the 0-1 knapsack
problem: given a set of n items, each with a weight and a value, does
there exist a subset of items whose total weight is at most a given
weight W and whose total value is at least a given value V? You can view
the set-partition problem in Exercise 34.5-5 as a special case of the
0-1 knapsack problem: let the value of each item equal its weight, and
set both W and V to half the total weight. If problem X is NP-hard and
it is a special case of problem Y, then problem Y must be NP-hard as
well. That is because a polynomial-time solution for problem Y
automatically gives a polynomial-time solution for problem X. More
intuitively, problem Y, being more general than problem X, is at least
as hard.

Select an appropriate problem to reduce from

It’s often a good strategy to reduce from a problem in a domain that is
the same as, or at least related to, the domain of the problem that
you’re trying to prove NP-complete. For example, we saw that the
vertex-cover problem—a graph problem—was NP-hard by reducing from the
clique problem—also a graph problem. From the vertex-cover problem, we
reduced to the hamiltonian-cycle problem, and from the hamiltonian-cycle
problem, we reduced to the traveling-salesperson problem. All of these
problems take undirected graphs as inputs.

Sometimes, however, you will find that is it better to cross over from
one domain to another, such as when we reduced from 3-CNF satisfiability
to the clique problem or to the subset-sum problem. 3-CNF satisfiability
often turns out to be a good choice as a problem to reduce from when
crossing domains.

Within graph problems, if you need to select a portion of the graph,
without regard to ordering, then the vertex-cover problem is often a
good place to start. If ordering matters, then consider starting from
the hamiltonian-cycle or hamiltonian-path problem (see Exercise 34.5-6).

Make big rewards and big penalties

The strategy for reducing the hamiltonian-cycle problem with a graph G
to the traveling-salesperson problem encouraged using edges present in G
when choosing edges for the traveling-salesperson tour. The reduction
did so by giving these edges a low weight: 0. In other words, we gave a
big reward for using these edges.

Alternatively, the reduction could have given the edges in G a finite
weight and given edges not in G infinite weight, thereby exacting a
hefty penalty for using edges not in G. With this approach, if each edge
in G has weight W, then the target weight of the traveling-salesperson
tour becomes W · |V|. You can sometimes think of the penalties as a way
to enforce requirements. For example, if the traveling-salesperson tour
includes an edge with infinite weight, then it violates the requirement
that the tour should include only edges belonging to G.

Design gadgets

The reduction from the vertex-cover problem to the hamiltonian-cycle
problem uses the gadget shown in Figure 34.16. This gadget is a subgraph
that is connected to other parts of the constructed graph in order to
restrict the ways that a cycle can visit each vertex in the gadget once.
More generally, a gadget is a component that enforces certain
properties. Gadgets can be complicated, as in the reduction to the
hamiltonian-cycle problem. Or they can be simple: in the reduction of
3-CNF satisfiability to the subset-sum problem, you can view the slack
variables s_(j) and [art] as gadgets enabling each clause-labeled digit
position to achieve the target value of 4.

Exercises

34.5-1

The subgraph-isomorphism problem takes two undirected graphs G₁ and G₂,
and asks whether G₁ is isomorphic to a subgraph of G₂. Show that the
subgraph-isomorphism problem is NP-complete.

34.5-2

Given an integer m × n matrix A and an integer m-vector b, the 0-1
integer-programming problem asks whether there exists an integer
n-vector x with elements in the set {0, 1} such that Ax ≤ b. Prove that
0-1 integer programming is NP-complete. (Hint: Reduce from 3-CNF-SAT.)

34.5-3

The integer linear-programming problem is like the 0-1
integer-programming problem given in Exercise 34.5-2, except that the
values of the vector x may be any integers rather than just 0 or 1.
Assuming that the 0-1 integer-programming problem is NP-hard, show that
the integer linear-programming problem is NP-complete.

34.5-4

Show how to solve the subset-sum problem in polynomial time if the
target value t is expressed in unary.

34.5-5

The set-partition problem takes as input a set S of numbers. The
question is whether the numbers can be partitioned into two sets A and A
= S − A such that Σ_(x∈A) x = Σ_(x∈A) x. Show that the set-partition
problem is NP-complete.

34.5-6

Show that the hamiltonian-path problem is NP-complete.

34.5-7

The longest-simple-cycle problem is the problem of determining a simple
cycle (no repeated vertices) of maximum length in a graph. Formulate a
related decision problem, and show that the decision problem is
NP-complete.

34.5-8

In the half 3-CNF satisfiability problem, the input is a 3-CNF formula ϕ
with n variables and m clauses, where m is even. The question is whether
there exists a truth assignment to the variables of ϕ such that exactly
half the clauses evaluate to 0 and exactly half the clauses evaluate
to 1. Prove that the half 3-CNF satisfiability problem is NP-complete.

34.5-9

The proof that VERTEX-COVER ≤_(P) HAM-CYCLE assumes that the graph G
given as input to the vertex-cover problem has no isolated vertices.
Show how the reduction in the proof can break down if G has an isolated
vertex.

Problems

34-1     Independent set

An independent set of a graph G = (V, E) is a subset V′ ⊆ V of vertices
such that each edge in E is incident on at most one vertex in V′. The
independent-set problem is to find a maximum-size independent set in G.

a. Formulate a related decision problem for the independent-set problem,
and prove that it is NP-complete. (Hint: Reduce from the clique
problem.)

b. You are given a “black-box” subroutine to solve the decision problem
you defined in part (a). Give an algorithm to find an independent set of
maximum size. The running time of your algorithm should be polynomial in
|V | and |E|, counting queries to the black box as a single step.

Although the independent-set decision problem is NP-complete, certain
special cases are polynomial-time solvable.

c. Give an efficient algorithm to solve the independent-set problem when
each vertex in G has degree 2. Analyze the running time, and prove that
your algorithm works correctly.

d. Give an efficient algorithm to solve the independent-set problem when
G is bipartite. Analyze the running time, and prove that your algorithm
works correctly. (Hint: First prove that in a bipartite graph, the size
of the maximimum independent set plus the size of the maximum matching
is equal to |V|. Then use a maximum-matching algorithm (see Section
25.1) as a first step in an algorithm to find an independent set.)

34-2     Bonnie and Clyde

Bonnie and Clyde have just robbed a bank. They have a bag of money and
want to divide it up. For each of the following scenarios, either give a
polynomial-time algorithm to divide the money or prove that the problem
of dividing the money in the manner described is NP-complete. The input
in each case is a list of the n items in the bag, along with the value
of each.

a. The bag contains n coins, but only two different denominations: some
coins are worth x dollars, and some are worth y dollars. Bonnie and
Clyde wish to divide the money exactly evenly.

b. The bag contains n coins, with an arbitrary number of different
denominations, but each denomination is a nonnegative exact power of 2,
so that the possible denominations are 1 dollar, 2 dollars, 4 dollars,
etc. Bonnie and Clyde wish to divide the money exactly evenly.

c. The bag contains n checks, which are, in an amazing coincidence, made
out to “Bonnie or Clyde.” They wish to divide the checks so that they
each get the exact same amount of money.

d. The bag contains n checks as in part (c), but this time Bonnie and
Clyde are willing to accept a split in which the difference is no larger
than 100 dollars.

34-3     Graph coloring

Mapmakers try to use as few colors as possible when coloring countries
on a map, subject to the restriction that if two countries share a
border, they must have different colors. You can model this problem with
an undirected graph G = (V, E) in which each vertex represents a country
and vertices whose respective countries share a border are adjacent.
Then, a k-coloring is a function c : V → {1, 2, … , k} such that c(u) ≠
c(v) for every edge (u, v) ∈ E. In other words, the numbers 1, 2, … , k
represent the k colors, and adjacent vertices must have different
colors. The graph-coloring problem is to determine the minimum number of
colors needed to color a given graph.

a. Give an efficient algorithm to determine a 2-coloring of a graph, if
one exists.

b. Cast the graph-coloring problem as a decision problem. Show that your
decision problem is solvable in polynomial time if and only if the
graph-coloring problem is solvable in polynomial time.

c. Let the language 3-COLOR be the set of graphs that can be 3-colored.
Show that if 3-COLOR is NP-complete, then your decision problem from
part (b) is NP-complete.

[art]

Figure 34.20 The subgraph of G in Problem 34-3 formed by the literal
edges. The special vertices TRUE, FALSE, and RED form a triangle, and
for each variable x_(i), the vertices x_(i), ¬x_(i), and RED form a
triangle.

[art]

Figure 34.21 The gadget corresponding to a clause (x ∨ y ∨ z), used in
Problem 34-3.

To prove that 3-COLOR is NP-complete, you can reduce from 3-CNF-SAT.
Given a formula ϕ of m clauses on n variables x₁, x₂, … , x_(n),
construct a graph G = (V, E) as follows. The set V consists of a vertex
for each variable, a vertex for the negation of each variable, five
vertices for each clause, and three special vertices: TRUE, FALSE, and
RED. The edges of the graph are of two types: “literal” edges that are
independent of the clauses and “clause” edges that depend on the
clauses. As Figure 34.20 shows, the literal edges form a triangle on the
three special vertices TRUE, FALSE, and RED, and they also form a
triangle on x_(i), ¬x_(i), and RED for i = 1, 2, … , n.

d. Consider a graph containing the literal edges. Argue that in any
3-coloring c of such a graph, exactly one of a variable and its negation
is colored c(TRUE) and the other is colored c(FALSE). Then argue that
for any truth assignment for ϕ, there exists a 3-coloring of the graph
containing just the literal edges.

The gadget shown in Figure 34.21 helps to enforce the condition
corresponding to a clause (x ∨ y ∨ z), where x, y, and z are literals.
Each clause requires a unique copy of the five blue vertices in the
figure. They connect as shown to the literals of the clause and the
special vertex TRUE.

e. Argue that if each of x, y, and z is colored c(TRUE) or c(FALSE),
then the gadget is 3-colorable if and only if at least one of x, y, or z
is colored c(TRUE).

f. Complete the proof that 3-COLOR is NP-complete.

34-4     Scheduling with profits and deadlines

You have one computer and a set of n tasks {a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)} requiring
time on the computer. Each task a_(j) requires t_(j) time units on the
computer (its processing time), yields a profit of p_(j), and has a
deadline d_(j). The computer can process only one task at a time, and
task a_(j) must run without interruption for t_(j) consecutive time
units. If task a_(j) completes by its deadline d_(j), you receive a
profit p_(j). If instead task a_(j) completes after its deadline, you
receive no profit. As an optimization problem, given the processing
times, profits, and deadlines for a set of n tasks, you wish to find a
schedule that completes all the tasks and returns the greatest amount of
profit. The processing times, profits, and deadlines are all nonnegative
numbers.

a. State this problem as a decision problem.

b. Show that the decision problem is NP-complete.

c. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the decision problem, assuming
that all processing times are integers from 1 to n. (Hint: Use dynamic
programming.)

d. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the optimization problem,
assuming that all processing times are integers from 1 to n.

Chapter notes

The book by Garey and Johnson [176] provides a wonderful guide to
NP-completeness, discussing the theory at length and providing a
catalogue of many problems that were known to be NP-complete in 1979.
The proof of Theorem 34.13 is adapted from their book, and the list of
NP-complete problem domains at the beginning of Section 34.5 is drawn
from their table of contents. Johnson wrote a series of 23 columns in
the Journal of Algorithms between 1981 and 1992 reporting new
developments in NP-completeness. Fortnow’s book [152] gives a history of
NP-completeness, along with societal implications. Hopcroft, Motwani,
and Ullman [225], Lewis and Papadimitriou [299], Papadimitriou [352],
and Sipser [413] have good treatments of NP-completeness in the context
of complexity theory. NP-completeness and several reductions also appear
in books by Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5], Dasgupta, Papadimitriou, and
Vazirani [107], Johnsonbaugh and Schaefer [239], and Kleinberg and
Tardos [257]. The book by Hromkovič [229] studies various methods for
solving hard problems.

The class P was introduced in 1964 by Cobham [96] and, independently, in
1965 by Edmonds [130], who also introduced the class NP and conjectured
that P ≠ NP. The notion of NP-completeness was proposed in 1971 by Cook
[100], who gave the first NP-completeness proofs for formula
satisfiability and 3-CNF satisfiability. Levin [297] independently
discovered the notion, giving an NP-completeness proof for a tiling
problem. Karp [248] introduced the methodology of reductions in 1972 and
demonstrated the rich variety of NP-complete problems. Karp’s paper
included the original NP-completeness proofs of the clique,
vertex-cover, and hamiltonian-cycle problems. Since then, thousands of
problems have been proven to be NP-complete by many researchers.

Work in complexity theory has shed light on the complexity of computing
approximate solutions. This work gives a new definition of NP using
“probabilistically checkable proofs.” This new definition implies that
for problems such as clique, vertex cover, the traveling-salesperson
problem with the triangle inequality, and many others, computing good
approximate solutions (see Chapter 35) is NP-hard and hence no easier
than computing optimal solutions. An introduction to this area can be
found in Arora’s thesis [21], a chapter by Arora and Lund in Hochbaum
[221], a survey article by Arora [22], a book edited by Mayr, Prömel,
and Steger [319], a survey article by Johnson [237], and a chapter in
the textbook by Arora and Barak [24].

¹ For the Halting Problem and other unsolvable problems, there are
proofs that no algorithm can exist that, for every input, eventually
produces the correct answer. A procedure attempting to solve an
unsolvable problem might always produce an answer but is sometimes
incorrect, or all the answers it produces might be correct but for some
inputs it never produces an answer.

² See the books by Hopcroft and Ullman [228], Lewis and Papadimitriou
[299], or Sipser [413] for a thorough treatment of the Turing-machine
model.

³ The codomain of e need not be binary strings: any set of strings over
a finite alphabet having at least two symbols will do.

⁴ We assume that the algorithm’s output is separate from its input.
Because it takes at least one time step to produce each bit of the
output and the algorithm takes O(T (n)) time steps, the size of the
output is O(T (n)).

⁵ The notation {0, 1}* denotes the set of all strings composed of
symbols from the set {0, 1}.

⁶ Technically, we also require the functions f₁₂ and f₂₁ to “map
noninstances to noninstances.” A noninstance of an encoding e is a
string x ∈ {0, 1}* such that there is no instance i for which e(i) = x.
We require that f₁₂(x) = y for every noninstance x of encoding e₁, where
y is some noninstance of e₂, and that f₂₁(x′) = y′ for every noninstance
x′ of e₂, where y′ is some noninstance of e₁.

⁷ For more on complexity classes, see the seminal paper by Hartmanis and
Stearns [210].

⁸ In a letter dated 17 October 1856 to his friend John T. Graves,
Hamilton [206, p. 624] wrote, “I have found that some young persons have
been much amused by trying a new mathematical game which the Icosion
furnishes, one person sticking five pins in any five consecutive points
… and the other player then aiming to insert, which by the theory in
this letter can always be done, fifteen other pins, in cyclical
succession, so as to cover all the other points, and to end in immediate
proximity to the pin wherewith his antagonist had begun.”

⁹ The name “NP” stands for “nondeterministic polynomial time.” The class
NP was originally studied in the context of nondeterminism, but this
book uses the somewhat simpler yet equivalent notion of verification.
Hopcroft and Ullman [228] give a good presentation of NP-completeness in
terms of nondeterministic models of computation.

¹⁰ On the other hand, if the size of the circuit C is Θ(2^(k)), then an
algorithm whose running time is O(2^(k)) has a running time that is
polynomial in the circuit size. Even if P ≠ NP, this situation would not
contradict the NP-completeness of the problem. The existence of a
polynomial-time algorithm for a special case does not imply that there
is a polynomial-time algorithm for all cases.

¹¹ Technically, a cycle is defined as a sequence of vertices rather than
edges (see Section B.4). In the interest of clarity, we abuse notation
here and define the hamiltonian cycle by its edges.

¹² In fact, any base b ≥ 7 works. The instance at the beginning of this
subsection is the set S and target t in Figure 34.19 interpreted in base
7, with S listed in sorted order.

35        Approximation Algorithms

Many problems of practical significance are NP-complete, yet they are
too important to abandon merely because nobody knows how to find an
optimal solution in polynomial time. Even if a problem is NP-complete,
there may be hope. You have at least three options to get around
NP-completeness. First, if the actual inputs are small, an algorithm
with exponential running time might be fast enough. Second, you might be
able to isolate important special cases that you can solve in polynomial
time. Third, you can try to devise an approach to find a near-optimal
solution in polynomial time (either in the worst case or the expected
case). In practice, near-optimality is often good enough. We call an
algorithm that returns near-optimal solutions an approximation
algorithm. This chapter presents polynomial-time approximation
algorithms for several NP-complete problems.

Performance ratios for approximation algorithms

Suppose that you are working on an optimization problem in which each
potential solution has a positive cost, and you want to find a
near-optimal solution. Depending on the problem, you could define an
optimal solution as one with maximum possible cost or as one with
minimum possible cost, which is to say that the problem might be either
a maximization or a minimization problem.

We say that an algorithm for a problem has an approximation ratio of
ρ(n) if, for any input of size n, the cost C of the solution produced by
the algorithm is within a factor of ρ(n) of the cost C* of an optimal
solution:

[art]

If an algorithm achieves an approximation ratio of ρ(n), we call it a
ρ(n)-approximation algorithm. The definitions of approximation ratio and
ρ(n)-approximation algorithm apply to both minimization and maximization
problems. For a maximization problem, 0 < C ≤ C*, and the ratio C*/C
gives the factor by which the cost of an optimal solution is larger than
the cost of the approximate solution. Similarly, for a minimization
problem, 0 < C* ≤ C, and the ratio C/C* gives the factor by which the
cost of the approximate solution is larger than the cost of an optimal
solution. Because we assume that all solutions have positive cost, these
ratios are always well defined. The approximation ratio of an
approximation algorithm is never less than 1, since C/C* ≤ 1 implies
C*/C ≥ 1. Therefore, a 1-approximation algorithm¹ produces an optimal
solution, and an approximation algorithm with a large approximation
ratio may return a solution that is much worse than optimal.

For many problems, we know of polynomial-time approximation algorithms
with small constant approximation ratios, although for other problems,
the best known polynomial-time approximation algorithms have
approximation ratios that grow as functions of the input size n. An
example of such a problem is the set-cover problem presented in Section
35.3.

Some polynomial-time approximation algorithms can achieve increasingly
better approximation ratios by using more and more computation time. For
such problems, you can trade computation time for the quality of the
approximation. An example is the subset-sum problem studied in Section
35.5. This situation is important enough to deserve a name of its own.

An approximation scheme for an optimization problem is an approximation
algorithm that takes as input not only an instance of the problem, but
also a value ϵ > 0 such that for any fixed ϵ, the scheme is a (1 +
ϵ)-approximation algorithm. We say that an approximation scheme is a
polynomial-time approximation scheme if for any fixed ϵ > 0, the scheme
runs in time polynomial in the size n of its input instance.

The running time of a polynomial-time approximation scheme can increase
very rapidly as ϵ decreases. For example, the running time of a
polynomial-time approximation scheme might be O(n^(2/ϵ)). Ideally, if ϵ
decreases by a constant factor, the running time to achieve the desired
approximation should not increase by more than a constant factor (though
not necessarily the same constant factor by which ϵ decreased).

We say that an approximation scheme is a fully polynomial-time
approximation scheme if it is an approximation scheme and its running
time is polynomial in both 1/ϵ and the size n of the input instance. For
example, the scheme might have a running time of O((1/ϵ)²n³). With such
a scheme, any constant-factor decrease in ϵ comes with a corresponding
constant-factor increase in the running time.

Chapter outline

The first four sections of this chapter present some examples of
polynomial-time approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems, and
the fifth section gives a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme. We
begin in Section 35.1 with a study of the vertex-cover problem, an
NP-complete minimization problem that has an approximation algorithm
with an approximation ratio of 2. Section 35.2 looks at a version of the
traveling-salesperson problem in which the cost function satisfies the
triangle inequality and presents an approximation algorithm with an
approximation ratio of 2. The section also shows that without the
triangle inequality, for any constant ρ ≥ 1, a ρ-approximation algorithm
cannot exist unless P = NP. Section 35.3 applies a greedy method as an
effective approximation algorithm for the set-covering problem,
obtaining a covering whose cost is at worst a logarithmic factor larger
than the optimal cost. Section 35.4 uses randomization and linear
programming to develop two more approximation algorithms. The section
first defines the optimization version of 3-CNF satisfiability and gives
a simple randomized algorithm that produces a solution with an expected
approximation ratio of 8/7. Then Section 35.4 examines a weighted
variant of the vertex-cover problem and exhibits how to use linear
programming to develop a 2-approximation algorithm. Finally, Section
35.5 presents a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for the
subset-sum problem.

35.1    The vertex-cover problem

Section 34.5.2 defined the vertex-cover problem and proved it
NP-complete. Recall that a vertex cover of an undirected graph G = (V,
E) is a subset V′ ⊆ V such that if (u, v) is an edge of G, then either u
∈ V′ or v ∈ V′ (or both). The size of a vertex cover is the number of
vertices in it.

The vertex-cover problem is to find a vertex cover of minimum size in a
given undirected graph. We call such a vertex cover an optimal vertex
cover. This problem is the optimization version of an NP-complete
decision problem.

Even though nobody knows how to find an optimal vertex cover in a graph
G in polynomial time, there is an efficient algorithm to find a vertex
cover that is near-optimal. The approximation algorithm
APPROX-VERTEX-COVER on the facing page takes as input an undirected
graph G and returns a vertex cover whose size is guaranteed to be no
more than twice the size of an optimal vertex cover.

Figure 35.1 illustrates how APPROX-VERTEX-COVER operates on an example
graph. The variable C contains the vertex cover being constructed. Line
1 initializes C to the empty set. Line 2 sets E′ to be a copy of the
edge set G.E of the graph. The while loop of lines 3–6 repeatedly picks
an edge (u, v) from E′, adds its endpoints u and v into C, and deletes
all edges in E′ that u or v covers. Finally, line 7 returns the vertex
cover C. The running time of this algorithm is O(V + E), using adjacency
lists to represent E′.

APPROX-VERTEX-COVER (G)

  --- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   C = Ø
  2   E′ = G.E
  3   while E′ ≠ Ø
  4   let (u, v) be an arbitrary edge of E′
  5   C = C ∪ {u, v}
  6   remove from E′ edge (u, v) and every edge incident on either u or v
  7   return C
  --- ---------------------------------------------------------------------

Theorem 35.1

APPROX-VERTEX-COVER is a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm.

Proof   We have already shown that APPROX-VERTEX-COVER runs in
polynomial time.

The set C of vertices that is returned by APPROX-VERTEX-COVER is a
vertex cover, since the algorithm loops until every edge in G.E has been
covered by some vertex in C.

To see that APPROX-VERTEX-COVER returns a vertex cover that is at most
twice the size of an optimal cover, let A denote the set of edges that
line 4 of APPROX-VERTEX-COVER picked. In order to cover the edges in A,
any vertex cover—in particular, an optimal cover C*—must include at
least one endpoint of each edge in A. No two edges in A share an
endpoint, since once an edge is picked in line 4, all other edges that
are incident on its endpoints are deleted from E′ in line 6. Thus, no
two edges in A are covered by the same vertex from C*, meaning that for
every vertex in C*, there is at most one edge in A, giving the lower
bound

[art]

on the size of an optimal vertex cover. Each execution of line 4 picks
an edge for which neither of its endpoints is already in C, yielding an
upper bound (an exact upper bound, in fact) on the size of the vertex
cover returned:

[art]

Combining equations (35.2) and (35.3) yields

  ----- --- ---------
  |C|   =   2 |A|
        ≤   2 |C*|,
  ----- --- ---------

thereby proving the theorem.

▪

[art]

Figure 35.1 The operation of APPROX-VERTEX-COVER. (a) The input graph G,
which has 7 vertices and 8 edges. (b) The highlighted edge (b, c) is the
first edge chosen by APPROX-VERTEX-COVER. Vertices b and c, in blue, are
added to the set C containing the vertex cover being created. Dashed
edges (a, b), (c, e), and (c, d) are removed since they are now covered
by some vertex in C. (c) Edge (e, f) is chosen, and vertices e and f are
added to C. (d) Edge (d, g) is chosen, and vertices d and g are added to
C. (e) The set C, which is the vertex cover produced by
APPROX-VERTEX-COVER, contains the six vertices b, c, d, e, f, g. (f) The
optimal vertex cover for this problem contains only three vertices: b,
d, and e.

Let us reflect on this proof. At first, you might wonder how you can
possibly prove that the size of the vertex cover returned by
APPROX-VERTEX-COVER is at most twice the size of an optimal vertex
cover, when you don’t even know the size of an optimal vertex cover.
Instead of requiring that you know the exact size of an optimal vertex
cover, you find a lower bound on the size. As Exercise 35.1-2 asks you
to show, the set A of edges that line 4 of APPROX-VERTEX-COVER selects
is actually a maximal matching in the graph G. (A maximal matching is a
matching to which no edges can be added and still have a matching.) The
size of a maximal matching is, as we argued in the proof of Theorem
35.1, a lower bound on the size of an optimal vertex cover. The
algorithm returns a vertex cover whose size is at most twice the size of
the maximal matching A. The approximation ratio comes from relating the
size of the solution returned to the lower bound. We will use this
methodology in later sections as well.

Exercises

35.1-1

Give an example of a graph for which APPROX-VERTEX-COVER always yields a
suboptimal solution.

35.1-2

Prove that the set of edges picked in line 4 of APPROX-VERTEX-COVER
forms a maximal matching in the graph G.

★ 35.1-3

Consider the following heuristic to solve the vertex-cover problem.
Repeatedly select a vertex of highest degree, and remove all of its
incident edges. Give an example to show that this heuristic does not
provide an approximation ratio of 2. (Hint: Try a bipartite graph with
vertices of uniform degree on the left and vertices of varying degree on
the right.)

35.1-4

Give an efficient greedy algorithm that finds an optimal vertex cover
for a tree in linear time.

35.1-5

The proof of Theorem 34.12 on page 1084 illustrates that the
vertex-cover problem and the NP-complete clique problem are
complementary in the sense that an optimal vertex cover is the
complement of a maximum-size clique in the complement graph. Does this
relationship imply that there is a polynomial-time approximation
algorithm with a constant approximation ratio for the clique problem?
Justify your answer.

35.2    The traveling-salesperson problem

The input to the traveling-salesperson problem, introduced in Section
34.5.4, is a complete undirected graph G = (V, E) that has a nonnegative
integer cost c(u, v) associated with each edge (u, v) ∈ E. The goal is
to find a hamiltonian cycle (a tour) of G with minimum cost. As an
extension of our notation, let c(A) denote the total cost of the edges
in the subset A ⊆ E:

[art]

In many practical situations, the least costly way to go from a place u
to a place w is to go directly, with no intermediate steps. Put another
way, cutting out an intermediate stop never increases the cost. Such a
cost function c satisfies the triangle inequality: for all vertices u,
v, w ∈ V,

c(u, w) ≤ c(u, v) + c(v, w).

The triangle inequality seems as though it should naturally hold, and it
is automatically satisfied in several applications. For example, if the
vertices of the graph are points in the plane and the cost of traveling
between two vertices is the ordinary euclidean distance between them,
then the triangle inequality is satisfied. Furthermore, many cost
functions other than euclidean distance satisfy the triangle inequality.

As Exercise 35.2-2 shows, the traveling-salesperson problem is
NP-complete even if you require the cost function to satisfy the
triangle inequality. Thus, you should not expect to find a
polynomial-time algorithm for solving this problem exactly. Your time
would be better spent looking for good approximation algorithms.

In Section 35.2.1, we examine a 2-approximation algorithm for the
traveling-salesperson problem with the triangle inequality. In Section
35.2.2, we show that without the triangle inequality, a polynomial-time
approximation algorithm with a constant approximation ratio does not
exist unless P = NP.

35.2.1    The traveling-salesperson problem with the triangle inequality

Applying the methodology of the previous section, start by computing a
structure—a minimum spanning tree—whose weight gives a lower bound on
the length of an optimal traveling-salesperson tour. Then use the
minimum spanning tree to create a tour whose cost is no more than twice
that of the minimum spanning tree’s weight, as long as the cost function
satisfies the triangle inequality. The procedure APPROX-TSP-TOUR on the
next page implements this approach, calling the minimum-spanning-tree
algorithm MST-PRIM on page 596 as a subroutine. The parameter G is a
complete undirected graph, and the cost function c satisfies the
triangle inequality.

Recall from Section 12.1 that a preorder tree walk recursively visits
every vertex in the tree, listing a vertex when it is first encountered,
before visiting any of its children.

Figure 35.2 illustrates the operation of APPROX-TSP-TOUR. Part (a) of
the figure shows a complete undirected graph, and part (b) shows the
minimum spanning tree T grown from root vertex a by MST-PRIM. Part (c)
shows how a preorder walk of T visits the vertices, and part (d)
displays the corresponding tour, which is the tour returned by
APPROX-TSP-TOUR. Part (e) displays an optimal tour, which is about 23%
shorter.

[art]

Figure 35.2 The operation of APPROX-TSP-TOUR. (a) A complete undirected
graph. Vertices lie on intersections of integer grid lines. For example,
f is one unit to the right and two units up from h. The cost function
between two points is the ordinary euclidean distance. (b) A minimum
spanning tree T of the complete graph, as computed by MST-PRIM. Vertex a
is the root vertex. Only edges in the minimum spanning tree are shown.
The vertices happen to be labeled in such a way that they are added to
the main tree by MST-PRIM in alphabetical order. (c) A walk of T,
starting at a. A full walk of the tree visits the vertices in the order
a, b, c, b, h, b, a, d, e, f, e, g, e, d, a. A preorder walk of T lists
a vertex just when it is first encountered, as indicated by the dot next
to each vertex, yielding the ordering a, b, c, h, d, e, f, g. (d) A tour
obtained by visiting the vertices in the order given by the preorder
walk, which is the tour H returned by APPROX-TSP-TOUR. Its total cost is
approximately 19.074. (e) An optimal tour H* for the original complete
graph. Its total cost is approximately 14.715.

APPROX-TSP-TOUR (G, c)

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 1                                 | select a vertex r ∈ G.V to be a   |
|                                   | “root” vertex                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 2                                 | compute a minimum spanning tree T |
|                                   | for G from root r                 |
|                                   | using MST-PRIM (G, c, r)          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 3                                 | let H be a list of vertices,      |
|                                   | ordered according to when they    |
|                                   | are first visited in a preorder   |
|                                   | tree walk of T                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 4                                 | return the hamiltonian cycle H    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

By Exercise 21.2-2, even with a simple implementation of MST-PRIM, the
running time of APPROX-TSP-TOUR is Θ(V ²). We now show that if the cost
function for an instance of the traveling-salesperson problem satisfies
the triangle inequality, then APPROX-TSP-TOUR returns a tour whose cost
is at most twice the cost of an optimal tour.

Theorem 35.2

When the triangle inequality holds, APPROX-TSP-TOUR is a polynomial-time
2-approximation algorithm for the traveling-salesperson problem.

Proof   We have already seen that APPROX-TSP-TOUR runs in polynomial
time.

Let H* denote an optimal tour for the given set of vertices. Deleting
any edge from a tour yields a spanning tree, and each edge cost is
nonnegative. Therefore, the weight of the minimum spanning tree T
computed in line 2 of APPROX-TSP-TOUR provides a lower bound on the cost
of an optimal tour:

[art]

A full walk of T lists the vertices when they are first visited and also
whenever they are returned to after a visit to a subtree. Let’s call
this full walk W. The full walk of our example gives the order

a, b, c, b, h, b, a, d, e, f, e, g, e, d, a.

Since the full walk traverses every edge of T exactly twice, by
extending the definition of the cost c in the natural manner to handle
multisets of edges, we have

[art]

Inequality (35.4) and equation (35.5) imply that

[art]

and so the cost of W is within a factor of 2 of the cost of an optimal
tour.

Of course, the full walk W is not a tour, since it visits some vertices
more than once. By the triangle inequality, however, deleting a visit to
any vertex from W does not increase the cost. (When a vertex v is
deleted from W between visits to u and w, the resulting ordering
specifies going directly from u to w.) Repeatedly apply this operation
on each visit to a vertex after the first time it’s visited in W, so
that W is left with only the first visit to each vertex. In our example,
this process leaves the ordering

a, b, c, h, d, e, f, g.

This ordering is the same as that obtained by a preorder walk of the
tree T. Let H be the cycle corresponding to this preorder walk. It is a
hamiltonian cycle, since every vertex is visited exactly once, and in
fact it is the cycle computed by APPROX-TSP-TOUR. Since H is obtained by
deleting vertices from the full walk W, we have

[art]

Combining inequalities (35.6) and (35.7) gives c(H) ≤ 2c(H*), which
completes the proof.

▪

Despite the small approximation ratio provided by Theorem 35.2,
APPROX-TSP-TOUR is usually not the best practical choice for this
problem. There are other approximation algorithms that typically perform
much better in practice. (See the references at the end of this
chapter.)

35.2.2    The general traveling-salesperson problem

When the cost function c does not satisfy the triangle inequality, there
is no way to find good approximate tours in polynomial time unless P =
NP.

Theorem 35.3

If P ≠ NP, then for any constant ρ ≥ 1, there is no polynomial-time
approximation algorithm with approximation ratio ρ for the general
traveling-salesperson problem.

Proof   The proof is by contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that for
some number ρ ≥ 1, there is a polynomial-time approximation algorithm A
with approximation ratio ρ. Without loss of generality, assume that ρ is
an integer, by rounding it up if necessary. We will show how to use A to
solve instances of the hamiltonian-cycle problem (defined in Section
34.2) in polynomial time. Since Theorem 34.13 on page 1085 says that the
hamiltonian-cycle problem is NP-complete, Theorem 34.4 on page 1063
implies that if it has a polynomial-time algorithm, then P = NP.

Let G = (V, E) be an instance of the hamiltonian-cycle problem. We will
show how to determine efficiently whether G contains a hamiltonian cycle
by making use of the hypothesized approximation algorithm A. Convert G
into an instance of the traveling-salesperson problem as follows. Let G′
= (V, E′) be the complete graph on V, that is,

E′ = {(u, v) : u, v ∈ V and u ≠ v}.

Assign an integer cost to each edge in E′ as follows:

[art]

Given a representation of G, it takes time polynomial in |V| and |E| to
create representations of G′ and c.

Now consider the traveling-salesperson problem (G′, c). If the original
graph G has a hamiltonian cycle H, then the cost function c assigns to
each edge of H a cost of 1, and so (G′, c) contains a tour of cost |V|.
On the other hand, if G does not contain a hamiltonian cycle, then any
tour of G′ must use some edge not in E. But any tour that uses an edge
not in E has a cost of at least

  ------------------------- --- -------------
  (ρ |V| + 1) + (|V| − 1)   =   ρ |V| + |V|
                            >   ρ |V|.
  ------------------------- --- -------------

Because edges not in G are so costly, there is a gap of at least ρ|V|
between the cost of a tour that is a hamiltonian cycle in G (cost |V|)
and the cost of any other tour (cost at least ρ|V| + |V|). Therefore,
the cost of a tour that is not a hamiltonian cycle in G is at least a
factor of ρ + 1 greater than the cost of a tour that is a hamiltonian
cycle in G.

What happens upon applying the approximation algorithm A to the
traveling-salesperson problem (G′, c)? Because A is guaranteed to return
a tour of cost no more than ρ times the cost of an optimal tour, if G
contains a hamiltonian cycle, then A must return it. If G has no
hamiltonian cycle, then A returns a tour of cost more than ρ |V|.
Therefore, using A solves the hamiltonian-cycle problem in polynomial
time.

▪

The proof of Theorem 35.3 serves as an example of a general technique to
prove that no good approximation algorithm exists for a particular
problem. Given an NP-hard decision problem X, produce in polynomial time
a minimization problem Y such that “yes” instances of X correspond to
instances of Y with value at most k (for some k), but that “no”
instances of X correspond to instances of Y with value greater than ρk.
This technique shows that, unless P = NP, there is no polynomial-time
ρ-approximation algorithm for problem Y.

Exercises

35.2-1

Let G = (V, E) be a complete undirected graph containing at least 3
vertices, and let c be a cost function that satisfies the triangle
inequality. Prove that c(u, v) ≥ 0 for all u, v ∈ V.

35.2-2

Show how in polynomial time to transform one instance of the
traveling-salesperson problem into another instance whose cost function
satisfies the triangle inequality. The two instances must have the same
set of optimal tours. Explain why such a polynomial-time transformation
does not contradict Theorem 35.3, assuming that P ≠ NP.

35.2-3

Consider the following closest-point heuristic for building an
approximate traveling-salesperson tour whose cost function satisfies the
triangle inequality. Begin with a trivial cycle consisting of a single
arbitrarily chosen vertex. At each step, identify the vertex u that is
not on the cycle but whose distance to any vertex on the cycle is
minimum. Suppose that the vertex on the cycle that is nearest u is
vertex v. Extend the cycle to include u by inserting u just after v.
Repeat until all vertices are on the cycle. Prove that this heuristic
returns a tour whose total cost is not more than twice the cost of an
optimal tour.

35.2-4

A solution to the bottleneck traveling-salesperson problem is the
hamiltonian cycle that minimizes the cost of the most costly edge in the
cycle. Assuming that the cost function satisfies the triangle
inequality, show that there exists a polynomial-time approximation
algorithm with approximation ratio 3 for this problem. (Hint: Show
recursively how to visit all the nodes in a bottleneck spanning tree, as
discussed in Problem 21-4 on page 601, exactly once by taking a full
walk of the tree and skipping nodes, but without skipping more than two
consecutive intermediate nodes. Show that the costliest edge in a
bottleneck spanning tree has a cost bounded from above by the cost of
the costliest edge in a bottleneck hamiltonian cycle.)

35.2-5

Suppose that the vertices for an instance of the traveling-salesperson
problem are points in the plane and that the cost c(u, v) is the
euclidean distance between points u and v. Show that an optimal tour
never crosses itself.

35.2-6

Adapt the proof of Theorem 35.3 to show that for any constant c ≥ 0,
there is no polynomial-time approximation algorithm with approximation
ratio |V|^(c) for the general traveling-salesperson problem.

35.3    The set-covering problem

The set-covering problem is an optimization problem that models many
problems that require resources to be allocated. Its corresponding
decision problem generalizes the NP-complete vertex-cover problem and is
therefore also NP-hard. The approximation algorithm developed to handle
the vertex-cover problem doesn’t apply here, however. Instead, this
section investigates a simple greedy heuristic with a logarithmic
approximation ratio. That is, as the size of the instance gets larger,
the size of the approximate solution may grow, relative to the size of
an optimal solution. Because the logarithm function grows rather slowly,
however, this approximation algorithm may nonetheless give useful
results.

An instance (X, ℱ) of the set-covering problem consists of a finite set
X and a family ℱ of subsets of X, such that every element of X belongs
to at least one subset in ℱ:

[art]

We say that a subfamily C ⊆ ℱ covers a set of elements U if

[art]

The problem is to find a minimum-size subfamily C ⊆ ℱ whose members
cover all of X:

[art]

Figure 35.3 illustrates the set-covering problem. The size of C is the
number of sets it contains, rather than the number of individual
elements in these sets, since every subfamily C that covers X must
contain all |X| individual elements. In Figure 35.3, the minimum set
cover has size 3.

The set-covering problem abstracts many commonly arising combinatorial
problems. As a simple example, suppose that X represents a set of skills
that are needed to solve a problem and that you have a given set of
people available to work on the problem. You wish to form a committee,
containing as few people as possible, such that for every requisite
skill in X, at least one member of the committee has that skill. The
decision version of the set-covering problem asks whether a covering
exists with size at most k, where k is an additional parameter specified
in the problem instance. The decision version of the problem is
NP-complete, as Exercise 35.3-2 asks you to show.

A greedy approximation algorithm

The greedy method in the procedure GREEDY-SET-COVER on the facing page
works by picking, at each stage, the set S that covers the greatest
number of remaining elements that are uncovered. In the example of
Figure 35.3, GREEDY-SET-COVER adds to C, in order, the sets S₁, S₄, and
S₅, followed by either S₃ or S₆.

[art]

Figure 35.3 An instance (X, ℱ) of the set-covering problem, where X
consists of the 12 tan points and ℱ = {S₁, S₂, S₃, S₄, S₅, S₆, S₄, S₅},
Each set S_(i) ∈ ℱ is outlined in blue. A minimum-size set cover C =
{S₃, S₄, S₅}, with size 3. The greedy algorithm produces a cover of size
4 by selecting either the sets S₁, S₄, S₅, and S₃ or the sets S₁, S₄,
S₅, and S₆, in order.

GREEDY-SET-COVER (X, ℱ)

  --- -----------------------------------------
  1   U₀ = X
  2   C = Ø
  3   i = 0
  4   while U_(i) ≠ Ø
  5   select S ∈ ℱ that maximizes |S ∩ U_(i)|
  6   U_(i+1) = U_(i) − S
  7   C = C ∪ {S}
  8   i = i + 1
  9   return C
  --- -----------------------------------------

The greedy algorithm works as follows. At the start of each iteration,
U_(i) is a subset of X containing the remaining uncovered elements, with
the initial subset U₀ containing all the elements in X. The set C
contains the subfamily being constructed. Line 5 is the greedy
decision-making step, choosing a subset S that covers as many uncovered
elements as possible (breaking ties arbitrarily). After S is selected,
line 6 updates the set of remaining uncovered elements, denoting it by
U_(i+1), and line 7 places S into C. When the algorithm terminates, C is
a subfamily of ℱ that covers X.

Analysis

We now show that the greedy algorithm returns a set cover that is not
too much larger than an optimal set cover.

Theorem 35.4

The procedure GREEDY-SET-COVER run on a set X and family of subsets ℱ is
a polynomial-time O(lg X)-approximation algorithm.

Proof   Let’s first show that the algorithm runs in time that is
polynomial in |X| and |ℱ|. The number of iterations of the loop in lines
4–7 is bounded above by min {|X|, |ℱ|} = O(|X| + |ℱ|). The loop body can
be implemented to run in O(|X|·|ℱ|) time. Thus the algorithm runs in
O(|X|·|ℱ|·(|X|+|ℱ|)) time, which is polynomial in the input size.
(Exercise 35.3-3 asks for a linear-time algorithm.)

To prove the approximation bound, let C* be an optimal set cover for the
original instance (X, ℱ), and let k = |C*|. Since C* is also a set cover
of each subset U_(i) of X constructed by the algorithm, we know that any
subset U_(i) constructed by the algorithm can be covered by k sets.
Therefore, if (U_(i), ℱ) is an instance of the set-covering problem, its
optimal set cover has size at most k.

If an optimal set cover for an instance (U_(i), ℱ) has size at most k,
at least one of the sets in C covers at least |U_(i)|/k new elements.
Thus, line 5 of GREEDY-SET-COVER, which chooses a set with the maximum
number of uncovered elements, must choose a set in which the number of
newly covered elements is at least |U_(i)|/k. These elements are removed
when constructing U_(i+1), giving

[art]

Iterating inequality (35.8) gives

  ------ --- ----------------------------------
  |U₀|   =   |X|,
  |U₁|   ≤   |U₀| (1 − 1/k),
  |U₂|   ≤   |U₁| (1 − 1/k) = |U| (1 − 1/k)²,
  ------ --- ----------------------------------

and in general

[art]

The algorithm stops when U_(i) = Ø, which means that |U_(i)| < 1. Thus
an upper bound on the number of iterations of the algorithm is the
smallest value of i for which |U_(i)| < 1.

Since 1 + x ≤ e^(x) for all real x (see inequality (3.14) on page 66),
by letting x = −1/k, we have 1 − 1/k ≤ e^(−1/k), so that (1 − 1/k)^(k) ≤
(e^(−1/k))^(k) = 1/e. Denoting the number i of iterations by ck for some
nonnegative integer c, we want c such that

[art]

Multiplying both sides by e^(c) and then taking the natural logarithm of
both sides gives c ≥ ln |X|, so we can choose for c any integer that is
at least ln |X|. We choose c = ⌈ln |X|⌉. Since i = ck is an upper bound
on the number of iterations, which equals the size of C, and k = |C*|,
we have |C| ≤ i = ck = c |C*| = |C*| ⌈ln |X|⌉, and the theorem follows.

▪

Exercises

35.3-1

Consider each of the following words as a set of letters: {arid, dash,
drain, heard, lost, nose, shun, slate, snare, thread}. Show which set
cover GREEDY-SET-COVER produces when you break ties in favor of the word
that appears first in the dictionary.

35.3-2

Show that the decision version of the set-covering problem is
NP-complete by reducing the vertex-cover problem to it.

35.3-3

Show how to implement GREEDY-SET-COVER to run in O(Σ_(S∈ℱ) |S|) time.

35.3-4

The proof of Theorem 35.4 says that when GREEDY-SET-COVER, run on the
instance (X, ℱ), returns the subfamily C, then |C| ≤ |C*| ⌈ln X⌉. Show
that the following weaker bound is trivially true:

|C| ≤ |C*| max {|S| : S ∈ ℱ}.

35.3-5

GREEDY-SET-COVER can return a number of different solutions, depending
on how it breaks ties in line 5. Give a procedure BAD-SET-COVER-INSTANCE
(n) that returns an n-element instance of the set-covering problem for
which, depending on how line 5 breaks ties, GREEDY-SET-COVER can return
a number of different solutions that is exponential in n.

35.4    Randomization and linear programming

This section studies two useful techniques for designing approximation
algorithms: randomization and linear programming. It starts with a
simple randomized algorithm for an optimization version of 3-CNF
satisfiability, and then it shows how to design an approximation
algorithm for a weighted version of the vertex-cover problem based on
linear programming. This section only scratches the surface of these two
powerful techniques. The chapter notes give references for further study
of these areas.

A randomized approximation algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability

Just as some randomized algorithms compute exact solutions, some
randomized algorithms compute approximate solutions. We say that a
randomized algorithm for a problem has an approximation ratio of ρ(n)
if, for any input of size n, the expected cost C of the solution
produced by the randomized algorithm is within a factor of ρ(n) of the
cost C* of an optimal solution:

[art]

We call a randomized algorithm that achieves an approximation ratio of
ρ(n) a randomized ρ(n)-approximation algorithm. In other words, a
randomized approximation algorithm is like a deterministic approximation
algorithm, except that the approximation ratio is for an expected cost.

A particular instance of 3-CNF satisfiability, as defined in Section
34.4, may or may not be satisfiable. In order to be satisfiable, there
must exist an assignment of the variables so that every clause evaluates
to 1. If an instance is not satisfiable, you might instead want to know
how “close” to satisfiable it is, that is, find an assignment of the
variables that satisfies as many clauses as possible. We call the
resulting maximization problem MAX-3-CNF satisfiability. The input to
MAX-3-CNF satisfiability is the same as for 3-CNF satisfiability, and
the goal is to return an assignment of the variables that maximizes the
number of clauses evaluating to 1. You might be surprised that randomly
setting each variable to 1 with probability 1/2 and to 0 with
probability 1/2 yields a randomized 8/7-approximation algorithm, but
we’re about to see why. Recall that the definition of 3-CNF
satisfiability from Section 34.4 requires each clause to consist of
exactly three distinct literals. We now further assume that no clause
contains both a variable and its negation. Exercise 35.4-1 asks you to
remove this last assumption.

Theorem 35.5

Given an instance of MAX-3-CNF satisfiability with n variables x₁, x₂, …
, x_(n) and m clauses, the randomized algorithm that independently sets
each variable to 1 with probability 1/2 and to 0 with probability 1/2 is
a randomized 8/7-approximation algorithm.

Proof   Suppose that each variable is independently set to 1 with
probability 1/2 and to 0 with probability 1/2. Define, for i = 1, 2, … ,
m, the indicator random variable

Y_(i) = I {clause i is satisfied},

so that Y_(i) = 1 as long as at least one of the literals in the ith
clause is set to 1. Since no literal appears more than once in the same
clause, and since we assume that no variable and its negation appear in
the same clause, the settings of the three literals in each clause are
independent. A clause is not satisfied only if all three of its literals
are set to 0, and so Pr {clause i is not satisfied} = (1/2)³ = 1/8.
Thus, we have Pr {clause i is satisfied} = 1 − 1/8 = 7/8, and Lemma 5.1
on page 130 gives E [Y_(i)] = 7/8. Let Y be the number of satisfied
clauses overall, so that Y = Y₁ + Y₂ + ⋯ + Y_(m). Then, we have

[art]

Since m is an upper bound on the number of satisfied clauses, the
approximation ratio is at most m/(7m/8) = 8/7.

▪

Approximating weighted vertex cover using linear programming

The minimum-weight vertex-cover problem takes as input an undirected
graph G = (V, E) in which each vertex v ∈ V has an associated positive
weight w(v). The weight w(V′) of a vertex cover V′ ⊆ V is the sum of the
weights of its vertices: w(V′) = Σ_(v∈V′) w(v). The goal is to find a
vertex cover of minimum weight.

The approximation algorithm for unweighted vertex cover from Section
35.1 won’t work here, because the solution it returns could be far from
optimal for the weighted problem. Instead, we’ll first compute a lower
bound on the weight of the minimum-weight vertex cover, by using a
linear program. Then we’ll “round” this solution and use it to obtain a
vertex cover.

Start by associating a variable x(v) with each vertex v ∈ V, and require
that x(v) equals either 0 or 1 for each v ∈ V. The vertex cover includes
v if and only if x(v) = 1. Then the constraint that for any edge (u, v),
at least one of u and v must belong to the vertex cover can be expressed
as x(u) + x(v) ≥ 1. This view gives rise to the following 0-1 integer
program for finding a minimum-weight vertex cover:

[art]

subject to

[art]

In the special case in which all the weights w(v) equal 1, this
formulation is the optimization version of the NP-hard vertex-cover
problem. Let’s remove the constraint that x(v) ∈ {0, 1} and replace it
by 0 ≤ x(v) ≤ 1, resulting in the following linear program:

[art]

subject to

[art]

We refer to this linear program as the linear-programming relaxation.
Any feasible solution to the 0-1 integer program in lines
(35.12)–(35.14) is also a feasible solution to its linear-programming
relaxation in lines (35.15)–(35.18). Therefore, the value of an optimal
solution to the linear-programming relaxation provides a lower bound on
the value of an optimal solution to the 0-1 integer program, and hence a
lower bound on the optimal weight in the minimum-weight vertex-cover
problem.

The procedure APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC on the facing page starts with a
solution to the linear-programming relaxation and uses it to construct
an approximate solution to the minimum-weight vertex-cover problem. The
procedure works as follows. Line 1 initializes the vertex cover to be
empty. Line 2 formulates the linear-programming relaxation in lines
(35.15)–(35.18) and then solves this linear program. An optimal solution
gives each vertex v an associated value x(v), where 0 ≤ x(v) ≤ 1. The
procedure uses this value to guide the choice of which vertices to add
to the vertex cover C in lines 3–5: the vertex cover C includes vertex v
if and only if x(v) ≥ 1/2. In effect, the procedure “rounds” each
fractional variable in the solution to the linear-programming relaxation
to either 0 or 1 in order to obtain a solution to the 0-1 integer
program in lines (35.12)–(35.14). Finally, line 6 returns the vertex
cover C.

Theorem 35.6

Algorithm APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a polynomial-time2-approximation
algorithm for the minimum-weight vertex-cover problem.

APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC (G, w)

  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1   C = Ø
  2   compute x, an optimal solution to the linear-programming relaxation in lines (35.15)–(35.18)
  3   for each vertex v ∈ V
  4   if x(v) ≥ 1/2
  5   C = C ∪ {v}
  6   return C
  --- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Proof   Because there is a polynomial-time algorithm to solve the linear
program in line 2, and because the for loop of lines 3–5 runs in
polynomial time, APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a polynomial-time algorithm.

It remains to show that APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a 2-approximation
algorithm. Let C* be an optimal solution to the minimum-weight
vertex-cover problem, and let z* be the value of an optimal solution to
the linear-programming relaxation in lines (35.15)–(35.18). Since an
optimal vertex cover is a feasible solution to the linear-programming
relaxation, z* must be a lower bound on w(C*), that is,

[art]

Next, we claim that rounding the fractional values of the variables x(v)
in lines 3–5 produces a set C that is a vertex cover and satisfies w(C)
≤ 2z*. To see that C is a vertex cover, consider any edge (u, v) ∈ E. By
constraint (35.16), we know that x(u) + x(v) ≥ 1, which implies that at
least one of x(u) and x(v) is at least 1/2. Therefore, at least one of u
and v is included in the vertex cover, and so every edge is covered.

Now we consider the weight of the cover. We have

[art]

Combining inequalities (35.19) and (35.20) gives

w(C) ≤ 2z* ≤ 2w(C*),

and hence APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a 2-approximation algorithm.

▪

Exercises

35.4-1

Show that even if a clause is allowed to contain both a variable and its
negation, randomly setting each variable to 1 with probability 1/2 and
to 0 with probability 1/2 still yields a randomized 8/7-approximation
algorithm.

35.4-2

The MAX-CNF satisfiability problem is like the MAX-3-CNF satisfiability
problem, except that it does not restrict each clause to have exactly
three literals. Give a randomized 2-approximation algorithm for the
MAX-CNF satisfiability problem.

35.4-3

In the MAX-CUT problem, the input is an unweighted undirected graph G =
(V, E). We define a cut (S, V − S) as in Chapter 21 and the weight of a
cut as the number of edges crossing the cut. The goal is to find a cut
of maximum weight. Suppose that each vertex v is randomly and
independently placed into S with probability 1/2 and into V −S with
probability 1/2. Show that this algorithm is a randomized
2-approximation algorithm.

35.4-4

Show that the constraints in line (35.17) are redundant in the sense
that removing them from the linear-programming relaxation in lines
(35.15)–(35.18) yields a linear program for which any optimal solution x
must satisfy x(v) ≤ 1 for each v ∈ V.

35.5    The subset-sum problem

Recall from Section 34.5.5 that an instance of the subset-sum problem is
given by a pair (S, t), where S is a set {x₁, x₂, … , x_(n)} of positive
integers and t is a positive integer. This decision problem asks whether
there exists a subset of S that adds up exactly to the target value t.
As we saw in Section 34.5.5, this problem is NP-complete.

The optimization problem associated with this decision problem arises in
practical applications. The optimization problem seeks a subset of {x₁,
x₂, … , x_(n)} whose sum is as large as possible but not larger than t.
For example, consider a truck that can carry no more than t pounds,
which is to be loaded with up to n different boxes, the ith of which
weighs x_(i) pounds. How heavy a load can the truck take without
exceeding the t-pound weight limit?

We start this section with an exponential-time algorithm to compute the
optimal value for this optimization problem. Then we show how to modify
the algorithm so that it becomes a fully polynomial-time approximation
scheme. (Recall that a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme has a
running time that is polynomial in 1/ϵ as well as in the size of the
input.)

An exponential-time exact algorithm

Suppose that you compute, for each subset S′ of S, the sum of the
elements in S′, and then you select, among the subsets whose sum does
not exceed t, the one whose sum is closest to t. This algorithm returns
the optimal solution, but it might take exponential time. To implement
this algorithm, you can use an iterative procedure that, in iteration i,
computes the sums of all subsets of {x₁, x₂, … , x_(i)}, using as a
starting point the sums of all subsets of {x₁, x₂, … , x_(i−1)}. In
doing so, you would realize that once a particular subset S′ has a sum
exceeding t, there is no reason to maintain it, since no superset of S′
can be an optimal solution. Let’s see how to implement this strategy.

The procedure EXACT-SUBSET-SUM takes an input set S = {x₁, x₂, … ,
x_(n)}, the size n = |S|, and a target value t. This procedure
iteratively computes L_(i), the list of sums of all subsets of {x₁, … ,
x_(i)} that do not exceed t, and then it returns the maximum value in
L_(n).

If L is a list of positive integers and x is another positive integer,
then let L + x denote the list of integers derived from L by increasing
each element of L by x. For example, if L = 〈1, 2, 3, 5, 9〉, then L +
2 = 〈3, 4, 5, 7, 11〉. This notation extends to sets, so that

S + x = {s + x : s ∈ S}.

EXACT-SUBSET-SUM (S, n, t)

  --- --------------------------------------------------------
  1   L₀ = 〈0〉
  2   for i = 1 to n
  3   L_(i) = MERGE-LISTS (L_(i−1), L_(i−1) + x_(i))
  4   remove from L_(i) every element that is greater than t
  5   return the largest element in L_(n)
  --- --------------------------------------------------------

EXACT-SUBSET-SUM invokes an auxiliary procedure MERGE-LISTS (L, L′),
which returns the sorted list that is the merge of its two sorted input
lists L and L′, with duplicate values removed. Like the MERGE procedure
we used in merge sort on page 36, MERGE-LISTS runs in O(|L| + |L′|)
time. We omit the pseudocode for MERGE-LISTS.

To see how EXACT-SUBSET-SUM works, let P_(i) denote the set of values
obtained by selecting each (possibly empty) subset of {x₁, x₂, … ,
x_(i)} and summing its members. For example, if S = {1, 4, 5}, then

  ---- --- -------------------------
  P₁   =   {0, 1},
  P₂   =   {0, 1, 4, 5},
  P₃   =   {0, 1, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10}.
  ---- --- -------------------------

Given the identity

[art]

you can prove by induction on i (see Exercise 35.5-1) that the list
L_(i) is a sorted list containing every element of P_(i) whose value is
not more than t. Since the length of L_(i) can be as much as 2^(i),
EXACT-SUBSET-SUM is an exponential-time algorithm in general, although
it is a polynomial-time algorithm in the special cases in which t is
polynomial in |S| or all the numbers in S are bounded by a polynomial in
|S|.

A fully polynomial-time approximation scheme

The key to devising a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for the
subset-sum problem is to “trim” each list L_(i) after it is created.
Here’s the idea behind trimming: if two values in L are close to each
other, then since the goal is just an approximate solution, there is no
need to maintain both of them explicitly. More precisely, use a trimming
parameter δ such that 0 < δ < 1. When trimming a list L by δ, remove as
many elements from L as possible, in such a way that if L′ is the result
of trimming L, then for every element y that was removed from L, some
element z still in L′ approximates y. For z to approximate y, it must be
no greater than y and also within a factor of 1 + δ of y, so that

[art]

You can think of such a z as “representing” y in the new list L′. Each
removed element y is represented by a remaining element z satisfying
inequality (35.22). For example, suppose that δ = 0.1 and

L = 〈10, 11, 12, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 29〉.

Then trimming L results in

L′ = 〈10, 12, 15, 20, 23, 29〉,

where the deleted value 11 is represented by 10, the deleted values 21
and 22 are represented by 20, and the deleted value 24 is represented by
23. Because every element of the trimmed version of the list is also an
element of the original version of the list, trimming can dramatically
decrease the number of elements kept while keeping a close (and slightly
smaller) representative value in the list for each deleted element.

The procedure TRIM trims list L = 〈y₁, y₂, … , y_(m)〉 in Θ(m) time,
given L and the trimming parameter δ. It assumes that L is sorted into
monotonically increasing order. The output of the procedure is a
trimmed, sorted list. The procedure scans the elements of L in
monotonically increasing order. A number is appended onto the returned
list L′ only if it is the first element of L or if it cannot be
represented by the most recent number placed into L′.

TRIM (L, δ)

+---+---------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1 | let m be the length of L                                        |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2 | L′ = 〈y₁〉                                                     |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3 | last = y₁                                                       |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4 | for i = 2 to m                                                  |
+---+---------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5 | if y_(i) > last · (1 + δ) | // y_(i) ≥ last because L is sorted |
+---+---------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6 | append y_(i) onto the end of L′                                 |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 7 | last = y_(i)                                                    |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| 8 | return L′                                                       |
+---+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

Given the procedure TRIM, the procedure APPROX-SUBSET-SUM on the
following page implements the approximation scheme. This procedure takes
as input a set S = {x₁, x₂, … , x_(n)} of n integers (in arbitrary
order), the size n = |S|, the target integer t, and an approximation
parameter ϵ, where

[art]

It returns a value z* whose value is within a factor of 1 + ϵ of the
optimal solution.

The APPROX-SUBSET-SUM procedure works as follows. Line 1 initializes the
list L₀ to be the list containing just the element 0. The for loop in
lines 2–5 computes L_(i) as a sorted list containing a suitably trimmed
version of the set P_(i), with all elements larger than t removed. Since
the procedure creates L_(i) from L_(i−1), it must ensure that the
repeated trimming doesn’t introduce too much compounded inaccuracy.
That’s why instead of the trimming parameter being ϵ in the call to
TRIM, it has the smaller value ϵ/2n. We’ll soon see that
APPROX-SUBSET-SUM returns a correct approximation if one exists.

APPROX-SUBSET-SUM (S, n, t, ϵ)

  --- --------------------------------------------------------
  1   L₀ = 〈0〉
  2   for i = 1 to n
  3   L_(i) = MERGE-LISTS (L_(i−1), L_(i−1) + x_(i))
  4   L_(i) = TRIM (L_(i), ϵ/2n)
  5   remove from L_(i) every element that is greater than t
  6   let z* be the largest value in L_(n)
  7   return z*
  --- --------------------------------------------------------

As an example, suppose that APPROX-SUBSET-SUM is given

S = 〈104, 102, 201, 101〉

with t = 308 and ϵ = 0.40. The trimming parameter δ is ϵ/2n = 0.40/80 =
0.05. The procedure computes the following values on the indicated
lines:

  --------- ------------------------------------------------
  line 1:   L₀ = 〈0〉,
  line 3:   L₁ = 〈0, 104〉,
  line 4:   L₁ = 〈0, 104〉,
  line 5:   L₁ = 〈0, 104〉,
  line 3:   L₂ = 〈0, 102, 104, 206〉,
  line 4:   L₂ = 〈0, 102, 206〉,
  line 5:   L₂ = 〈0, 102, 206〉,
  line 3:   L₃ = 〈0, 102, 201, 206, 303, 407〉,
  line 4:   L₃ = 〈0, 102, 201, 303, 407〉,
  line 5:   L₃ = 〈0, 102, 201, 303〉,
  line 3:   L₄ = 〈0, 101, 102, 201, 203, 302, 303, 404〉,
  line 4:   L₄ = 〈0, 101, 201, 302, 404〉,
  line 5:   L₄ = 〈0, 101, 201, 302〉.
  --------- ------------------------------------------------

The procedure returns z* = 302 as its answer, which is well within ϵ =
40% of the optimal answer 307 = 104 + 102 + 101. In fact, it is within
2%.

Theorem 35.7

APPROX-SUBSET-SUM is a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for
the subset-sum problem.

Proof   The operations of trimming L_(i) in line 4 and removing from
L_(i) every element that is greater than t maintain the property that
every element of L_(i) is also a member of P_(i). Therefore, the value
z* returned in line 7 is indeed the sum of some subset of S, that is, z*
∈ P_(n). Let y* ∈ P_(n) denote an optimal solution to the subset-sum
problem, so that it is the greatest value in P_(n) that is less than or
equal to t. Because line 5 ensures that z* ≤ t, we know that z* ≤ y*. By
inequality (35.1), we need to show that y*/z* ≤ 1 + ϵ. We must also show
that the running time of this algorithm is polynomial in both 1/ϵ and
the size of the input.

As Exercise 35.5-2 asks you to show, for every element y in P_(i) that
is at most t, there exists an element z ∈ L_(i) such that

[art]

Inequality (35.24) must hold for y* ∈ P_(n), and therefore there exists
an element z ∈ L_(n) such that

[art]

and thus

[art]

Since there exists an element z ∈ L_(n) fulfilling inequality (35.25),
the inequality must hold for z*, which is the largest value in L_(n),
which is to say

[art]

Now we show that y*/z* ≤ 1 + ϵ. We do so by showing that (1 +ϵ/2n)^(n) ≤
1 + ϵ. First, inequality (35.23), 0 < ϵ < 1, implies that

[art]

Next, from equation (3.16) on page 66, we have lim_(n→∞)(1 + ϵ/2n)^(n) =
e^(ϵ/2). Exercise 35.5-3 asks you to show that

[art]

Therefore, the function (1 + ϵ/2n)^(n) increases with n as it approaches
its limit of e^(ϵ/2), and we have

[art]

Combining inequalities (35.26) and (35.29) completes the analysis of the
approximation ratio.

To show that APPROX-SUBSET-SUM is a fully polynomial-time approximation
scheme, we derive a bound on the length of L_(i). After trimming,
successive elements z and z′ of L_(i) must have the relationship z′/z >
1 + ϵ/2n. That is, they must differ by a factor of at least 1 + ϵ/2n.
Each list, therefore, contains the value 0, possibly the value 1, and up
to ⌊log_(1 + ϵ/2n) t⌋ additional values. The number of elements in each
list L_(i) is at most

[art]

This bound is polynomial in the size of the input—which is the number of
bits lg t needed to represent t plus the number of bits needed to
represent the set S, which in turn is polynomial in n—and in 1/ϵ. Since
the running time of APPROX-SUBSET-SUM is polynomial in the lengths of
the lists L_(i), we conclude that APPROX-SUBSET-SUM is a fully
polynomial-time approximation scheme.

▪

Exercises

35.5-1

Prove equation (35.21). Then show that after executing line 4 of
EXACT-SUBSET-SUM, L_(i) is a sorted list containing every element of
P_(i) whose value is not more than t.

35.5-2

Using induction on i, prove inequality (35.24).

35.5-3

Prove inequality (35.28).

35.5-4

How can you modify the approximation scheme presented in this section to
find a good approximation to the smallest value not less than t that is
a sum of some subset of the given input list?

35.5-5

Modify the APPROX-SUBSET-SUM procedure to also return the subset of S
that sums to the value z*.

Problems

35-1     Bin packing

You are given a set of n objects, where the size s_(i) of the ith object
satisfies 0 < s_(i) < 1. Your goal is to pack all the objects into the
minimum number of unit-size bins. Each bin can hold any subset of the
objects whose total size does not exceed 1.

a. Prove that the problem of determining the minimum number of bins
required is NP-hard. (Hint: Reduce from the subset-sum problem.)

The first-fit heuristic takes each object in turn and places it into the
first bin that can accommodate it, as follows. It maintains an ordered
list of bins. Let b denote the number of bins in the list, where b
increases over the course of the algorithm, and let 〈B₁, … , B_(b)〉 be
the list of bins. Initially b = 0 and the list is empty. The algorithm
takes each object i in turn and places it in the lowest-numbered bin
that can still accommodate it. If no bin can accommodate object i, then
b is incremented and a new bin B_(b) is opened, containing object i. Let
[art].

b. Argue that the optimal number of bins required is at least ⌈S⌉.

c. Argue that the first-fit heuristic leaves at most one bin at most
half full.

d. Prove that the number of bins used by the first-fit heuristic never
exceeds ⌈2S⌉.

e. Prove an approximation ratio of 2 for the first-fit heuristic.

f. Give an efficient implementation of the first-fit heuristic, and
analyze its running time.

35-2     Approximating the size of a maximum clique

Let G = (V, E) be an undirected graph. For any k ≥ 1, define G^((k)) to
be the undirected graph (V ^((k)), E^((k))), where V ^((k)) is the set
of all ordered k-tuples of vertices from V and E^((k)) is defined so
that (v₁, v₂, … , v_(k)) is adjacent to (w₁, w₂, … , w_(k)) if and only
if for i = 1, 2, … , k, either vertex v_(i) is adjacent to w_(i) in G,
or else v_(i) = w_(i).

a. Prove that the size of the maximum clique in G^((k)) is equal to the
kth power of the size of the maximum clique in G.

b. Argue that if there is an approximation algorithm that has a constant
approximation ratio for finding a maximum-size clique, then there is a
polynomial-time approximation scheme for the problem.

35-3     Weighted set-covering problem

Suppose that sets have weights in the set-covering problem, so that each
set S_(i) in the family ℱ has an associated weight w_(i). The weight of
a cover C is [art]. The goal is wish to determine a minimum-weight
cover. (Section 35.3 handles the case in which w_(i) = 1 for all i.)

Show how to generalize the greedy set-covering heuristic in a natural
manner to provide an approximate solution for any instance of the
weighted set-covering problem. Letting d be the maximum size of any set
S_(i), show that your heuristic has an approximation ratio of [art].

35-4     Maximum matching

Recall that for an undirected graph G, a matching is a set of edges such
that no two edges in the set are incident on the same vertex. Section
25.1 showed how to find a maximum matching in a bipartite graph, that
is, a matching such that no other matching in G contains more edges.
This problem examines matchings in undirected graphs that are not
required to be bipartite.

a. Show that a maximal matching need not be a maximum matching by
exhibiting an undirected graph G and a maximal matching M in G that is
not a maximum matching. (Hint: You can find such a graph with only four
vertices.)

b. Consider a connected, undirected graph G = (V, E). Give an O(E)-time
greedy algorithm to find a maximal matching in G.

This problem concentrates on a polynomial-time approximation algorithm
for maximum matching. Whereas the fastest known algorithm for maximum
matching takes superlinear (but polynomial) time, the approximation
algorithm here will run in linear time. You will show that the
linear-time greedy algorithm for maximal matching in part (b) is a
2-approximation algorithm for maximum matching.

c. Show that the size of a maximum matching in G is a lower bound on the
size of any vertex cover for G.

d. Consider a maximal matching M in G = (V, E). Let T = {v ∈ V : some
edge in M is incident on v}. What can you say about the subgraph of G
induced by the vertices of G that are not in T ?

e. Conclude from part (d) that 2 |M| is the size of a vertex cover for
G.

f. Using parts (c) and (e), prove that the greedy algorithm in part (b)
is a 2-approximation algorithm for maximum matching.

35-5     Parallel machine scheduling

In the parallel-machine-scheduling problem, the input has two parts: n
jobs, J₁, J₂, … , J_(n), where each job J_(k) has an associated
nonnegative processing time of p_(k), and m identical machines, M₁, M₂,
… , M_(m). Any job can run on any machine. A schedule specifies, for
each job J_(k), the machine on which it runs and the time period during
which it runs. Each job J_(k) must run on some machine M_(i) for p_(k)
consecutive time units, and during that time period no other job may run
on M_(i). Let C_(k) denote the completion time of job J_(k), that is,
the time at which job J_(k) completes processing. Given a schedule,
define C_(max) = max {C_(j) : 1 ≤ j ≤ n} to be the makespan of the
schedule. The goal is to find a schedule whose makespan is minimum.

For example, consider an input with two machines M₁ and M₂, and four
jobs J₁, J₂, J₃, and J₄ with p₁ = 2, p₂ = 12, p₃ = 4, and p₄ = 5. Then
one possible schedule runs, on machine M₁, job J₁ followed by job J₂,
and on machine M₂, job J₄ followed by job J₃. For this schedule, C₁ = 2,
C₂ = 14, C₃ = 9, C₄ = 5, and C_(max) = 14. An optimal schedule runs job
J₂ on machine M₁ and jobs J₁, J₃, and J₄ on machine M₂. For this
schedule, we have C₁ = 2, C₂ = 12, C₃ = 6, and C₄ = 11, and so C_(max) =
12.

Given the input to a parallel-machine-scheduling problem, let [art]
denote the makespan of an optimal schedule.

a. Show that the optimal makespan is at least as large as the greatest
processing time, that is,

[art]

b. Show that the optimal makespan is at least as large as the average
machine load, that is,

[art]

Consider the following greedy algorithm for parallel machine scheduling:
whenever a machine is idle, schedule any job that has not yet been
scheduled.

c. Write pseudocode to implement this greedy algorithm. What is the
running time of your algorithm?

d. For the schedule returned by the greedy algorithm, show that

[art]

Conclude that this algorithm is a polynomial-time 2-approximation
algorithm.

35-6     Approximating a maximum spanning tree

Let G = (V, E) be an undirected graph with distinct edge weights w(u, v)
on each edge (u, v) ∈ E. For each vertex v ∈ V, denote by max(v) the
maximum-weight edge incident on that vertex. Let S_(G)= {max(v) : v ∈ V
} be the set of maximum-weight edges incident on each vertex, and let
T_(G) be the maximum-weight spanning tree of G, that is, the spanning
tree of maximum total weight. For any subset of edges E′ ⊆ E, define
w(E′) = Σ_((u,v)∈E′) w(u, v).

a. Give an example of a graph with at least 4 vertices for which S_(G) =
T_(G).

b. Give an example of a graph with at least 4 vertices for which S_(G) ≠
T_(G).

c. Prove that S_(G) ⊆ T_(G) for any graph G.

d. Prove that w(S_(G)) ≥ w(T_(G))/2 for any graph G.

e. Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to compute a 2-approximation to the
maximum spanning tree.

35-7     An approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem

Recall the knapsack problem from Section 15.2. The input includes n
items, where the ith item is worth v_(i) dollars and weighs w_(i)
pounds. The input also includes the capacity of a knapsack, which is W
pounds. Here, we add the further assumptions that each weight w_(i) is
at most W and that the items are indexed in monotonically decreasing
order of their values: v₁ ≥ v₂ ≥ ⋯ ≥ v_(n).

In the 0-1 knapsack problem, the goal is to find a subset of the items
whose total weight is at most W and whose total value is maximum. The
fractional knapsack problem is like the 0-1 knapsack problem, except
that a fraction of each item may be put into the knapsack, rather than
either all or none of each item. If a fraction x_(i) of item i goes into
the knapsack, where 0 ≤ x_(i) ≤ 1, it contributes x_(i)w_(i) to the
weight of the knapsack and adds value x_(i)v_(i). The goal of this
problem is to develop a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm for
the 0-1 knapsack problem.

In order to design a polynomial-time algorithm, let’s consider
restricted instances of the 0-1 knapsack problem. Given an instance I of
the knapsack problem, form restricted instances I_(j), for j = 1, 2, … ,
n, by removing items 1, 2, … , j − 1 and requiring the solution to
include item j (all of item j in both the fractional and 0-1 knapsack
problems). No items are removed in instance I₁. For instance I_(j), let
P_(j) denote an optimal solution to the 0-1 problem and Q_(j) denote an
optimal solution to the fractional problem.

a. Argue that an optimal solution to instance I of the 0-1 knapsack
problem is one of {P₁, P₂, … , P_(n)}.

b. Prove that to find an optimal solution Q_(j) to the fractional
problem for instance I_(j), you can include item j and then use the
greedy algorithm in which each step takes as much as possible of the
unchosen item with the maximum value per pound v_(i)/w_(i) in the set
{j + 1, j + 2, … , n}.

c. Prove that there is always an optimal solution Q_(j) to the
fractional problem for instance I_(j) that includes at most one item
fractionally. That is, for all items except possibly one, either all of
the item or none of the item goes into the knapsack.

d. Given an optimal solution Q_(j) to the fractional problem for
instance I_(j), form solution R_(j) from Q_(j) by deleting any
fractional items from Q_(j). Let v(S) denote the total value of items
taken in a solution S. Prove that v(R_(j)) ≥ v(Q_(j))/2 ≥ v(P_(j))/2.

e. Give a polynomial-time algorithm that returns a maximum-value
solution from the set {R₁, R₂, … , R_(n)}, and prove that your algorithm
is a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack
problem.

Chapter notes

Although methods that do not necessarily compute exact solutions have
been known for thousands of years (for example, methods to approximate
the value of π), the notion of an approximation algorithm is much more
recent. Hochbaum [221] credits Garey, Graham, and Ullman [175] and
Johnson [236] with formalizing the concept of a polynomial-time
approximation algorithm. The first such algorithm is often credited to
Graham [197].

Since this early work, thousands of approximation algorithms have been
designed for a wide range of problems, and there is a wealth of
literature on this field. Texts by Ausiello et al. [29], Hochbaum [221],
Vazirani [446], and Williamson and Shmoys [459] deal exclusively with
approximation algorithms, as do surveys by Shmoys [409] and Klein and
Young [256]. Several other texts, such as Garey and Johnson [176] and
Papadimitriou and Steiglitz [353], have significant coverage of
approximation algorithms as well. Books edited by Lawler, Lenstra,
Rinnooy Kan, and Shmoys [277] and by Gutin and Punnen [204] provide
extensive treatments of approximation algorithms and heuristics for the
traveling-salesperson problem.

Papadimitriou and Steiglitz attribute the algorithm APPROX-VERTEX-COVER
to F. Gavril and M. Yannakakis. The vertex-cover problem has been
studied extensively (Hochbaum [221] lists 16 different approximation
algorithms for this problem), but all the approximation ratios are at
least 2 − o(1).

The algorithm APPROX-TSP-TOUR appears in a paper by Rosenkrantz,
Stearns, and Lewis [384]. Christofides improved on this algorithm and
gave a 3/2-approximation algorithm for the traveling-salesperson problem
with the triangle inequality. Arora [23] and Mitchell [330] have shown
that if the points lie in the euclidean plane, there is a
polynomial-time approximation scheme. Theorem 35.3 is due to Sahni and
Gonzalez [392].

The algorithm APPROX-SUBSET-SUM and its analysis are loosely modeled
after related approximation algorithms for the knapsack and subset-sum
problems by Ibarra and Kim [234].

Problem 35-7 is a combinatorial version of a more general result on
approximating knapsack-type integer programs by Bienstock and McClosky
[55].

The randomized algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability is implicit in the
work of Johnson [236]. The weighted vertex-cover algorithm is by
Hochbaum [220]. Section 35.4 only touches on the power of randomization
and linear programming in the design of approximation algorithms. A
combination of these two ideas yields a technique called “randomized
rounding,” which formulates a problem as an integer linear program,
solves the linear-programming relaxation, and interprets the variables
in the solution as probabilities. These probabilities then help guide
the solution of the original problem. This technique was first used by
Raghavan and Thompson [374], and it has had many subsequent uses. (See
Motwani, Naor, and Raghavan [335] for a survey.) Several other notable
ideas in the field of approximation algorithms include the primal-dual
method (see Goemans and Williamson [184] for a survey), finding sparse
cuts for use in divide-and-conquer algorithms [288], and the use of
semidefinite programming [183].

As mentioned in the chapter notes for Chapter 34, results in
probabilistically checkable proofs have led to lower bounds on the
approximability of many problems, including several in this chapter. In
addition to the references there, the chapter by Arora and Lund [26]
contains a good description of the relationship between
probabilistically checkable proofs and the hardness of approximating
various problems.

¹ When the approximation ratio is independent of n, we use the terms
“approximation ratio of ρ” and “ρ-approximation algorithm,” indicating
no dependence on n.

Part VIII    Appendix: Mathematical Background

 

 

Introduction

When you analyze algorithms, you often need to draw upon a body of
mathematical tools. Some of these tools are as simple as high-school
algebra, but others may be new to you. In Part I, we saw how to
manipulate asymptotic notations and solve recurrences. This appendix
comprises a compendium of several other concepts and methods used in
analyzing algorithms. As noted in the introduction to Part I, you may
have seen much of the material in this appendix before having read this
book, although some of the specific notational conventions appearing
here might differ from those you have seen elsewhere. Hence, you should
treat this appendix as reference material. As in the rest of this book,
however, we have included exercises and problems, in order for you to
improve your skills in these areas.

Appendix A offers methods for evaluating and bounding summations, which
occur frequently in the analysis of algorithms. Many of the formulas
here appear in any calculus text, but you will find it convenient to
have these methods compiled in one place.

Appendix B contains basic definitions and notations for sets, relations,
functions, graphs, and trees. It also gives some basic properties of
these mathematical objects.

Appendix C begins with elementary principles of counting: permutations,
combinations, and the like. The remainder contains definitions and
properties of basic probability. Most of the algorithms in this book
require no probability for their analysis, and thus you can easily omit
the latter sections of the chapter on a first reading, even without
skimming them. Later, when you encounter a probabilistic analysis that
you want to understand better, you will find Appendix C well organized
for reference purposes.

Appendix D defines matrices, their operations, and some of their basic
properties. You have probably seen most of this material already if you
have taken a course in linear algebra. But you might find it helpful to
have one place to look for notations and definitions.

A Summations

When an algorithm contains an iterative control construct such as a
while or for loop, you can express its running time as the sum of the
times spent on each execution of the body of the loop. For example,
Section 2.2 argued that the i th iteration of insertion sort took time
proportional to i in the worst case. Adding up the time spent on each
iteration produced the summation (or series) [art]. Evaluating this
summation resulted in a bound of Θ(n²) on the worst-case running time of
the algorithm. This example illustrates why you should know how to
manipulate and bound summations.

Section A.1 lists several basic formulas involving summations. Section
A.2 offers useful techniques for bounding summations. The formulas in
Section A.1 appear without proof, though proofs for some of them appear
in Section A.2 to illustrate the methods of that section. You can find
most of the other proofs in any calculus text.

A.1 Summation formulas and properties

Given a sequence a₁, a₂, … , a_(n) of numbers, where n is a nonnegative
integer, the finite sum a₁ + a₂ + … + a_(n) can be expressed as [art].
If n = 0, the value of the summation is defined to be 0. The value of a
finite series is always well defined, and the order in which its terms
are added does not matter.

Given an infinite sequence a₁, a₂, … of numbers, we can write their
infinite sum a₁ + a₂ + … as [art], which means [art]. If the limit does
not exist, the series diverges, and otherwise, it converges. The terms
of a convergent series cannot always be added in any order. You can,
however, rearrange the terms of an absolutely convergent series, that
is, a series [art] for which the series [art] also converges.

Linearity

For any real number c and any finite sequences a₁, a₂, … , a_(n) and b₁,
b₂, … , b_(n),

[art]

The linearity property also applies to infinite convergent series.

The linearity property applies to summations incorporating asymptotic
notation. For example,

[art]

In this equation, the Θ-notation on the left-hand side applies to the
variable k, but on the right-hand side, it applies to n. Such
manipulations also apply to infinite convergent series.

Arithmetic series

The summation

[art]

is an arithmetic series and has the value

[art]

A general arithmetic series includes an additive constant a ≥ 0 and a
constant coefficient b > 0 in each term, but has the same total
asymptotically:

[art]

Sums of squares and cubes

The following formulas apply to summations of squares and cubes:

[art]

Geometric series

For real x ≠ 1, the summation

[art]

is a geometric series and has the value

[art]

The infinite decreasing geometric series occurs when the summation is
infinite and |x| < 1:

[art]

If we assume that 0⁰ = 1, these formulas apply even when x = 0.

Harmonic series

For positive integers n, the nth harmonic number is

[art]

Inequalities (A.20) and (A.21) on page 1150 provide the stronger bounds

[art]

Integrating and differentiating series

Integrating or differentiating the formulas above yields additional
formulas. For example, differentiating both sides of the infinite
geometric series (A.7) and multiplying by x gives

[art]

Telescoping series

For any sequence a₀, a₁, … , a_(n),

[art]

since each of the terms a₁, a₂, … , a_(n−1) is added in exactly once and
subtracted out exactly once. We say that the sum telescopes. Similarly,

[art]

As an example of a telescoping sum, consider the series

[art]

Rewriting each term as

[art]

gives

[art]

Reindexing summations

A series can sometimes be simplified by changing its index, often
reversing the order of summation. Consider the series [art]. Because the
terms in this summation are a_(n), a_(n−1), … , a₀, we can reverse the
order of indices by letting j = n − k and rewrite this summation as

[art]

Generally, if the summation index appears in the body of the sum with a
minus sign, it’s worth thinking about reindexing.

As an example, consider the summation

[art]

The index k appears with a negative sign in 1/(n − k + 1). And indeed,
we can simplify this summation, this time setting j = n − k + 1,
yielding

[art]

which is just the harmonic series (A.8).

Products

The finite product a₁a₂ … a_(n) can be expressed as

[art]

If n = 0, the value of the product is defined to be 1. You can convert a
formula with a product to a formula with a summation by using the
identity

[art]

Exercises

A.1-1

Prove that [art] by using the linearity property of summations.

A.1-2

Find a simple formula for [art].

A.1-3

Interpret the decimal number 111,111,111 in light of equation (A.6).

A.1-4

Evaluate the infinite series [art].

A.1-5

Let c ≥ 0 be a constant. Show that [art].

A.1-6

Show that [art] for |x| < 1.

A.1-7

Prove that [art]. (Hint: Show the asymptotic upper and lower bounds
separately.)

★ A.1-8

Show that [art] by manipulating the harmonic series.

★ A.1-9

Show that [art].

★ A.1-10

Evaluate the sum [art].

★ A.1-11

Evaluate the product [art].

A.2 Bounding summations

You can choose from several techniques to bound the summations that
describe the running times of algorithms. Here are some of the most
frequently used methods.

Mathematical induction

The most basic way to evaluate a series is to use mathematical
induction. As an example, let’s prove that the arithmetic series [art]
evaluates to n(n + 1)/2. For n = 1, we have that n(n + 1)/2 = 1 · 2/2 =
1, which equals [art]. With the inductive assumption that it holds for
n, we prove that it holds for n + 1. We have

[art]

You don’t always need to guess the exact value of a summation in order
to use mathematical induction. Instead, you can use induction to prove
an upper or lower bound on a summation. As an example, let’s prove the
asymptotic upper bound [art]. More specifically, we’ll prove that [art]
for some constant c. For the initial condition n = 0, we have [art] as
long as c ≥ 1. Assuming that the bound holds for n, we prove that it
holds for n + 1. We have

[art]

as long as (1/3 + 1/c) ≤ 1 or, equivalently, c ≥ 3/2. Thus, [art], as we
wished to show.

You need to take care when using asymptotic notation to prove bounds by
induction. Consider the following fallacious proof that [art].
Certainly, [art]. Assuming that the bound holds for n, we now prove it
for n + 1:

[art]

The bug in the argument is that the “constant” hidden by the “big-oh”
grows with n and thus is not constant. We have not shown that the same
constant works for all n.

Bounding the terms

You can sometimes obtain a good upper bound on a series by bounding each
term of the series, and it often suffices to use the largest term to
bound the others. For example, a quick upper bound on the arithmetic
series (A.1) is

[art]

In general, for a series [art], if we let a_(max) = max {a_(k) : 1 ≤ k ≤
n}, then

[art]

The technique of bounding each term in a series by the largest term is a
weak method when the series can in fact be bounded by a geometric
series. Given the series [art], suppose that a_(k+1)/a_(k) ≤ r for all k
≥ 0, where 0 < r < 1 is a constant. You can bound the sum by an infinite
decreasing geometric series, since a_(k) ≤ a₀r^(k), and thus

[art]

You can apply this method to bound the summation [art]. In order to
start the summation at k = 0, rewrite it as [art]. The first term (a₀)
is 1/3, and the ratio (r) of consecutive terms is

[art]

for all k ≥ 0. Thus, we have

[art]

A common bug in applying this method is to show that the ratio of
consecutive terms is less than 1 and then to assume that the summation
is bounded by a geometric series. An example is the infinite harmonic
series, which diverges since

[art]

The ratio of the (k+1)st and kth terms in this series is k/(k+1) < 1,
but the series is not bounded by a decreasing geometric series. To bound
a series by a geometric series, you need to show that there is an r < 1,
which is a constant, such that the ratio of all pairs of consecutive
terms never exceeds r. In the harmonic series, no such r exists because
the ratio becomes arbitrarily close to 1.

Splitting summations

One way to obtain bounds on a difficult summation is to express the
series as the sum of two or more series by partitioning the range of the
index and then to bound each of the resulting series. For example, let’s
find a lower bound on the arithmetic series [art], which we have already
seen has an upper bound of n². You might attempt to bound each term in
the summation by the smallest term, but since that term is 1, you would
get a lower bound of n for the summation—far off from the upper bound of
n².

You can obtain a better lower bound by first splitting the summation.
Assume for convenience that n is even, so that

[art]

which is an asymptotically tight bound, since [art].

For a summation arising from the analysis of an algorithm, you can
sometimes split the summation and ignore a constant number of the
initial terms. Generally, this technique applies when each term a_(k) in
a summation [art] is independent of n. Then for any constant k₀ > 0, you
can write

[art]

since the initial terms of the summation are all constant and there are
a constant number of them. You can then use other methods to bound
[art]. This technique applies to infinite summations as well. For
example, let’s find an asymptotic upper bound on [art]. The ratio of
consecutive terms is

[art]

if k ≥ 3. Thus, you can split the summation into

[art]

The technique of splitting summations can help determine asymptotic
bounds in much more difficult situations. For example, here is one way
to obtain a bound of O(lg n) on the harmonic series (A.9):

[art]

The idea is to split the range 1 to n into ⌊lg n⌋ + 1 pieces and
upper-bound the contribution of each piece by 1. For i = 0, 1, … , ⌊lg
n⌋, the ith piece consists of the terms starting at 1/2^(i) and going up
to but not including 1/2^(i+1). The last piece might contain terms not
in the original harmonic series, giving

[art]

Approximation by integrals

When a summation has the form [art], where f (k) is a monotonically
increasing function, you can approximate it by integrals:

[art]

Figure A.1 justifies this approximation. The summation is represented as
the area of the rectangles in the figure, and the integral is the blue
region under the curve. When f (k) is a monotonically decreasing
function, you can use a similar method to provide the bounds

[art]

The integral approximation (A.19) can be used to prove the tight bounds
in inequality (A.10) for the nth harmonic number. The lower bound is

[art]

For the upper bound, the integral approximation gives

[art]

Exercises

A.2-1

Show that [art] is bounded above by a constant.

A.2-2

Find an asymptotic upper bound on the summation

[art]

[art]

Figure A.1 Approximation of [art] by integrals. The area of each
rectangle is shown within the rectangle, and the total rectangle area
represents the value of the summation. The integral is represented by
the blue area under the curve. Comparing areas in (a) gives the lower
bound [art]. Shifting the rectangles one unit to the right gives the
upper bound [art] in (b).

A.2-3

Show that the nth harmonic number is Ω(lg n) by splitting the summation.

A.2-4

Approximate [art] with an integral.

A.2-5

Why can’t you use the integral approximation (A.19) directly on [art] to
obtain an upper bound on the nth harmonic number?

Problems

A-1 Bounding summations

Give asymptotically tight bounds on the following summations. Assume
that r ≥ 0 and s ≥ 0 are constants.

a. [art]

b. [art]

c. [art]

Appendix notes

Knuth [259] provides an excellent reference for the material presented
here. You can find basic properties of series in any good calculus book,
such as Apostol [19] or Thomas et al. [433].

B Sets, Etc.

Many chapters of this book touch on the elements of discrete
mathematics. This appendix reviews the notations, definitions, and
elementary properties of sets, relations, functions, graphs, and trees.
If you are already well versed in this material, you can probably just
skim this chapter.

B.1 Sets

A set is a collection of distinguishable objects, called its members or
elements. If an object x is a member of a set S, we write x ∈ S (read “x
is a member of S” or, more briefly, “x belongs to S”). If x is not a
member of S, we write x ∉ S. To describe a set explicitly, write its
members as a list inside braces. For example, to define a set S to
contain precisely the numbers 1, 2, and 3, write S = {1, 2, 3}. Since 2
belongs to the set S, we can write 2 ∈ S, and since 4 is not a member,
we can write 4 ∉ S. A set cannot contain the same object more than
once,¹ and its elements are not ordered. Two sets A and B are equal,
written A = B, if they contain the same elements. For example, {1, 2, 3,
1} = {1, 2, 3} = {3, 2, 1}.

We adopt special notations for frequently encountered sets:

- Ø denotes the empty set, that is, the set containing no members.
- ℤ denotes the set of integers, that is, the set {… −2, −1, 0, 1, 2,…}.
- ℝ denotes the set of real numbers.
- ℕ denotes the set of natural numbers, that is, the set {0, 1, 2,…}.²

If all the elements of a set A are contained in a set B, that is, if x ∈
A implies x ∈ B, then we write A ⊆ B and say that A is a subset of B. A
set A is a proper subset of set B, written A ⊂ B, if A ⊆ B but A ≠ B.
(Some authors use the symbol “⊂” to denote the ordinary subset relation,
rather than the proper-subset relation.) Every set is a subset of
itself: A ⊆ A for any set A. For two sets A and B, we have A = B if and
only if A ⊆ B and B ⊆ A. The subset relation is transitive (see page
1159): for any three sets A, B, and C, if A ⊆ B and B ⊆ C, then A ⊆ C.
The proper-subset relation is transitive as well. The empty set is a
subset of all sets: for any set A, we have Ø ⊆ A.

Sets can be specified in terms of other sets. Given a set A, a set B ⊆ A
can be defined by stating a property that distinguishes the elements of
B. For example, one way to define the set of even integers is {x : x ∈ ℤ
and x/2 is an integer}. The colon in this notation is read “such that.”
(Some authors use a vertical bar in place of the colon.)

Given two sets A and B, set operations define new sets:

- The intersection of sets A and B is the set

  A ∩ B = {x : x ∈ A and x ∈ B}.

- The union of sets A and B is the set

  A ∪ B = {x : x ∈ A or x ∈ B}.

- The difference between two sets A and B is the set

  A − B = {x : x ∈ A and x ∉ B}.

Set operations obey the following laws:

Empty set laws:

  ------- --- ----
  A ∩ Ø   =   Ø,
  A ∪ Ø   =   A.
  ------- --- ----

Idempotency laws:

  ------- --- ----
  A ∩ A   =   A,
  A ∪ A   =   A.
  ------- --- ----

Commutative laws:

  ------- --- --------
  A ∩ B   =   B ∩ A,
  A ∪ B   =   B ∪ A.
  ------- --- --------

[art]

Figure B.1 A Venn diagram illustrating the first of DeMorgan’s laws
(B.2). Each of the sets A, B, and C is represented as a circle.

Associative laws:

  ------------- --- --------------
  A ∩ (B ∩ C)   =   (A ∩ B) ∩ C,
  A ∪ (B ∪ C)   =   (A ∪ B) ∪ C.
  ------------- --- --------------

Distributive laws:

[art]

Absorption laws:

  ------------- --- ----
  A ∩ (A ∪ B)   =   A,
  A ∪ (A ∩ B)   =   A.
  ------------- --- ----

DeMorgan’s laws:

[art]

Figure B.1 illustrates the first of DeMorgan’s laws, using a Venn
diagram: a graphical picture in which sets are represented as regions of
the plane.

Often, all the sets under consideration are subsets of some larger set U
called the universe. For example, when considering various sets made up
only of integers, the set ℤ of integers is an appropriate universe.
Given a universe U, we define the complement of a set A as Ā = U − A =
{x : x ∈ U and x ∉ A}. For any set A ⊆ U, we have the following laws:

  ------- --- ----
  [art]   =   A,
  A ∩ Ā   =   Ø,
  A ∪ Ā   =   U.
  ------- --- ----

An equivalent way to express DeMorgan’s laws (B.2) uses set complements.
For any two sets B, C ⊆ U, we have

  ------- --- --------
  B ∩ C   =   B ∪ C,
  B ∪ C   =   B ∩ C.
  ------- --- --------

Two sets A and B are disjoint if they have no elements in common, that
is, if A ∩ B = Ø. A collection of sets S₁, S₂, … , either finite or
infinite, is a set of sets, in which each member is a set S_(i). A
collection S = {S_(i)} of nonempty sets forms a partition of a set S if

- the sets are pairwise disjoint, that is, S_(i), S_(j) ∈ S and i ≠ j
  imply S_(i) ∩ S_(j) = Ø,

- their union is S, that is,

  [art]

In other words, S forms a partition of S if each element of S appears in
exactly one set S_(i) ∈ S.

The number of elements in a set is the cardinality (or size) of the set,
denoted |S|. Two sets have the same cardinality if their elements can be
put into a one-to-one correspondence. The cardinality of the empty set
is |Ø| = 0. If the cardinality of a set is a natural number, the set is
finite, and otherwise, it is infinite. An infinite set that can be put
into a one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers ℕ is countably
infinite, and otherwise, it is uncountable. For example, the integers ℤ
are countable, but the reals ℝ are uncountable.

For any two finite sets A and B, we have the identity

[art]

from which we can conclude that

|A ∪ B| ≤ |A| + |B|.

If A and B are disjoint, then |A ∩ B| = 0 and thus |A ∪ B| = |A| + |B|.
If A ⊆ B, then |A| ≤ |B|.

A finite set of n elements is sometimes called an n-set. A 1-set is
called a singleton. A subset of k elements of a set is sometimes called
a k-subset.

We denote the set of all subsets of a set S, including the empty set and
S itself, by 2^(S), called the power set of S. For example, 2^({a,b}) =
{Ø, {a}, {b}, {a, b}}. The power set of a finite set S has cardinality
2^(|S|) (see Exercise B.1-5).

We sometimes care about setlike structures in which the elements are
ordered. An ordered pair of two elements a and b is denoted (a, b) and
is defined formally as the set (a, b) = {a, {a, b}}. Thus, the ordered
pair (a, b) is not the same as the ordered pair (b, a).

The Cartesian product of two sets A and B, denoted A × B, is the set of
all ordered pairs such that the first element of the pair is an element
of A and the second is an element of B. More formally,

A × B = {(a, b) : a ∈ A and b ∈ B}.

For example, {a, b}×{a, b, c} = {(a, a), (a, b), (a, c), (b, a), (b, b),
(b, c)}. When A and B are finite sets, the cardinality of their
Cartesian product is

[art]

The Cartesian product of n sets A₁, A₂, … , A_(n) is the set of n-tuples

A₁ × A₂ × … × A_(n) = {(a₁, a₂, … , a_(n)) : a_(i) ∈ A_(i) for i = 1, 2,
… , n},

whose cardinality is

|A₁ × A₂ × … × A_(n)| = |A₁| · |A₂| · |A_(n)|

if all sets A_(i) are finite. We denote an n-fold Cartesian product over
a single set A by the set

[art]

whose cardinality is |A^(n)| = |A|^(n) if A is finite. We can also view
an n-tuple as a finite sequence of length n (see page 1162).

Intervals are continuous sets of real numbers. We denote them with
parentheses and/or brackets. Given real numbers a and b, the closed
interval [a, b] is the set {x ∈ ℝ : a ≤ x ≤ b} of reals between a and b,
including both a and b. (If a > b, this definition implies that [a, b] =
Ø.) The open interval (a, b) = {x ∈ ℝ : a < x < b} omits both of the
endpoints from the set. There are two half-open intervals [a, b) = {x ∈
ℝ : a ≤ x < b} and (a, b] = {x ∈ ℝ : a < x ≤ b}, each of which excludes
one endpoint.

Intervals can also be defined on the integers by replacing ℝ in the
these definitions by ℤ. Whether the interval is defined over the reals
or integers can usually be inferred from context.

Exercises

B.1-1

Draw Venn diagrams that illustrate the first of the distributive laws
(B.1).

B.1-2

Prove the generalization of DeMorgan’s laws to any finite collection of
sets:

  --------------------- --- ----------------------
  A₁ ∩ A₂ ∩ … ∩ A_(n)   =   A₁ ∪ A₂ ∪ … ∪ A_(n),
  A₁ ∪ A₂ ∪ … ∪ A_(n)   =   A₁ ∩ A₂ ∩ … ∩ A_(n).
  --------------------- --- ----------------------

★ B.1-3

Prove the generalization of equation (B.3), which is called the
principle of inclusion and exclusion:

+-----------+-------------------------------------+---------------+
| |A₁ ∪ A₂ ∪ … ∪ A_(n)| =                                         |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+---------------+
|           | |A₁| + |A₂| + … + |A_(n)|           |               |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+---------------+
|           | − |A₁ ∩ A₂| − |A₁ ∩ A₃| − …         | (all pairs)   |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+---------------+
|           | + |A₁ ∩ A₂ ∩ A₃| + …                | (all triples) |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+---------------+
|           | ⋮                                   |               |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+---------------+
|           | + (−1)^(n−1) |A₁ ∩ A₂ ∩ … ∩ A_(n)|. |               |
+-----------+-------------------------------------+---------------+

B.1-4

Show that the set of odd natural numbers is countable.

B.1-5

Show that for any finite set S, the power set 2^(S) has 2^(|S|) elements
(that is, there are 2^(|S|) distinct subsets of S).

B.1-6

Give an inductive definition for an n-tuple by extending the
set-theoretic definition for an ordered pair.

B.2 Relations

A binary relation R on two sets A and B is a subset of the Cartesian
product A×B. If (a, b) ∈ R, we sometimes write a R b. When we say that R
is a binary relation on a set A, we mean that R is a subset of A × A.
For example, the “less than” relation on the natural numbers is the set
{(a, b) : a, b ∈ ℕ and a < b}. An n-ary relation on sets A₁, A₂, … ,
A_(n) is a subset of A₁ × A₂ × … × A_(n).

A binary relation R ⊆ A × A is reflexive if

a R a

for all a ∈ A. For example, “=” and “≤” are reflexive relations on ℕ,
but “<” is not. The relation R is symmetric if

a R b implies b R a

for all a, b ∈ A. For example, “=” is symmetric, but “<” and “≤” are
not. The relation R is transitive if

a R b and b R c imply a R c

for all a, b, c ∈ A. For example, the relations “<,” “≤,” and “=” are
transitive, but the relation R = {(a, b) : a, b ∈ ℕ and a = b − 1} is
not, since 3 R 4 and 4 R 5 do not imply 3 R 5.

A relation that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive is an
equivalence relation. For example, “=” is an equivalence relation on the
natural numbers, but “<” is not. If R is an equivalence relation on a
set A, then for a ∈ A, the equivalence class of a is the set [a] = {b ∈
A : a R b}, that is, the set of all elements equivalent to a. For
example, if we define R = {(a, b) : a, b ∈ ℕ and a + b is an even
number}, then R is an equivalence relation, since a + a is even
(reflexive), a + b is even implies b + a is even (symmetric), and a + b
is even and b + c is even imply a + c is even (transitive). The
equivalence class of 4 is [4] = {0, 2, 4, 6,…}, and the equivalence
class of 3 is [3] = {1, 3, 5, 7,…}. A basic theorem of equivalence
classes is the following.

Theorem B.1 (An equivalence relation is the same as a partition)

The equivalence classes of any equivalence relation R on a set A form a
partition of A, and any partition of A determines an equivalence
relation on A for which the sets in the partition are the equivalence
classes.

Proof   For the first part of the proof, we must show that the
equivalence classes of R are nonempty, pairwise-disjoint sets whose
union is A. Because R is reflexive, a ∈ [a], and so the equivalence
classes are nonempty. Moreover, since every element a ∈ A belongs to the
equivalence class [a], the union of the equivalence classes is A. It
remains to show that the equivalence classes are pairwise disjoint, that
is, if two equivalence classes [a] and [b] have an element c in common,
then they are in fact the same set. Suppose that a R c and b R c.
Symmetry gives that c R b and, by transitivity, a R b. Thus, we have x R
a for any arbitrary element x ∈ [a] and, by transitivity, x R b, and
thus [a] ⊆ [b]. Similarly, [b] ⊆ [a], and thus [a] = [b].

For the second part of the proof, let A = {A_(i)} be a partition of A,
and define R = {(a, b) : there exists i such that a ∈ A_(i) and b ∈
A_(i)}. We claim that R is an equivalence relation on A. Reflexivity
holds, since a ∈ A_(i) implies a R a. Symmetry holds, because if a R b,
then a and b belong to the same set A_(i), and hence b R a. If a R b and
b R c, then all three elements are in the same set A_(i), and thus a R c
and transitivity holds. To see that the sets in the partition are the
equivalence classes of R, observe that if a ∈ A_(i), then x ∈ [a]
implies x ∈ A_(i), and x ∈ A_(i) implies x ∈ [a].

▪

A binary relation R on a set A is antisymmetric if

a R b and b R a imply a = b.

For example, the “≤” relation on the natural numbers is antisymmetric,
since a ≤ b and b ≤ a imply a = b. A relation that is reflexive,
antisymmetric, and transitive is a partial order, and we call a set on
which a partial order is defined a partially ordered set. For example,
the relation “is a descendant of” is a partial order on the set of all
people (if we view individuals as being their own descendants).

In a partially ordered set A, there may be no single “maximum” element a
such that b R a for all b ∈ A. Instead, the set may contain several
maximal elements a such that for no b ∈ A, where b ≠ a, is it the case
that a R b. For example, a collection of different-sized boxes may
contain several maximal boxes that don’t fit inside any other box, yet
it has no single “maximum” box into which any other box will fit.³

A relation R on a set A is a total relation if for all a, b ∈ A, we have
a R b or b R a (or both), that is, if every pairing of elements of A is
related by R. A partial order that is also a total relation is a total
order or linear order. For example, the relation “≤” is a total order on
the natural numbers, but the “is a descendant of” relation is not a
total order on the set of all people, since there are individuals
neither of whom is descended from the other. A total relation that is
transitive, but not necessarily either symmetric or antisymmetric, is a
total preorder.

Exercises

B.2-1

Prove that the subset relation “⊆” on all subsets of ℤ is a partial
order but not a total order.

B.2-2

Show that for any positive integer n, the relation “equivalent modulo n”
is an equivalence relation on the integers. (We say that a = b (mod n)
if there exists an integer q such that a − b = qn.) Into what
equivalence classes does this relation partition the integers?

B.2-3

Give examples of relations that are

a. reflexive and symmetric but not transitive,

b. reflexive and transitive but not symmetric,

c. symmetric and transitive but not reflexive.

B.2-4

Let S be a finite set, and let R be an equivalence relation on S × S.
Show that if in addition R is antisymmetric, then the equivalence
classes of S with respect to R are singletons.

B.2-5

Professor Narcissus claims that if a relation R is symmetric and
transitive, then it is also reflexive. He offers the following proof. By
symmetry, a R b implies b R a. Transitivity, therefore, implies a R a.
Is the professor correct?

B.3 Functions

Given two sets A and B, a function f is a binary relation on A and B
such that for all a ∈ A, there exists precisely one b ∈ B such that (a,
b) ∈ f. The set A is called the domain of f, and the set B is called the
codomain of f. We sometimes write f : A → B, and if (a, b) ∈ f, we write
b = f (a), since the choice of a uniquely determines b.

Intuitively, the function f assigns an element of B to each element of
A. No element of A is assigned two different elements of B, but the same
element of B can be assigned to two different elements of A. For
example, the binary relation

f = {(a, b) : a, b ∈ ℕ and b = a mod 2}

is a function f : → {0, 1}, since for each natural number a, there is
exactly one value b in {0, 1} such that b = a mod 2. For this example, 0
= f (0), 1 = f (1), 0 = f (2), 1 = f (3), etc. In contrast, the binary
relation

g = {(a, b) : a, b ∈ ℕ and a + b is even}

is not a function, since (1, 3) and (1, 5) are both in g, and thus for
the choice a = 1, there is not precisely one b such that (a, b) ∈ g.

Given a function f : A → B, if b = f (a), we say that a is the argument
of f and that b is the value of f at a. We can define a function by
stating its value for every element of its domain. For example, we might
define f (n) = 2n for n ∈ ℕ, which means f = {(n, 2n) : n ∈ ℕ}. Two
functions f and g are equal if they have the same domain and codomain
and if f (a) = g(a) for all a in the domain.

A finite sequence of length n is a function f whose domain is the set of
n integers {0, 1, … , n − 1}. We often denote a finite sequence by
listing its values in angle brackets: 〈f (0), f (1), … , f (n−1)〉. An
infinite sequence is a function whose domain is the set ℕ of natural
numbers. For example, the Fibonacci sequence, defined by recurrence
(3.31), is the infinite sequence 〈0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21,…〉.

When the domain of a function f is a Cartesian product, we often omit
the extra parentheses surrounding the argument of f. For example, if we
have a function f : A₁ × A₂ × … A_(n) → B, we write b = f (a₁, a₂, …
a_(n)) instead of writing b = f ((a₁, a₂, … a_(n))). We also call each
a_(i) an argument to the function f, though technically f has just a
single argument, which is the n-tuple (a₁, a₂, … a_(n)).

If f : A → B is a function and b = f (a), then we sometimes say that b
is the image of a under f. The image of a set A′ ⊆ A under f is defined
by

f (A′) = {b ∈ B : b = f (a) for some a ∈ A′}.

The range of f is the image of its domain, that is, f (A). For example,
the range of the function f : ℕ → ℕ defined by f (n) = 2n is f(ℕ) = {m :
m = 2n for some n ∈ ℕ}, in other words, the set of nonnegative even
integers.

A function is a surjection if its range is its codomain. For example,
the function f (n) = ⌊n/2⌋ is a surjective function from ℕ to ℕ, since
every element in ℕ appears as the value of f for some argument. In
contrast, the function f (n) = 2n is not a surjective function from ℕ to
ℕ, since no argument to f can produce any odd natural number as a value.
The function f (n) = 2n is, however, a surjective function from the
natural numbers to the even numbers. A surjection f : A → B is sometimes
described as mapping A onto B. When we say that f is onto, we mean that
it is surjective.

A function f : A → B is an injection if distinct arguments to f produce
distinct values, that is, if a ≠ a′ implies f (a) ≠ f (a′). For example,
the function f (n) = 2n is an injective function from ℕ to ℕ, since each
even number b is the image under f of at most one element of the domain,
namely b/2. The function f (n) = ⌊n/2⌋ is not injective, since the value
1 is produced by two arguments: f (2) = 1 and f (3) = 1. An injection is
sometimes called a one-to-one function.

A function f : A → B is a bijection if it is injective and surjective.
For example, the function f (n) = (−1)^(n)⌈n/2⌉ is a bijection from ℕ to
ℤ:

  --- --- -----
  0   →   0,
  1   →   −1,
  2   →   1,
  3   →   −2,
  4   →   2,
      ⋮   
  --- --- -----

The function is injective, since no element of ℤ is the image of more
than one element of ℕ. It is surjective, since every element of ℤ
appears as the image of some element of ℕ. Hence, the function is
bijective. A bijection is sometimes called a one-to-one correspondence,
since it pairs elements in the domain and codomain. A bijection from a
set A to itself is sometimes called a permutation.

When a function f is bijective, we define its inverse f⁻¹ as

f ⁻¹(b) = a if and only if f (a) = b.

For example, the inverse of the function f (n) = (−1)^(n)⌈n/2⌉ is

[art]

Exercises

B.3-1

Let A and B be finite sets, and let f : A → B be a function. Show the
following:

a. If f is injective, then |A| ≤ |B|.

b. If f is surjective, then |A| ≥ |B|.

B.3-2

Is the function f (x) = x + 1 bijective when the domain and the codomain
are the set ℕ? Is it bijective when the domain and the codomain are the
set ℤ?

B.3-3

Give a natural definition for the inverse of a binary relation such that
if a relation is in fact a bijective function, its relational inverse is
its functional inverse.

★ B.3-4

Give a bijection from ℤ to ℤ × ℤ.

B.4 Graphs

This section presents two kinds of graphs: directed and undirected.
Certain definitions in the literature differ from those given here, but
for the most part, the differences are slight. Section 20.1 shows how to
represent graphs in computer memory.

A directed graph (or digraph) G is a pair (V, E), where V is a finite
set and E is a binary relation on V. The set V is called the vertex set
of G, and its elements are called vertices (singular: vertex). The set E
is called the edge set of G, and its elements are called edges. Figure
B.2(a) is a pictorial representation of a directed graph on the vertex
set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. Vertices are represented by circles in the
figure, and edges are represented by arrows. Self-loops—edges from a
vertex to itself—are possible.

In an undirected graph G = (V, E), the edge set E consists of unordered
pairs of vertices, rather than ordered pairs. That is, an edge is a set
{u, v}, where u, v ∈ V and u ≠ v. By convention, we use the notation (u,
v) for an edge, rather than the set notation {u, v}, and we consider (u,
v) and (v, u) to be the same edge. In an undirected graph, self-loops
are forbidden, so that every edge consists of two distinct vertices.
Figure B.2(b) shows an undirected graph on the vertex set {1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6}.

[art]

Figure B.2 Directed and undirected graphs. (a) A directed graph G = (V,
E), where V = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and E = {(1, 2), (2, 2), (2, 4), (2,
5), (4, 1), (4, 5), (5, 4), (6, 3)}. The edge (2, 2) is a self-loop. (b)
An undirected graph G = (V, E), where V = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and E =
{(1, 2), (1, 5), (2, 5), (3, 6)}. The vertex 4 is isolated. (c) The
subgraph of the graph in part (a) induced by the vertex set {1, 2, 3,
6}.

Many definitions for directed and undirected graphs are the same,
although certain terms have slightly different meanings in the two
contexts. If (u, v) is an edge in a directed graph G = (V, E), we say
that (u, v) is incident from or leaves vertex u and is incident to or
enters vertex v. For example, the edges leaving vertex 2 in Figure
B.2(a) are (2, 2), (2, 4), and (2, 5). The edges entering vertex 2 are
(1, 2) and (2, 2). If (u, v) is an edge in an undirected graph G = (V,
E), we say that (u, v) is incident on vertices u and v. In Figure
B.2(b), the edges incident on vertex 2 are (1, 2) and (2, 5).

If (u, v) is an edge in a graph G = (V, E), we say that vertex v is
adjacent to vertex u. When the graph is undirected, the adjacency
relation is symmetric. When the graph is directed, the adjacency
relation is not necessarily symmetric. If v is adjacent to u in a
directed graph, we can write u → v. In parts (a) and (b) of Figure B.2,
vertex 2 is adjacent to vertex 1, since the edge (1, 2) belongs to both
graphs. Vertex 1 is not adjacent to vertex 2 in Figure B.2(a), since the
edge (2, 1) is absent.

The degree of a vertex in an undirected graph is the number of edges
incident on it. For example, vertex 2 in Figure B.2(b) has degree 2. A
vertex whose degree is 0, such as vertex 4 in Figure B.2(b), is
isolated. In a directed graph, the out-degree of a vertex is the number
of edges leaving it, and the in-degree of a vertex is the number of
edges entering it. The degree of a vertex in a directed graph is its
in-degree plus its out-degree. Vertex 2 in Figure B.2(a) has in-degree
2, out-degree 3, and degree 5.

A path of length k from a vertex u to a vertex u′ in a graph G = (V, E)
is a sequence 〈v₀, v₁, v₂, … , v_(k)〉 of vertices such that u = v₀, u′
= v_(k), and (v_(i−1), v_(i)) ∈ E for i = 1, 2, … , k. The length of the
path is the number of edges in the path, which is 1 less than the number
of vertices in the path. The path contains the vertices v₀, v₁, … ,
v_(k) and the edges (v₀, v₁), (v₁, v₂), … , (v_(k−1), v_(k)). (There is
always a 0-length path from u to u.) If there is a path p from u to u′,
we say that u′ is reachable from u via p, which we can write as [art]. A
path is simple⁴ if all vertices in the path are distinct. In Figure
B.2(a), the path 〈1, 2, 5, 4〉 is a simple path of length 3. The path
〈2, 5, 4, 5〉 is not simple. A subpath of path p = 〈v₀, v₁, … ,
v_(k)〉 is a contiguous subsequence of its vertices. That is, for any 0
≤ i ≤ j ≤ k, the subsequence of vertices 〈v_(i), v_(i+1), … , v_(j)〉
is a subpath of p.

In a directed graph, a path 〈v₀, v₁, … , v_(k)〉 forms a cycle if v₀ =
v_(k) and the path contains at least one edge. The cycle is simple if,
in addition, v₁, v₂, … , v_(k) are distinct. A cycle consisting of k
vertices has length k. A self-loop is a cycle of length 1. Two paths
〈v₀, v₁, v₂, … , v_(k−1), v₀〉 and [art] form the same cycle if there
exists an integer j such that [art] for i = 0, 1, … , k−1. In Figure
B.2(a), the path 〈1,2,4,1〉 forms the same cycle as the paths 〈2, 4,
1, 2〉 and 〈4, 1, 2, 4〉. This cycle is simple, but the cycle 〈1, 2,
4, 5, 4, 1〉 is not. The cycle 〈2, 2〉 formed by the edge (2, 2) is a
self-loop. A directed graph with no self-loops is simple. In an
undirected graph, a path 〈v₀, v₁, …, v_(k)〉 forms a cycle if k > 0, v₀
= v_(k), and all edges on the path are distinct. The cycle is simple if
v₁, v₂, … , v_(k) are distinct. For example, in Figure B.2(b), the path
〈1, 2, 5, 1〉 is a simple cycle. A graph with no simple cycles is
acyclic.

An undirected graph is connected if every vertex is reachable from all
other vertices. The connected components of an undirected graph are the
equivalence classes of vertices under the “is reachable from” relation.
The graph shown in Figure B.2(b) has three connected components: {1, 2,
5}, {3, 6}, and {4}. Every vertex in the connected component {1, 2, 5}
is reachable from every other vertex in {1, 2, 5}. An undirected graph
is connected if it has exactly one connected component. The edges of a
connected component are those that are incident on only the vertices of
the component. In other words, edge (u, v) is an edge of a connected
component only if both u and v are vertices of the component.

A directed graph is strongly connected if every two vertices are
reachable from each other. The strongly connected components of a
directed graph are the equivalence classes of vertices under the “are
mutually reachable” relation. A directed graph is strongly connected if
it has only one strongly connected component. The graph in Figure B.2(a)
has three strongly connected components: {1, 2, 4, 5}, {3}, and {6}. All
pairs of vertices in {1, 2, 4, 5} are mutually reachable. The vertices
{3, 6} do not form a strongly connected component, since vertex 6 cannot
be reached from vertex 3.

Two graphs G = (V, E) and G′ = (V′, E′) are isomorphic if there exists a
bijection f : V → V′ such that (u, v) ∈ E if and only if (f (u), f (v))
∈ E′. In other words, G and G′ are isomorphic if the vertices of G can
be relabeled to be vertices of G′, maintaining the corresponding edges
in G and G′. Figure B.3(a) shows a pair of isomorphic graphs G and G′
with respective vertex sets V = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and V′ = {u, v, w, x,
y, z}. The mapping from V to V′ given by f (1) = u, f (2) = v, f (3) =
w, f (4) = x, f (5) = y, f (6) = z provides the required bijective
function. The graphs in Figure B.3(b) are not isomorphic. Although both
graphs have 5 vertices and 7 edges, the top graph has a vertex of degree
4 and the bottom graph does not.

We say that a graph G′ = (V′, E′) is a subgraph of G = (V, E) if V′ ⊆ V
and E′ ⊆ E. Given a set V′ ⊆ V, the subgraph of G induced by V′ is the
graph G′ = (V′, E′), where

E′ = {(u, v) ∈ E : u, v ∈ V′}.

The subgraph induced by the vertex set {1, 2, 3, 6} in Figure B.2(a)
appears in Figure B.2(c) and has the edge set {(1, 2), (2, 2), (6, 3)}.

Given an undirected graph G = (V, E), the directed version of G is the
directed graph G′ = (V, E′), where (u, v) ∈ E′ if and only if (u, v) ∈
E. That is, each undirected edge (u, v) in G turns into two directed
edges, (u, v) and (v, u), in the directed version. Given a directed
graph G = (V, E), the undirected version of G is the undirected graph G′
= (V, E′), where (u, v) ∈ E′ if and only if u ≠ v and E contains at
least one of the edges (u, v) and (v, u). That is, the undirected
version contains the edges of G “with their directions removed” and with
self-loops eliminated. (Since (u, v) and (v, u) are the same edge in an
undirected graph, the undirected version of a directed graph contains it
only once, even if the directed graph contains both edges (u, v) and (v,
u).) In a directed graph G = (V, E), a neighbor of a vertex u is any
vertex that is adjacent to u in the undirected version of G. That is, v
is a neighbor of u if u ≠ v and either (u, v) ∈ E or (v, u) ∈ E. In an
undirected graph, u and v are neighbors if they are adjacent.

[art]

Figure B.3 (a) A pair of isomorphic graphs. The vertices of the top
graph are mapped to the vertices of the bottom graph by f (1) = u, f (2)
= v, f (3) = w, f (4) = x, f (5) = y, f (6) = z. (b) Two graphs that are
not isomorphic. The top graph has a vertex of degree 4, and the bottom
graph does not.

Several kinds of graphs have special names. A complete graph is an
undirected graph in which every pair of vertices is adjacent. An
undirected graph G = (V, E) is bipartite if V can be partitioned into
two sets V₁ and V₂ such that (u, v) ∈ E implies either u ∈ V₁ and v ∈ V₂
or u ∈ V₂ and v ∈ V₁. That is, all edges go between the two sets V₁ and
V₂. An acyclic, undirected graph is a forest, and a connected, acyclic,
undirected graph is a (free) tree (see Section B.5). We often take the
first letters of “directed acyclic graph” and call such a graph a dag.

There are two variants of graphs that you may occasionally encounter. A
multigraph is like an undirected graph, but it can have both multiple
edges between vertices (such as two distinct edges (u, v) and (u, v))
and self-loops. A hypergraph is like an undirected graph, but each
hyperedge, rather than connecting two vertices, connects an arbitrary
subset of vertices. Many algorithms written for ordinary directed and
undirected graphs can be adapted to run on these graphlike structures.

The contraction of an undirected graph G = (V, E) by an edge e = (u, v)
is a graph G′ = (V′, E′), where V′ = V − {u, v} ∪ {x} and x is a new
vertex. The set of edges E′ is formed from E by deleting the edge (u, v)
and, for each vertex w adjacent to u or v, deleting whichever of (u, w)
and (v, w) belongs to E and adding the new edge (x, w). In effect, u and
v are “contracted” into a single vertex.

Exercises

B.4-1

Attendees of a faculty party shake hands to greet each other, with every
pair of professors shaking hands one time. Each professor remembers the
number of times he or she shook hands. At the end of the party, the
department head asks the professors for their totals and adds them all
up. Show that the result is even by proving the handshaking lemma: if G
= (V, E) is an undirected graph, then

[art]

B.4-2

Show that if a directed or undirected graph contains a path between two
vertices u and v, then it contains a simple path between u and v. Show
that if a directed graph contains a cycle, then it contains a simple
cycle.

B.4-3

Show that any connected, undirected graph G = (V, E) satisfies |E| ≥ |V
| − 1.

B.4-4

Verify that in an undirected graph, the “is reachable from” relation is
an equivalence relation on the vertices of the graph. Which of the three
properties of an equivalence relation hold in general for the “is
reachable from” relation on the vertices of a directed graph?

B.4-5

What is the undirected version of the directed graph in Figure B.2(a)?
What is the directed version of the undirected graph in Figure B.2(b)?

B.4-6

Show how a bipartite graph can represent a hypergraph by letting
incidence in the hypergraph correspond to adjacency in the bipartite
graph. (Hint: Let one set of vertices in the bipartite graph correspond
to vertices of the hypergraph, and let the other set of vertices of the
bipartite graph correspond to hyperedges.)

B.5 Trees

As with graphs, there are many related, but slightly different, notions
of trees. This section presents definitions and mathematical properties
of several kinds of trees. Sections 10.3 and 20.1 describe how to
represent trees in computer memory.

B.5.1 Free trees

As defined in Section B.4, a free tree is a connected, acyclic,
undirected graph. We often omit the adjective “free” when we say that a
graph is a tree. If an undirected graph is acyclic but possibly
disconnected, it is a forest. Many algorithms that work for trees also
work for forests. Figure B.4(a) shows a free tree, and Figure B.4(b)
shows a forest. The forest in Figure B.4(b) is not a tree because it is
not connected. The graph in Figure B.4(c) is connected but neither a
tree nor a forest, because it contains a cycle.

The following theorem captures many important facts about free trees.

Theorem B.2 (Properties of free trees)

[art]

Figure B.4 (a) A free tree. (b) A forest. (c) A graph that contains a
cycle and is therefore neither a tree nor a forest.

Let G = (V, E) be an undirected graph. The following statements are
equivalent.

1.  G is a free tree.
2.  Any two vertices in G are connected by a unique simple path.
3.  G is connected, but if any edge is removed from E, the resulting
    graph is disconnected.
4.  G is connected, and |E| = |V | − 1.
5.  G is acyclic, and |E| = |V | − 1.
6.  G is acyclic, but if any edge is added to E, the resulting graph
    contains a cycle.

[art]

Figure B.5 A step in the proof of Theorem B.2: if (1) G is a free tree,
then (2) any two vertices in G are connected by a unique simple path.
Assume for the sake of contradiction that vertices u and v are connected
by two distinct simple paths. These paths first diverge at vertex w, and
they first reconverge at vertex z. The path p′ concatenated with the
reverse of the path p″ forms a cycle, which yields the contradiction.

Proof   (1) ⇒ (2): Since a tree is connected, any two vertices in G are
connected by at least one simple path. Suppose for the sake of
contradiction that vertices u and v are connected by two distinct simple
paths as shown in Figure B.5. Let w be the vertex at which the paths
first diverge. That is, if we call the paths p₁ and p₂, then w is the
first vertex on both p₁ and p₂ whose successor on p₁ is x and whose
successor on p₂ is y, where x ≠ y. Let z be the first vertex at which
the paths reconverge, that is, z is the first vertex following w on p₁
that is also on p₂. Let p′ = w → x ⇝ z be the subpath of p₁ from w
through x to z, so that [art], and let p″ = w → y ⇝ z be the subpath of
p₂ from w through y to z, so that [art]. Paths p′ and p″ share no
vertices except their endpoints. Then, as Figure B.5 shows, the path
obtained by concatenating p′ and the reverse of p″ is a cycle, which
contradicts our assumption that G is a tree. Thus, if G is a tree, there
can be at most one simple path between two vertices.

(2) ⇒ (3): If any two vertices in G are connected by a unique simple
path, then G is connected. Let (u, v) be any edge in E. This edge is a
path from u to v, and so it must be the unique path from u to v. If (u,
v) were to be removed from G, there would be no path from u to v, and G
would be disconnected.

(3) ⇒ (4): By assumption, the graph G is connected, so Exercise B.4-3
gives that |E| ≥ |V| − 1. We prove |E| ≤ |V| − 1 by induction on |V|.
The base cases are when |V| = 1 or |V| = 2, and in either case, |E| =
|V| − 1. For the inductive step, suppose that |V| ≥ 3 for graph G and
that any graph G′ = (V′, E′), where |V′| < |V|, that satisfies (3) also
satisfies |E′| ≤ |V′| − 1. Removing an arbitrary edge from G separates
the graph into k ≥ 2 connected components (actually k = 2). Each
component satisfies (3), or else G would not satisfy (3). Consider each
connected component V_(i), with edge set E_(i), as a separate free tree.
Then, because each connected component has fewer than |V| vertices, the
inductive hypothesis implies that |E_(i)| ≤ |V_(i)| − 1. Thus, the
number of edges in all k connected components combined is at most |V| −
k ≤ |V| − 2. Adding in the removed edge yields |E| ≤ |V| − 1.

(4) ⇒ (5): Suppose that G is connected and that |E| = |V| − 1. We must
show that G is acyclic. Suppose that G has a cycle containing k vertices
v₁, v₂, … , v_(k), and without loss of generality assume that this cycle
is simple. Let G_(k) = (V_(k), E_(k)) be the subgraph of G consisting of
the cycle, so that |V_(k)| = |E_(k)| = k. If k < |V|, then because G is
connected, there must be a vertex v_(k+1)∈ V − V_(k) that is adjacent to
some vertex v_(i) ∈ V_(k). Define G_(k+1) = (V_(k+1), E_(k+1)) to be the
subgraph of G with V_(k+1) = V_(k) ∪ {v_(k+1)} and E_(k+1) = E_(k) ∪
{(v_(i), v_(k+1))}. Note that |V_(k+1)| = |E_(k+1)| = k + 1. If k + 1 <
|V|, then continue, defining G_(k+2) in the same manner, and so forth,
until we obtain G_(n) = (V_(n), E_(n)), where n = |V|, V_(n) = V, and
|E_(n)| = |V_(n)| = |V|. Since G_(n) is a subgraph of G, we have E_(n) ⊆
E, and hence |E| ≥ |E_(n)| = |V_(n)| = |V|, which contradicts the
assumption that |E| = |V| − 1. Thus, G is acyclic.

(5) ⇒ (6): Suppose that G is acyclic and that |E| = |V| − 1. Let k be
the number of connected components of G. Each connected component is a
free tree by definition, and since (1) implies (5), the sum of all edges
in all connected components of G is |V| − k. Consequently, k must equal
1, and G is in fact a tree. Since (1) implies (2), any two vertices in G
are connected by a unique simple path. Thus, adding any edge to G
creates a cycle.

(6) ⇒ (1): Suppose that G is acyclic but that adding any edge to E
creates a cycle. We must show that G is connected. Let u and v be
arbitrary vertices in G. If u and v are not already adjacent, adding the
edge (u, v) creates a cycle in which all edges but (u, v) belong to G.
Thus, the cycle minus edge (u, v) must contain a path from u to v, and
since u and v were chosen arbitrarily, G is connected.

▪

B.5.2 Rooted and ordered trees

A rooted tree is a free tree in which one of the vertices is
distinguished from the others. We call the distinguished vertex the root
of the tree. We often refer to a vertex of a rooted tree as a node⁵ of
the tree. Figure B.6(a) shows a rooted tree on a set of 12 nodes with
root 7.

[art]

Figure B.6 Rooted and ordered trees. (a) A rooted tree with height 4.
The tree is drawn in a standard way: the root (node 7) is at the top,
its children (nodes with depth 1) are beneath it, their children (nodes
with depth 2) are beneath them, and so forth. If the tree is ordered,
the relative left-to-right order of the children of a node matters;
otherwise, it doesn’t. (b) Another rooted tree. As a rooted tree, it is
identical to the tree in (a), but as an ordered tree it is different,
since the children of node 3 appear in a different order.

Consider a node x in a rooted tree T with root r. We call any node y on
the unique simple path from r to x an ancestor of x. If y is an ancestor
of x, then x is a descendant of y. (Every node is both an ancestor and a
descendant of itself.) If y is an ancestor of x and x ≠ y, then y is a
proper ancestor of x and x is a proper descendant of y. The subtree
rooted at x is the tree induced by descendants of x, rooted at x. For
example, the subtree rooted at node 8 in Figure B.6(a) contains nodes 8,
6, 5, and 9.

If the last edge on the simple path from the root r of a tree T to a
node x is (y, x), then y is the parent of x, and x is a child of y. The
root is the only node in T with no parent. If two nodes have the same
parent, they are siblings. A node with no children is a leaf or external
node. A nonleaf node is an internal node.

The number of children of a node x in a rooted tree T is the degree of
x.⁶ The length of the simple path from the root r to a node x is the
depth of x in T. A level of a tree consists of all nodes at the same
depth. The height of a node in a tree is the number of edges on the
longest simple downward path from the node to a leaf, and the height of
a tree is the height of its root. The height of a tree is also equal to
the largest depth of any node in the tree.

An ordered tree is a rooted tree in which the children of each node are
ordered. That is, if a node has k children, then there is a first child,
a second child, and so on, up to and including a kth child. The two
trees in Figure B.6 are different when considered to be ordered trees,
but the same when considered to be just rooted trees.

B.5.3 Binary and positional trees

We define binary trees recursively. A binary tree T is a structure
defined on a finite set of nodes that either

- contains no nodes, or
- is composed of three disjoint sets of nodes: a root node, a binary
  tree called its left subtree, and a binary tree called its right
  subtree.

The binary tree that contains no nodes is called the empty tree or null
tree, sometimes denoted NIL. If the left subtree is nonempty, its root
is called the left child of the root of the entire tree. Likewise, the
root of a nonnull right subtree is the right child of the root of the
entire tree. If a subtree is the null tree NIL, we say that the child is
absent or missing. Figure B.7(a) shows a binary tree.

A binary tree is not simply an ordered tree in which each node has
degree at most 2. For example, in a binary tree, if a node has just one
child, the position of the child—whether it is the left child or the
right child—matters. In an ordered tree, there is no distinguishing a
sole child as being either left or right. Figure B.7(b) shows a binary
tree that differs from the tree in Figure B.7(a) because of the position
of one node. Considered as ordered trees, however, the two trees are
identical.

One way to represent the positioning information in a binary tree is by
the internal nodes of an ordered tree, as shown in Figure B.7(c). The
idea is to replace each missing child in the binary tree with a node
having no children. These leaf nodes are drawn as squares in the figure.
The tree that results is a full binary tree: each node is either a leaf
or has degree exactly 2. No nodes have degree 1. Consequently, the order
of the children of a node preserves the position information.

[art]

Figure B.7 Binary trees. (a) A binary tree drawn in a standard way. The
left child of a node is drawn beneath the node and to the left. The
right child is drawn beneath and to the right. (b) A binary tree
different from the one in (a). In (a), the left child of node 7 is 5 and
the right child is absent. In (b), the left child of node 7 is absent
and the right child is 5. As ordered trees, these trees are the same,
but as binary trees, they are distinct. (c) The binary tree in (a)
represented by the internal nodes of a full binary tree: an ordered tree
in which each internal node has degree 2. The leaves in the tree are
shown as squares.

The positioning information that distinguishes binary trees from ordered
trees extends to trees with more than two children per node. In a
positional tree, the children of a node are labeled with distinct
positive integers. The ith child of a node is absent if no child is
labeled with integer i. A k-ary tree is a positional tree in which for
every node, all children with labels greater than k are missing. Thus, a
binary tree is a k-ary tree with k = 2.

A complete k-ary tree is a k-ary tree in which all leaves have the same
depth and all internal nodes have degree k. Figure B.8 shows a complete
binary tree of height 3. How many leaves does a complete k-ary tree of
height h have? The root has k children at depth 1, each of which has k
children at depth 2, etc. Thus, the number of nodes at depth d is k^(d).
In a complete k-ary tree with height h, the leaves are at depth h, so
that there are k^(h) leaves. Consequently, the height of a complete
k-ary tree with n leaves is log_(k)n. A complete k-ary tree of height h
has

[art]

internal nodes. Thus, a complete binary tree has 2^(h) − 1 internal
nodes.

[art]

Figure B.8 A complete binary tree of height 3 with 8 leaves and 7
internal nodes.

Exercises

B.5-1

Draw all the free trees composed of the three vertices x, y, and z. Draw
all the rooted trees with nodes x, y, and z with x as the root. Draw all
the ordered trees with nodes x, y, and z with x as the root. Draw all
the binary trees with nodes x, y, and z with x as the root.

B.5-2

Let G = (V, E) be a directed acyclic graph in which there is a vertex v₀
∈ V such that there exists a unique path from v₀ to every vertex v ∈ V.
Prove that the undirected version of G forms a tree.

B.5-3

Show by induction that the number of degree-2 nodes in any nonempty
binary tree is one less than the number of leaves. Conclude that the
number of internal nodes in a full binary tree is one less than the
number of leaves.

B.5-4

Prove that for any integer k ≥ 1, there is a full binary tree with k
leaves.

B.5-5

Use induction to show that a nonempty binary tree with n nodes has
height at least ⌊lg n⌋.

★ B.5-6

The internal path length of a full binary tree is the sum, taken over
all internal nodes of the tree, of the depth of each node. Likewise, the
external path length is the sum, taken over all leaves of the tree, of
the depth of each leaf. Consider a full binary tree with n internal
nodes, internal path length i, and external path length e. Prove that e
= i + 2n.

★ B.5-7

Associate a “weight” w(x) = 2^(−d) with each leaf x of depth d in a
binary tree T, and let L be the set of leaves of T. Prove the Kraft
inequality: Σ_(x∈L) w(x) ≤ 1.

★ B.5-8

Show that if L ≥ 2, then every binary tree with L leaves contains a
subtree having between L/3 and 2L/3 leaves, inclusive.

Problems

B-1 Graph coloring

A k-coloring of undirected graph G = (V, E) is a function c : V → {1, 2,
… , k} such that c(u) ≠ c(v) for every edge (u, v) ∈ E. In other words,
the numbers 1, 2, … , k represent the k colors, and adjacent vertices
must have different colors.

a. Show that any tree is 2-colorable.

b. Show that the following are equivalent:

1.  G is bipartite.
2.  G is 2-colorable.
3.  G has no cycles of odd length.

c. Let d be the maximum degree of any vertex in a graph G. Prove that G
can be colored with d + 1 colors.

d. Show that if G has O(|V|) edges, then G can be colored with [art]
colors.

B-2 Friendly graphs

Reword each of the following statements as a theorem about undirected
graphs, and then prove it. Assume that friendship is symmetric but not
reflexive.

a. Any group of at least two people contains at least two people with
the same number of friends in the group.

b. Every group of six people contains either at least three mutual
friends or at least three mutual strangers.

c. Any group of people can be partitioned into two subgroups such that
at least half the friends of each person belong to the subgroup of which
that person is not a member.

d. If everyone in a group is the friend of at least half the people in
the group, then the group can be seated around a table in such a way
that everyone is seated between two friends.

B-3 Bisecting trees

Many divide-and-conquer algorithms that operate on graphs require that
the graph be bisected into two nearly equal-sized subgraphs, which are
induced by a partition of the vertices. This problem investigates
bisections of trees formed by removing a small number of edges. We
require that whenever two vertices end up in the same subtree after
removing edges, then they must belong to the same partition.

a. Show that the vertices of any n-vertex binary tree can be partitioned
into two sets A and B, such that |A| ≤ 3n/4 and |B| ≤ 3n/4, by removing
a single edge.

b. Show that the constant 3/4 in part (a) is optimal in the worst case
by giving an example of a simple binary tree whose most evenly balanced
partition upon removal of a single edge has |A| = 3n/4.

c. Show that by removing at most O(lg n) edges, we can partition the
vertices of any n-vertex binary tree into two sets A and B such that |A|
= ⌊n/2⌋ and |B| = ⌈n/2⌉.

Appendix notes

G. Boole pioneered the development of symbolic logic, and he introduced
many of the basic set notations in a book published in 1854. Modern set
theory was created by G. Cantor during the period 1874–1895. Cantor
focused primarily on sets of infinite cardinality. The term “function”
is attributed to G. W. Leibniz, who used it to refer to several kinds of
mathematical formulas. His limited definition has been generalized many
times. Graph theory originated in 1736, when L. Euler proved that it was
impossible to cross each of the seven bridges in the city of Königsberg
exactly once and return to the starting point.

The book by Harary [208] provides a useful compendium of many
definitions and results from graph theory.

¹ A variation of a set, which can contain the same object more than
once, is called a multiset.

² Some authors start the natural numbers with 1 instead of 0. The modern
trend seems to be to start with 0.

³ To be precise, in order for the “fit inside” relation to be a partial
order, we need to view a box as fitting inside itself.

⁴ Some authors refer to what we call a path as a “walk” and to what we
call a simple path as just a “path.”

⁵ The term “node” is often used in the graph theory literature as a
synonym for “vertex.” We reserve the term “node” to mean a vertex of a
rooted tree.

⁶ The degree of a node depends on whether we consider T to be a rooted
tree or a free tree. The degree of a vertex in a free tree is, as in any
undirected graph, the number of adjacent vertices. In a rooted tree,
however, the degree is the number of children—the parent of a node does
not count toward its degree.

C Counting and Probability

This appendix reviews elementary combinatorics and probability theory.
If you have a good background in these areas, you may want to skim the
beginning of this appendix lightly and concentrate on the later
sections. Most of this book’s chapters do not require probability, but
for some chapters it is essential.

Section C.1 reviews elementary results in counting theory, including
standard formulas for counting permutations and combinations. The axioms
of probability and basic facts concerning probability distributions form
Section C.2. Random variables are introduced in Section C.3, along with
the properties of expectation and variance. Section C.4 investigates the
geometric and binomial distributions that arise from studying Bernoulli
trials. The study of the binomial distribution continues in Section C.5,
an advanced discussion of the “tails” of the distribution.

C.1 Counting

Counting theory tries to answer the question “How many?” without
actually enumerating all the choices. For example, you might ask, “How
many different n-bit numbers are there?” or “How many orderings of n
distinct elements are there?” This section reviews the elements of
counting theory. Since some of the material assumes a basic
understanding of sets, you might wish to start by reviewing the material
in Section B.1.

Rules of sum and product

We can sometimes express a set of items that we wish to count as a union
of disjoint sets or as a Cartesian product of sets.

The rule of sum says that the number of ways to choose one element from
one of two disjoint sets is the sum of the cardinalities of the sets.
That is, if A and B are two finite sets with no members in common, then
|A ∪ B| = |A| + |B|, which follows from equation (B.3) on page 1156. For
example, if each position on a car’s license plate is a letter or a
digit, then the number of possibilities for each position is 26 + 10 =
36, since there are 26 choices if it is a letter and 10 choices if it is
a digit.

The rule of product says that the number of ways to choose an ordered
pair is the number of ways to choose the first element times the number
of ways to choose the second element. That is, if A and B are two finite
sets, then |A × B| = |A|·|B|, which is simply equation (B.4) on page
1157. For example, if an ice-cream parlor offers 28 flavors of ice cream
and four toppings, the number of possible sundaes with one scoop of ice
cream and one topping is 28 · 4 = 112.

Strings

A string over a finite set S is a sequence of elements of S. For
example, there are eight binary strings of length 3:

000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, 111.

(Here we use the shorthand of omitting the angle brackets when denoting
a sequence.) We sometimes call a string of length k a k-string. A
substring s′ of a string s is an ordered sequence of consecutive
elements of s. A k-substring of a string is a substring of length k. For
example, 010 is a 3-substring of 01101001 (the 3-substring that begins
in position 4), but 111 is not a substring of 01101001.

We can view a k-string over a set S as an element of the Cartesian
product S^(k) of k-tuples, which means that there are |S|^(k) strings of
length k. For example, the number of binary k-strings is 2^(k).
Intuitively, to construct a k-string over an n-set, there are n ways to
pick the first element; for each of these choices, there are n ways to
pick the second element; and so forth k times. This construction leads
to the k-fold product [art] as the number of k-strings.

Permutations

A permutation of a finite set S is an ordered sequence of all the
elements of S, with each element appearing exactly once. For example, if
S = {a, b, c}, then S has 6 permutations:

abc, acb, bac, bca, cab, cba.

(Again, we use the shorthand of omitting the angle brackets when
denoting a sequence.) There are n! permutations of a set of n elements,
since there are n ways to choose the first element of the sequence, n −
1 ways for the second element, n − 2 ways for the third, and so on.

A k-permutation of S is an ordered sequence of k elements of S, with no
element appearing more than once in the sequence. (Thus, an ordinary
permutation is an n-permutation of an n-set.) Here are the
2-permutations of the set {a, b, c, d}:

ab, ac, ad, ba, bc, bd, ca, cb, cd, da, db, dc.

The number of k-permutations of an n-set is

[art]

since there are n ways to choose the first element, n − 1 ways to choose
the second element, and so on, until k elements are chosen, with the
last element chosen from the remaining n − k + 1 elements. For the above
example, with n = 4 and k = 2, the formula (C.1) evaluates to 4!/2! =
12, matching the number of 2-permutations listed.

Combinations

A k-combination of an n-set S is simply a k-subset of S. For example,
the 4-set {a, b, c, d} has six 2-combinations:

ab, ac, ad, bc, bd, cd.

(Here we use the shorthand of omitting the braces around each subset.)
To construct a k-combination of an n-set, choose k distinct (different)
elements from the n-set. The order of selecting the elements does not
matter.

We can express the number of k-combinations of an n-set in terms of the
number of k-permutations of an n-set. Every k-combination has exactly k!
permutations of its elements, each of which is a distinct k-permutation
of the n-set. Thus the number of k-combinations of an n-set is the
number of k-permutations divided by k!. From equation (C.1), this
quantity is

[art]

For k = 0, this formula tells us that the number of ways to choose 0
elements from an n-set is 1 (not 0), since 0! = 1.

Binomial coefficients

The notation [art] (read “n choose k”) denotes the number of
k-combinations of an n-set. Equation (C.2) gives

[art]

This formula is symmetric in k and n − k:

[art]

These numbers are also known as binomial coefficients, due to their
appearance in the binomial theorem:

[art]

where n ∈ ℕ and x, y ∈ ℝ. The right-hand side of equation (C.4) is
called the binomial expansion of the left-hand side. A special case of
the binomial theorem occurs when x = y = 1:

[art]

This formula corresponds to counting the 2^(n) binary n-strings by the
number of 1s they contain: [art] binary n-strings contain exactly k 1s,
since there are [art] ways to choose k out of the n positions in which
to place the 1s.

Many identities involve binomial coefficients. The exercises at the end
of this section give you the opportunity to prove a few.

Binomial bounds

You sometimes need to bound the size of a binomial coefficient. For 1 ≤
k ≤ n, we have the lower bound

[art]

Taking advantage of the inequality k! ≥ (k/e)^(k) derived from
Stirling’s approximation (3.25) on page 67, we obtain the upper bounds

[art]

For all integers k such that 0 ≤ k ≤ n, you can use induction (see
Exercise C.1-12) to prove the bound

[art]

where for convenience we assume that 0⁰ = 1. For k = λn, where 0 ≤ λ ≤
1, we can rewrite this bound as

[art]

where

[art]

is the (binary) entropy function and where, for convenience, we assume
that 0 lg 0 = 0, so that H(0) = H(1) = 0.

Exercises

C.1-1

How many k-substrings does an n-string have? (Consider identical
k-substrings at different positions to be different.) How many
substrings does an n-string have in total?

C.1-2

An n-input, m-output boolean function is a function from {0, 1}^(n) to
{0, 1}^(m). How many n-input, 1-output boolean functions are there? How
many n-input, m-output boolean functions are there?

C.1-3

In how many ways can n professors sit around a circular conference
table? Consider two seatings to be the same if one can be rotated to
form the other.

C.1-4

In how many ways is it possible to choose three distinct numbers from
the set {1, 2, … , 99} so that their sum is even?

C.1-5

Prove the identity

[art]

for 0 < k ≤ n.

C.1-6

Prove the identity

[art]

for 0 ≤ k < n.

C.1-7

To choose k objects from n, you can make one of the objects
distinguished and consider whether the distinguished object is chosen.
Use this approach to prove that

[art]

C.1-8

Using the result of Exercise C.1-7, make a table for n = 0, 1, … , 6 and
0 ≤ k ≤ n of the binomial coefficients [art] with [art] at the top,
[art] and [art] on the next line, then [art], [art], and [art], and so
forth. Such a table of binomial coefficients is called Pascal’s
triangle.

C.1-9

Prove that

[art]

C.1-10

Show that for any integers n ≥ 0 and 0 ≤ k ≤ n, the expression [art]
achieves its maximum value when k = ⌊n/2⌋ or k = ⌈n/2⌉.

★ C.1-11

Argue that for any integers n ≥ 0, j ≥ 0, k ≥ 0, and j + k ≤ n,

[art]

Provide both an algebraic proof and an argument based on a method for
choosing j + k items out of n. Give an example in which equality does
not hold.

★ C.1-12

Use induction on all integers k such that 0 ≤ k ≤ n/2 to prove
inequality (C.7), and use equation (C.3) to extend it to all integers k
such that 0 ≤ k ≤ n.

★ C.1-13

Use Stirling’s approximation to prove that

[art]

★ C.1-14

By differentiating the entropy function H(λ), show that it achieves its
maximum value at λ = 1/2. What is H(1/2)?

★ C.1-15

Show that for any integer n ≥ 0,

[art]

★ C.1-16

Inequality (C.5) provides a lower bound on the binomial coefficient
[art]. For small values of k, a stronger bound holds. Prove that

[art]

for [art].

C.2 Probability

Probability is an essential tool for the design and analysis of
probabilistic and randomized algorithms. This section reviews basic
probability theory.

We define probability in terms of a sample space S, which is a set whose
elements are called outcomes or elementary events. Think of each outcome
as a possible result of an experiment. For the experiment of flipping
two distinguishable coins, with each individual flip resulting in a head
(H) or a tail (T), you can view the sample space S as consisting of the
set of all possible 2-strings over {H, T}:

S = {HH, HT, TH, TT}.

An event is a subset¹ of the sample space S. For example, in the
experiment of flipping two coins, the event of obtaining one head and
one tail is {HT, TH}. The event S is called the certain event, and the
event ∅ is called the null event. We say that two events A and B are
mutually exclusive if A ∩ B = ∅. An outcome s also defines the event
{s}, which we sometimes write as just s. By definition, all outcomes are
mutually exclusive.

Axioms of probability

A probability distribution Pr {} on a sample space S is a mapping from
events of S to real numbers satisfying the following probability axioms:

1.  Pr {A} ≥ 0 for any event A.

2.  Pr {S} = 1.

3.  Pr {A ∪ B} = Pr {A} + Pr {B} for any two mutually exclusive events A
    and B. More generally, for any sequence of events A₁, A₂, … (finite
    or countably infinite) that are pairwise mutually exclusive,

    [art]

We call Pr {A} the probability of the event A. Axiom 2 is simply a
normalization requirement: there is really nothing fundamental about
choosing 1 as the probability of the certain event, except that it is
natural and convenient.

Several results follow immediately from these axioms and basic set
theory (see Section B.1). The null event ∅ has probability Pr {∅} = 0.
If A ⊆ B, then Pr {A} ≤ Pr {B}. Using Ā to denote the event S − A (the
complement of A), we have Pr {Ā} = 1 − Pr {A}. For any two events A and
B,

[art]

In our coin-flipping example, suppose that each of the four outcomes has
probability 1/4. Then the probability of getting at least one head is

  ----------------- --- -----------------------------
  Pr {HH, HT, TH}   =   Pr {HH} + Pr {HT} + Pr {TH}
                    =   3/4.
  ----------------- --- -----------------------------

Another way to obtain the same result is to observe that since the
probability of getting strictly less than one head is Pr {TT} = 1/4, the
probability of getting at least one head is 1 − 1/4 = 3/4.

Discrete probability distributions

A probability distribution is discrete if it is defined over a finite or
countably infinite sample space. Let S be the sample space. Then for any
event A,

[art]

since outcomes, specifically those in A, are mutually exclusive. If S is
finite and every outcome s ∈ S has probability Pr {s} = 1/|S|, then we
have the uniform probability distribution on S. In such a case the
experiment is often described as “picking an element of S at random.”

As an example, consider the process of flipping a fair coin, one for
which the probability of obtaining a head is the same as the probability
of obtaining a tail, that is, 1/2. Flipping the coin n times gives the
uniform probability distribution defined on the sample space S = {H,
T}^(n), a set of size 2^(n). We can represent each outcome in S as a
string of length n over {H, T}, with each string occurring with
probability 1/2^(n). The event A = {exactly k heads and exactly n − k
tails occur} is a subset of S of size [art], since [art] strings of
length n over {H, T} contain exactly kH’s. The probability of event A is
thus [art].

Continuous uniform probability distribution

The continuous uniform probability distribution is an example of a
probability distribution in which not all subsets of the sample space
are considered to be events. The continuous uniform probability
distribution is defined over a closed interval [a, b] of the reals,
where a < b. The intuition is that each point in the interval [a, b]
should be “equally likely.” Because there are an uncountable number of
points, however, if all points had the same finite, positive
probability, axioms 2 and 3 would not be simultaneously satisfied. For
this reason, we’d like to associate a probability only with some of the
subsets of S in such a way that the axioms are satisfied for these
events.

For any closed interval [c, d], where a ≤ c ≤ d ≤ b, the continuous
uniform probability distribution defines the probability of the event
[c, d] to be

[art]

Letting c = d gives that the probability of a single point is 0.
Removing the endpoints [c, c] and [d, d] of an interval [c, d] results
in the open interval (c, d). Since [c, d] = [c, c] ∪ (c, d) ∪ [d, d],
axiom 3 gives Pr {[c, d]} = Pr {(c, d)}. Generally, the set of events
for the continuous uniform probability distribution contains any subset
of the sample space [a, b] that can be obtained by a finite or countable
union of open and closed intervals, as well as certain more complicated
sets.

Conditional probability and independence

Sometimes you have some prior partial knowledge about the outcome of an
experiment. For example, suppose that a friend has flipped two fair
coins and has told you that at least one of the coins showed a head.
What is the probability that both coins are heads? The information given
eliminates the possibility of two tails. The three remaining outcomes
are equally likely, and so you infer that each occurs with probability
1/3. Since only one of these outcomes shows two heads, the answer is
1/3.

Conditional probability formalizes the notion of having prior partial
knowledge of the outcome of an experiment. The conditional probability
of an event A given that another event B occurs is defined to be

[art]

whenever Pr {B} ≠ 0. (Read “Pr {A | B}” as “the probability of A given
B.”) The idea behind equation (C.16) is that since we are given that
event B occurs, the event that A also occurs is A ∩ B. That is, A ∩ B is
the set of outcomes in which both A and B occur. Because the outcome is
one of the elementary events in B, we normalize the probabilities of all
the elementary events in B by dividing them by Pr {B}, so that they sum
to 1. The conditional probability of A given B is, therefore, the ratio
of the probability of event A ∩ B to the probability of event B. In the
example above, A is the event that both coins are heads, and B is the
event that at least one coin is a head. Thus, Pr {A | B} = (1/4)/(3/4) =
1/3.

Two events are independent if

[art]

which is equivalent, if Pr {B} ≠ 0, to the condition

Pr {A | B} = Pr {A}.

For example, suppose that you flip two fair coins and that the outcomes
are independent. Then the probability of two heads is (1/2)(1/2) = 1/4.
Now suppose that one event is that the first coin comes up heads and the
other event is that the coins come up differently. Each of these events
occurs with probability 1/2, and the probability that both events occur
is 1/4. Thus, according to the definition of independence, the events
are independent—even though you might think that both events depend on
the first coin. Finally, suppose that the coins are welded together so
that they both fall heads or both fall tails and that the two
possibilities are equally likely. Then the probability that each coin
comes up heads is 1/2, but the probability that they both come up heads
is 1/2 ≠ (1/2)(1/2). Consequently, the event that one comes up heads and
the event that the other comes up heads are not independent.

A collection A₁, A₂, … , A_(n) of events is said to be pairwise
independent if

Pr {A_(i) ∩ A_(j) } = Pr {A_(i)} Pr {A_(j)}

for all 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n. We say that the events of the collection are
(mutually) independent if every k-subset [art] of the collection, where
2 ≤ k ≤ n and 1 ≤ i₁ < i₂ < ⋯ < i_(k) ≤ n, satisfies

[art]

For example, suppose that you flip two fair coins. Let A₁ be the event
that the first coin is heads, let A₂ be the event that the second coin
is heads, and let A₃ be the event that the two coins are different.
Then,

  ------------------- --- ------
  Pr {A₁}             =   1/2,
  Pr {A₂}             =   1/2,
  Pr {A₃}             =   1/2,
  Pr {A₁ ∩ A₂}        =   1/4,
  Pr {A₁ ∩ A₃}        =   1/4,
  Pr {A₂ ∩ A₃}        =   1/4,
  Pr {A₁ ∩ A₂ ∩ A₃}   =   0.
  ------------------- --- ------

Since for 1 ≤ i < j ≤ 3, we have Pr {A_(i) ∩ A_(j) } = Pr {A_(i)} Pr
{A_(j)} = 1/4, the events A₁, A₂, and A₃ are pairwise independent. The
events are not mutually independent, however, because Pr {A₁ ∩ A₂ ∩ A₃}
= 0 and Pr {A₁} Pr {A₂} Pr {A₃} = 1/8 ≠ 0.

Bayes’s theorem

From the definition (C.16) of conditional probability and the
commutative law A ∩ B = B ∩ A, it follows that for two events A and B,
each with nonzero probability,

[art]

Solving for Pr {A | B}, we obtain

[art]

which is known as Bayes’s theorem. The denominator Pr {B} is a
normalizing constant, which we can reformulate as follows. Since B = (B
∩ A) ∪ (B ∩ Ā), and since B ∩ A and B ∩ Ā are mutually exclusive events,

  -------- --- ----------------------------------------
  Pr {B}   =   Pr {B ∩ A} + Pr {B ∩ Ā}
           =   Pr {A} Pr {B | A} + Pr {Ā} Pr {B | Ā}.
  -------- --- ----------------------------------------

Substituting into equation (C.19) produces an equivalent form of Bayes’s
theorem:

[art]

Bayes’s theorem can simplify the computing of conditional probabilities.
For example, suppose that you have a fair coin and a biased coin that
always comes up heads. Run an experiment consisting of three independent
events: choose one of the two coins at random, flip that coin once, and
then flip it again. Suppose that the coin you have chosen comes up heads
both times. What is the probability that it’s the biased coin?

Bayes’s theorem solves this problem. Let A be the event that you choose
the biased coin, and let B be the event that the chosen coin comes up
heads both times. We wish to determine Pr {A | B}, knowing that Pr {A} =
1/2, Pr {B | A} = 1, Pr {Ā} = 1/2, and Pr {B | Ā = 1/4. Thus we have

[art]

Exercises

C.2-1

Professor Rosencrantz flips a fair coin twice. Professor Guildenstern
flips a fair coin once. What is the probability that Professor
Rosencrantz obtains strictly more heads than Professor Guildenstern?

C.2-2

Prove Boole’s inequality: For any finite or countably infinite sequence
of events A₁, A₂, …,

[art]

C.2-3

You shuffle a deck of 10 cards, each bearing a distinct number from 1 to
10, in order to mix the cards thoroughly. You then remove three cards,
one at a time, from the deck. What is the probability that the three
cards you select are in sorted (increasing) order?

C.2-4

Prove that

Pr {A | B} + Pr {Ā | B} = 1.

C.2-5

Prove that for any collection of events A₁, A₂, … , A_(n),

[art]

★ C.2-6

Show how to construct a set of n events that are pairwise independent
but such that no subset of k > 2 of them is mutually independent.

★ C.2-7

Two events A and B are conditionally independent, given C, if

Pr {A ∩ B | C} = Pr {A | C} · Pr {B | C}.

Give a simple but nontrivial example of two events that are not
independent but are conditionally independent given a third event.

★ C.2-8

Professor Gore teaches a music class on rhythm in which three
students—Jeff, Tim, and Carmine—are in danger of failing. Professor Gore
tells the three that one of them will pass the course and the other two
will fail. Carmine asks Professor Gore privately which of Jeff and Tim
will fail, arguing that since he already knows at least one of them will
fail, the professor won’t be revealing any information about Carmine’s
outcome. In a breach of privacy law, Professor Gore tells Carmine that
Jeff will fail. Carmine feels somewhat relieved now, figuring that
either he or Tim will pass, so that his probability of passing is now
1/2. Is Carmine correct, or is his chance of passing still 1/3? Explain.

C.3 Discrete random variables

A (discrete) random variable X is a function from a finite or countably
infinite sample space S to the real numbers. It associates a real number
with each possible outcome of an experiment, which allows us to work
with the probability distribution induced on the resulting set of
numbers. Random variables can also be defined for uncountably infinite
sample spaces, but they raise technical issues that are unnecessary to
address for our purposes. Therefore we’ll assume that random variables
are discrete.

For a random variable X and a real number x, we define the event X = x
to be {s ∈ S : X(s) = x}, and thus

[art]

The function

f(x) = Pr {X = x}

is the probability density function of the random variable X. From the
probability axioms, Pr {X = x} ≥ 0 and ∑_(x) Pr {X = x} = 1.

As an example, consider the experiment of rolling a pair of ordinary,
6-sided dice. There are 36 possible outcomes in the sample space. Assume
that the probability distribution is uniform, so that each outcome s ∈ S
is equally likely: Pr {s} = 1/36. Define the random variable X to be the
maximum of the two values showing on the dice. We have Pr {X = 3} =
5/36, since X assigns a value of 3 to 5 of the 36 possible outcomes,
namely, (1, 3), (2, 3), (3, 3), (3, 2), and (3, 1).

We can define several random variables on the same sample space. If X
and Y are random variables, the function

f(x, y) = Pr {X = x and Y = y}

is the joint probability density function of X and Y. For a fixed value
y,

[art]

and similarly, for a fixed value x,

[art]

Using the definition (C.16) of conditional probability on page 1187, we
have

[art]

We define two random variables X and Y to be independent if for all x
and y, the events X = x and Y = y are independent or, equivalently, if
for all x and y, we have Pr {X = x and Y = y} = Pr {X = x} Pr {Y = y}.

Given a set of random variables defined over the same sample space, we
can define new random variables as sums, products, or other functions of
the original variables.

Expected value of a random variable

The simplest, and often the most useful, summary of the distribution of
a random variable is the “average” of the values it takes on. The
expected value (or, synonymously, expectation or mean) of a discrete
random variable X is

[art]

which is well defined if the sum is finite or converges absolutely.
Sometimes the expectation of X is denoted by μ_(X) or, when the random
variable is apparent from context, simply by μ.

Consider a game in which you flip two fair coins. You earn $3 for each
head but lose $2 for each tail. The expected value of the random
variable X representing your earnings is

  ------ --- -----------------------------------------------------
  E[X]   =   6 · Pr {2 H’s} + 1 · Pr {1 H, 1 T} − 4 · Pr {2 T’s}
         =   6 · (1/4) + 1 · (1/2) − 4 · (1/4)
         =   1.
  ------ --- -----------------------------------------------------

Linearity of expectation says that the expectation of the sum of two
random variables is the sum of their expectations, that is,

[art]

whenever E[X] and E[Y] are defined. Linearity of expectation applies to
a broad range of situations, holding even when X and Y are not
independent. It also extends to finite and absolutely convergent
summations of expectations. Linearity of expectation is the key property
that enables us to perform probabilistic analyses by using indicator
random variables (see Section 5.2).

If X is any random variable, any function g(x) defines a new random
variable g(X). If the expectation of g(X) is defined, then

[art]

Letting g(x) = ax, we have for any constant a,

[art]

Consequently, expectations are linear: for any two random variables X
and Y and any constant a,

[art]

When two random variables X and Y are independent and each has a defined
expectation,

[art]

In general, when n random variables X₁, X₂, … , X_(n) are mutually
independent,

[art]

When a random variable X takes on values from the set of natural numbers
ℕ = {0, 1, 2, …}, we have a nice formula for its expectation:

[art]

since each term Pr {X ≥ i} is added in i times and subtracted out i − 1
times (except Pr {X ≥ 0}, which is added in 0 times and not subtracted
out at all).

A function f(x) is convex if

[art]

for all x and y and for all 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1. Jensen’s inequality says that
when a convex function f(x) is applied to a random variable X,

[art]

provided that the expectations exist and are finite.

Variance and standard deviation

The expected value of a random variable does not express how “spread
out” the variable’s values are. For example, consider random variables X
and Y for which Pr {X = 1/4} = Pr {X = 3/4} = 1/2 and Pr {Y = 0} = Pr {Y
= 1} = 1/2. Then both E[X] and E[Y] are 1/2, yet the actual values taken
on by Y are further from the mean than the actual values taken on by X.

The notion of variance mathematically expresses how far from the mean a
random variable’s values are likely to be. The variance of a random
variable X with mean E[X] is

[art]

To justify the equation E[E²[X]] = E²[X], note that because E[X] is a
real number and not a random variable, so is E²[X]. The equation
E[XE[X]] = E²[X] follows from equation (C.25), with a = E[X]. Rewriting
equation (C.31) yields an expression for the expectation of the square
of a random variable:

[art]

The variance of a random variable X and the variance of aX are related
(see Exercise C.3-10):

Var[aX] = a²Var[X].

When X and Y are independent random variables,

Var[X + Y] = Var[X] + Var[Y].

In general, if n random variables X₁, X₂, … , X_(n) are pairwise
independent, then

[art]

The standard deviation of a random variable X is the nonnegative square
root of the variance of X. The standard deviation of a random variable X
is sometimes denoted σ_(X) or simply σ when the random variable X is
understood from context. With this notation, the variance of X is
denoted σ².

Exercises

C.3-1

You roll two ordinary, 6-sided dice. What is the expectation of the sum
of the two values showing? What is the expectation of the maximum of the
two values showing?

C.3-2

An array A[1 : n] contains n distinct numbers that are randomly ordered,
with each permutation of the n numbers being equally likely. What is the
expectation of the index of the maximum element in the array? What is
the expectation of the index of the minimum element in the array?

C.3-3

A carnival game consists of three dice in a cage. A player can bet a
dollar on any of the numbers 1 through 6. The cage is shaken, and the
payoff is as follows. If the player’s number doesn’t appear on any of
the dice, the player loses the dollar. Otherwise, if the player’s number
appears on exactly k of the three dice, for k = 1, 2, 3, the player
keeps the dollar and wins k more dollars. What is the expected gain from
playing the carnival game once?

C.3-4

Argue that if X and Y are nonnegative random variables, then

E[max {X, Y}] ≤ E[X] + E[Y].

★ C.3-5

Let X and Y be independent random variables. Prove that f(X) and g(Y)
are independent for any choice of functions f and g.

★ C.3-6

Let X be a nonnegative random variable, and suppose that E[X] is well
defined. Prove Markov’s inequality:

[art]

for all t > 0.

★ C.3-7

Let S be a sample space, and let X and X′ be random variables such that
X(s) ≥ X′(s) for all s ∈ S. Prove that for any real constant t,

Pr {X ≥ t} ≥ Pr {X′ ≥ t}.

C.3-8

Which is larger: the expectation of the square of a random variable, or
the square of its expectation?

C.3-9

Show that for any random variable X that takes on only the values 0 and
1, we have Var[X] = E[X] E [1 − X].

C.3-10

Prove that Var[aX] = a²Var[X] from the definition (C.31) of variance.

C.4 The geometric and binomial distributions

A Bernoulli trial is an experiment with only two possible outcomes:
success, which occurs with probability p, and failure, which occurs with
probability q = 1 − p. A coin flip serves as an example where, depending
on your point of view, heads equates to success and tails to failure.
When we speak of Bernoulli trials collectively, we mean that the trials
are mutually independent and, unless we specifically say otherwise, that
each has the same probability p for success. Two important distributions
arise from Bernoulli trials: the geometric distribution and the binomial
distribution.

The geometric distribution

Consider a sequence of Bernoulli trials, each with a probability p of
success and a probability q = 1 − p of failure. How many trials occur
before a success? Define the random variable X to be the number of
trials needed to obtain a success. Then X has values in the range {1, 2,
…}, and for k ≥ 1,

[art]

Figure C.1 A geometric distribution with probability p = 1/3 of success
and a probability q = 1 − p of failure. The expectation of the
distribution is 1/p = 3.

[art]

since k − 1 failures occur before the first success. A probability
distribution satisfying equation (C.35) is said to be a geometric
distribution. Figure C.1 illustrates such a distribution.

Assuming that q < 1, we can calculate the expectation of a geometric
distribution:

[art]

Thus, on average, it takes 1/p trials before a success occurs, an
intuitive result. As Exercise C.4-3 asks you to show, the variance is

[art]

As an example, suppose that you repeatedly roll two dice until you
obtain either a seven or an eleven. Of the 36 possible outcomes, 6 yield
a seven and 2 yield an eleven. Thus, the probability of success is p =
8/36 = 2/9, and you’d have to roll 1/p = 9/2 = 4.5 times on average to
obtain a seven or eleven.

The binomial distribution

How many successes occur during n Bernoulli trials, where a success
occurs with probability p and a failure with probability q = 1 − p?
Define the random variable X to be the number of successes in n trials.
Then X has values in the range {0, 1, … , n}, and for k = 0, 1, … , n,

[art]

since there are [art] ways to pick which k of the n trials are
successes, and the probability that each occurs is p^(k)q^(n−k). A
probability distribution satisfying equation (C.38) is said to be a
binomial distribution. For convenience, we define the family of binomial
distributions using the notation

[art]

Figure C.2 illustrates a binomial distribution. The name “binomial”
comes from the right-hand side of equation (C.38) being the kth term of
the expansion of (p +q)^(n). Consequently, since p + q = 1, equation
(C.4) on page 1181 gives

[art]

as axiom 2 of the probability axioms requires.

We can compute the expectation of a random variable having a binomial
distribution from equations (C.9) and (C.40). Let X be a random variable
that follows the binomial distribution b(k; n, p), and let q = 1 − p.
The definition of expectation gives

[art]

Figure C.2 The binomial distribution b(k; 15, 1/3) resulting from n = 15
Bernoulli trials, each with probability p = 1/3 of success. The
expectation of the distribution is np = 5.

[art]

Linearity of expectation produces the same result with substantially
less algebra. Let X_(i) be the random variable describing the number of
successes in the ith trial. Then E[X_(i)] = p · 1 + q · 0 = p, and the
expected number of successes for n trials is

[art]

We can use the same approach to calculate the variance of the
distribution. By equation (C.31), [art]. Since X_(i) takes on only the
values 0 and 1, we have [art], which implies [art]. Hence,

[art]

To compute the variance of X, we take advantage of the independence of
the n trials. By equation (C.33), we have

[art]

As Figure C.2 shows, the binomial distribution b(k; n, p) increases with
k until it reaches the mean np, and then it decreases. To prove that the
distribution always behaves in this manner, examine the ratio of
successive terms:

[art]

This ratio is greater than 1 precisely when (n + 1)p − k is positive.
Consequently, b(k; n, p) > b(k − 1; n, p) for k < (n + 1)p (the
distribution increases), and b(k; n, p) < b(k − 1; n, p) for k > (n +
1)p (the distribution decreases). If (n + 1)p is an integer, then for k
= (n + 1)p, the ratio b(k; n, p)/b(k − 1; n, p) equals 1, so that b(k;
n, p) = b(k − 1; n, p). In this case, the distribution has two maxima:
at k = (n+1)p and at k−1 = (n+1)p−1 = np−q. Otherwise, it attains a
maximum at the unique integer k that lies in the range np − q < k < (n +
1)p.

The following lemma provides an upper bound on the binomial
distribution.

Lemma C.1

Let n ≥ 0, let 0 < p < 1, let q = 1 − p, and let 0 ≤ k ≤ n. Then

[art]

Proof   We have

[art]

▪

Exercises

C.4-1

Verify axiom 2 of the probability axioms for the geometric distribution.

C.4-2

How many times on average do you need to flip six fair coins before
obtaining three heads and three tails?

C.4-3

Show that the variance of the geometric distribution is q/p². (Hint: Use
Exercise A.1-6 on page 1144.)

C.4-4

Show that b(k; n, p) = b(n − k; n, q), where q = 1 − p.

C.4-5

Show that the value of the maximum of the binomial distribution b(k; n,
p) is approximately [art], where q = 1 − p.

★ C.4-6

Show that the probability of no successes in n Bernoulli trials, each
with probability p = 1/n of success, is approximately 1/e. Show that the
probability of exactly one success is also approximately 1/e.

★ C.4-7

Professor Rosencrantz flips a fair coin n times, and so does Professor
Guildenstern. Show that the probability that they get the same number of
heads is [art]. (Hint: For Professor Rosencrantz, call a head a success,
and for Professor Guildenstern, call a tail a success.) Use your
argument to verify the identity

[art]

★ C.4-8

Show that for 0 ≤ k ≤ n,

b(k; n, 1/2) ≤ 2^(n H(k/n)−n),

where H(x) is the entropy function (C.8) on page 1182.

★ C.4-9

Consider n Bernoulli trials, where for i = 1, 2, … , n, the ith trial
has probability p_(i) of success, and let X be the random variable
denoting the total number of successes. Let p ≥ p_(i) for all i = 1, 2,
… , n. Prove that for 1 ≤ k ≤ n,

[art]

★ C.4-10

Let X be the random variable for the total number of successes in a set
A of n Bernoulli trials, where the ith trial has a probability p_(i) of
success, and let X′ be the random variable for the total number of
successes in a second set A′ of n Bernoulli trials, where the ith trial
has a probability [art] of success. Prove that for 0 ≤ k ≤ n,

Pr {X′ ≥ k} ≥ Pr {X ≥ k}.

(Hint: Show how to obtain the Bernoulli trials in A′ by an experiment
involving the trials of A, and use the result of Exercise C.3-7.)

★ C.5 The tails of the binomial distribution

The probability of having at least, or at most, k successes in n
Bernoulli trials, each with probability p of success, is often of more
interest than the probability of having exactly k successes. In this
section, we investigate the tails of the binomial distribution: the two
regions of the distribution b(k; n, p) that are far from the mean np.
We’ll prove several important bounds on (the sum of all terms in) a
tail.

We first provide a bound on the right tail of the distribution b(k; n,
p). To determine bounds on the left tail, simply invert the roles of
successes and failures.

Theorem C.2

Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p. Let X be the random variable denoting the total number of
successes. Then for 0 ≤ k ≤ n, the probability of at least k successes
is

[art]

Proof   For S ⊆ {1, 2, … , n}, let A_(S) denote the event that the ith
trial is a success for every i ∈ S. Since Pr {A_(S)} = p^(k), where |S|
= k, we have

[art]

▪

The following corollary restates the theorem for the left tail of the
binomial distribution. In general, we’ll leave it to you to adapt the
proofs from one tail to the other.

Corollary C.3

Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p. If X is the random variable denoting the total number of
successes, then for 0 ≤ k ≤ n, the probability of at most k successes is

[art]

▪

Our next bound concerns the left tail of the binomial distribution. Its
corollary shows that, far from the mean, the left tail diminishes
exponentially.

Theorem C.4

Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p and failure with probability q = 1 − p. Let X be the
random variable denoting the total number of successes. Then for 0 < k <
np, the probability of fewer than k successes is

[art]

Proof   We bound the series [art] by a geometric series using the
technique from Section A.2, page 1147. For i = 1, 2, … , k, equation
(C.45) gives

[art]

If we let

[art]

it follows that

b(i − 1; n, p) < xb(i; n, p)

for 0 < i ≤ k. Iteratively applying this inequality k − i times gives

b(i; n, p) < x^(k−i) b(k; n, p)

for 0 ≤ i < k, and hence

[art]

▪

Corollary C.5

Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p and failure with probability q = 1 − p. Then for 0 < k ≤
np/2, the probability of fewer than k successes is less than half the
probability of fewer than k + 1 successes.

Proof   Because k ≤ np/2, we have

[art]

since q ≤ 1. Letting X be the random variable denoting the number of
successes, Theorem C.4 and inequality (C.46) imply that the probability
of fewer than k successes is

[art]

Thus we have

[art]

since [art].

▪

Bounds on the right tail follow similarly. Exercise C.5-2 asks you to
prove them.

Corollary C.6

Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p. Let X be the random variable denoting the total number of
successes. Then for np < k < n, the probability of more than k successes
is

[art]

▪

Corollary C.7

Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p and failure with probability q = 1 − p. Then for (np +
n)/2 < k < n, the probability of more than k successes is less than half
the probability of more than k − 1 successes.

▪

The next theorem considers n Bernoulli trials, each with a probability
p_(i) of success, for i = 1, 2, … , n. As the subsequent corollary
shows, we can use the theorem to provide a bound on the right tail of
the binomial distribution by setting p_(i) = p for each trial.

Theorem C.8

Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where in the ith trial, for i
= 1, 2, … , n, success occurs with probability p_(i) and failure occurs
with probability q_(i) = 1 − p_(i). Let X be the random variable
describing the total number of successes, and let μ = E[X]. Then for r >
μ,

[art]

Proof   Since for any α > 0, the function e^(αx) strictly increases in
x,

[art]

where we will determine α later. Using Markov’s inequality (C.34), we
obtain

[art]

The bulk of the proof consists of bounding E[e^(α(X−μ))] and
substituting a suitable value for α in inequality (C.48). First, we
evaluate E[e^(α(X−μ))]. Using the technique of indicator random
variables (see Section 5.2), let X_(i) = I {the ith Bernoulli trial is a
success} for i = 1, 2, … , n. That is, X_(i) is the random variable that
is 1 if the ith Bernoulli trial is a success and 0 if it is a failure.
Thus, we have

[art]

and by linearity of expectation,

[art]

which implies

[art]

To evaluate E[e^(α(X−μ))], we substitute for X − μ, obtaining

[art]

which follows from equation (C.27), since the mutual independence of the
random variables X_(i) implies the mutual independence of the random
variables [art] (see Exercise C.3-5). By the definition of expectation,

[art]

where exp(x) denotes the exponential function: exp(x) = e^(x).
(Inequality (C.49) follows from the inequalities α > 0, q_(i) ≤ 1,
[art], and [art]. The last line follows from inequality (3.14) on page
66.) Consequently,

[art]

since [art]. Therefore, from equation (C.47) and inequalities (C.48) and
(C.50), it follows that

[art]

Choosing α = ln(r/μ) (see Exercise C.5-7), we obtain

[art]

▪

When applied to Bernoulli trials in which each trial has the same
probability of success, Theorem C.8 yields the following corollary
bounding the right tail of a binomial distribution.

Corollary C.9

Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where in each trial success
occurs with probability p and failure occurs with probability q = 1 − p.
Then for r > np,

[art]

Proof   By equation (C.41), we have μ = E[X] = np.

▪

Exercises

★ C.5-1

Which is more likely: getting exactly n heads in 2n flips of a fair
coin, or n heads in n flips of a fair coin?

★ C.5-2

Prove Corollaries C.6 and C.7.

★ C.5-3

Show that

[art]

for all a > 0 and all k such that 0 < k < na/(a + 1).

★ C.5-4

Prove that if 0 < k < np, where 0 < p < 1 and q = 1 − p, then

[art]

★ C.5-5

Use Theorem C.8 to show that

[art]

for r > n − μ. Similarly, use Corollary C.9 to show that

[art]

for r > n − np.

★ C.5-6

Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where in the ith trial, for i
= 1, 2, … , n, success occurs with probability p_(i) and failure occurs
with probability q_(i) = 1 − p_(i). Let X be the random variable
describing the total number of successes, and let μ = E[X]. Show that
for r ≥ 0,

[art]

(Hint: Prove that [art]. Then follow the outline of the proof of Theorem
C.8, using this inequality in place of inequality (C.49).)

★ C.5-7

Show that choosing α = ln(r/μ) minimizes the right-hand side of
inequality (C.51).

Problems

C-1 The Monty Hall problem

Imagine that you are a contestant in the 1960s game show Let’s Make a
Deal, hosted by emcee Monty Hall. A valuable prize is hidden behind one
of three doors and comparatively worthless prizes behind the other two
doors. You will win the valuable prize, typically an automobile or other
expensive product, if you select the correct door. After you have picked
one door, but before the door has been opened, Monty, who knows which
door hides the automobile, directs his assistant Carol Merrill to open
one of the other doors, revealing a goat (not a valuable prize). He asks
whether you would like to stick with your current choice or to switch to
the other closed door. What should you do to maximize your chances of
winning the automobile and not the other goat?

The answer to this question—stick or switch?—has been heavily debated,
in part because the problem setup is ambiguous. We’ll explore different
subtle assumptions.

a. Suppose that your first pick is random, with probability 1/3 of
choosing the right door. Moreover, you know that Monty always gives
every contestant (and will give you) the opportunity to switch. Prove
that it is better to switch than stick. What is your probability of
winning the automobile?

This answer is the one typically given, even though the original
statement of the problem rarely mentions the assumption that Monty
always offers the contestant the opportunity to switch. But, as the
remainder of this problem will elucidate, your best strategy may be
different if this unstated assumption does not hold. In fact, in the
real game show, after a contestant picked a door, Monty sometimes simply
asked Carol to open the door that the contestant had chosen.

Let’s model the interactions between you and Monty as a probabilistic
experiment, where you both employ randomized strategies. Specifically,
after you pick a door, Monty offers you the opportunity to switch with
probability p_(right) if you picked the right door and with probability
p_(wrong) if you picked the wrong door. Given the opportunity to switch,
you randomly choose to switch with probability p_(switch). For example,
if Monty always offers you the opportunity to switch, then his strategy
is given by p_(right) = p_(wrong) = 1. If you always switch, then your
strategy is given by p_(switch) = 1.

The game can now be viewed as an experiment consisting of five steps:

1. You pick a door at random, choosing the automobile (right) with
probability 1/3 or a goat (wrong) with probability 2/3.

2. Carol opens one of the two closed doors, revealing a goat.

3. Monty offers you the opportunity to switch with probability p_(right)
if your choice is right and with probability p_(wrong) if your choice is
wrong.

4. If Monty makes you an offer in step 3, you switch with probability
p_(switch).

5. Carol opens the door you’ve chosen, revealing either an automobile
(you win) or a goat (you lose).

Let’s now analyze this game and understand how the choices of p_(right),
p_(wrong), and p_(switch) influence the probability of winning.

b. What are the six outcomes in the sample space for this game? Which
outcomes correspond to you winning the automobile? What are the
probabilities in terms of p_(right), p_(wrong), and p_(switch) of each
outcome? Organize your answers into a table.

c. Use the results of your table (or other means) to prove that the
probability of winning the automobile is

[art]

Suppose that Monty knows the probability p_(switch) that you switch, and
his goal is to minimize your chance of winning.

d. If p_(switch) > 0 (you switch with a positive probability), what is
Monty’s best strategy, that is, his best choice for p_(right) and
p_(wrong)?

e. If p_(switch) = 0 (you always stick), argue that all of Monty’s
possible strategies are optimal for him.

Suppose that now Monty’s strategy is fixed, with particular values for
p_(right) and p_(wrong).

f. If you know p_(right) and p_(wrong), what is your best strategy for
choosing your probability p_(switch) of switching as a function of
p_(right) and p_(wrong)?

g. If you don’t know p_(right) and p_(wrong), what choice of p_(switch)
maximizes the minimum probability of winning over all the choices of
p_(right) and p_(wrong)?

Let’s return to the original problem as stated, where Monty has given
you the option of switching, but you have no knowledge of Monty’s
possible motivations or strategies.

h. Argue that the conditional probability of winning the automobile
given that Monty offers you the opportunity to switch is

[art]

Explain why p_(right) + 2p_(wrong) ≠ 0.

i. What is the value of expression (C.52) when p_(switch) = 1/2? Show
that choosing p_(switch) < 1/2 or p_(switch) > 1/2 allows Monty to
select values for p_(right) and p_(wrong) that yield a lower value for
expression (C.52) than choosing p_(switch) = 1/2.

j. Suppose that you don’t know Monty’s strategy. Explain why choosing to
switch with probability 1/2 is a good strategy for the original problem
as stated. Summarize what you have learned overall from this problem.

C-2 Balls and bins

This problem investigates the effect of various assumptions on the
number of ways of placing n balls into b distinct bins.

a. Suppose that the n balls are distinct and that their order within a
bin does not matter. Argue that the number of ways of placing the balls
in the bins is b^(n).

b. Suppose that the balls are distinct and that the balls in each bin
are ordered. Prove that there are exactly (b + n − 1)!/(b − 1)! ways to
place the balls in the bins. (Hint: Consider the number of ways of
arranging n distinct balls and b − 1 indistinguishable sticks in a row.)

c. Suppose that the balls are identical, and hence their order within a
bin does not matter. Show that the number of ways of placing the balls
in the bins is [art]. (Hint: Of the arrangements in part (b), how many
are repeated if the balls are made identical?)

d. Suppose that the balls are identical and that no bin may contain more
than one ball, so that n ≤ b. Show that the number of ways of placing
the balls is [art].

e. Suppose that the balls are identical and that no bin may be left
empty. Assuming that n ≥ b, show that the number of ways of placing the
balls is [art].

Appendix notes

The first general methods for solving probability problems were
discussed in a famous correspondence between B. Pascal and P. de Fermat,
which began in 1654, and in a book by C. Huygens in 1657. Rigorous
probability theory began with the work of J. Bernoulli in 1713 and A. De
Moivre in 1730. Further developments of the theory were provided by
P.-S. Laplace, S.-D. Poisson, and C. F. Gauss.

Sums of random variables were originally studied by P. L. Chebyshev and
A. A. Markov. A. N. Kolmogorov axiomatized probability theory in 1933.
Chernoff [91] and Hoeffding [222] provided bounds on the tails of
distributions. Seminal work in random combinatorial structures was done
by P. Erdős.

Knuth [259] and Liu [302] are good references for elementary
combinatorics and counting. Standard textbooks such as Billingsley [56],
Chung [93], Drake [125], Feller [139], and Rozanov [390] offer
comprehensive introductions to probability.

¹ For a general probability distribution, there may be some subsets of
the sample space S that are not considered to be events. This situation
usually arises when the sample space is uncountably infinite. The main
requirement for what subsets are events is that the set of events of a
sample space must be closed under the operations of taking the
complement of an event, forming the union of a finite or countable
number of events, and taking the intersection of a finite or countable
number of events. Most of the probability distributions we see in this
book are over finite or countable sample spaces, and we generally
consider all subsets of a sample space to be events. A notable exception
is the continuous uniform probability distribution, which we’ll see
shortly.

D Matrices

Matrices arise in numerous applications, including, but by no means
limited to, scientific computing. If you have seen matrices before, much
of the material in this appendix will be familiar to you, but some of it
might be new. Section D.1 covers basic matrix definitions and
operations, and Section D.2 presents some basic matrix properties.

D.1 Matrices and matrix operations

This section reviews some basic concepts of matrix theory and some
fundamental properties of matrices.

Matrices and vectors

A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers. For example,

[art]

is a 2 × 3 matrix A = (a_(ij)), where for i = 1, 2 and j = 1, 2, 3, the
element of the matrix in row i and column j is denoted by a_(ij). By
convention, uppercase letters denote matrices and corresponding
subscripted lowercase letters denote their elements. We denote the set
of all m × n matrices with real-valued entries by ℝ^(m×n) and, in
general, the set of m × n matrices with entries drawn from a set S by
S^(m×n).

The transpose of a matrix A is the matrix A^(T) obtained by exchanging
the rows and columns of A. For the matrix A of equation (D.1),

[art]

A vector is a one-dimensional array of numbers. For example,

[art]

is a vector of size 3. We sometimes call a vector of length n an
n-vector. By convention, lowercase letters denote vectors, and the ith
element of a size-n vector x is denoted by x_(i), for i = 1, 2, … , n.
We take the standard form of a vector to be as a column vector
equivalent to an n × 1 matrix, whereas the corresponding row vector is
obtained by taking the transpose:

x^(T) = ( 2 3 5 ).

The unit vector e_(i) is the vector whose ith element is 1 and all of
whose other elements are 0. Usually, the context makes the size of a
unit vector clear.

A zero matrix is a matrix all of whose entries are 0. Such a matrix is
often denoted 0, since the ambiguity between the number 0 and a matrix
of 0s can usually be resolved from context. If a matrix of 0s is
intended, then the size of the matrix also needs to be derived from the
context.

Square matrices

Square n × n matrices arise frequently. Several special cases of square
matrices are of particular interest:

1. A diagonal matrix has a_(ij) = 0 whenever i ≠ j. Because all of the
off-diagonal elements are 0, a succinct way to specify the matrix lists
only the elements along the diagonal:

[art]

2. The n × n identity matrix I_(n) is a diagonal matrix with 1s along
the diagonal:

[art]

When I appears without a subscript, its size derives from the context.
The ith column of an identity matrix is the unit vector e_(i).

3. A tridiagonal matrix T is one for which t_(ij) = 0 if |i − j | > 1.
Nonzero entries appear only on the main diagonal, immediately above the
main diagonal (t_(i,i+1) for i = 1, 2, … , n − 1), or immediately below
the main diagonal (t_(i+1,i) for i = 1, 2, … , n − 1):

[art]

4. An upper-triangular matrix U is one for which u_(ij) = 0 if i > j.
All entries below the diagonal are 0:

[art]

An upper-triangular matrix is unit upper-triangular if it has all 1s
along the diagonal.

5. A lower-triangular matrix L is one for which l_(ij) = 0 if i < j. All
entries above the diagonal are 0:

[art]

A lower-triangular matrix is unit lower-triangular if it has all 1s
along the diagonal.

6. A permutation matrix P has exactly one 1 in each row or column, and
0s elsewhere. An example of a permutation matrix is

[art]

Such a matrix is called a permutation matrix because multiplying a
vector x by a permutation matrix has the effect of permuting
(rearranging) the elements of x. Exercise D.1-4 explores additional
properties of permutation matrices.

7. A symmetric matrix A satisfies the condition A = A^(T). For example,

[art]

is a symmetric matrix.

Basic matrix operations

The elements of a matrix or vector are scalar numbers from a number
system, such as the real numbers, the complex numbers, or integers
modulo a prime. The number system defines how to add and multiply
scalars. These definitions extend to encompass addition and
multiplication of matrices.

We define matrix addition as follows. If A = (a_(ij)) and B = (b_(ij))
are m × n matrices, then their matrix sum C = (c_(ij)) = A + B is the m
× n matrix defined by

c_(ij) = a_(ij) + b_(ij)

for i = 1, 2, … , m and j = 1, 2, … , n. That is, matrix addition is
performed componentwise. A zero matrix is the identity for matrix
addition:

A + 0 = A = 0 + A.

If is λ a scalar number and A = (a_(ij)) is a matrix, then λA =
(λa_(ij)) is the scalar multiple of A obtained by multiplying each of
its elements by λ. As a special case, we define the negative of a matrix
A = (a_(ij)) to be −1 · A = −A, so that the ijth entry of −A is −a_(ij).
Thus,

A + (−A) = 0 = (−A) + A.

The negative of a matrix defines matrix subtraction: A − B = A + (−B).

We define matrix multiplication as follows. Start with two matrices A
and B that are compatible in the sense that the number of columns of A
equals the number of rows of B. (In general, an expression containing a
matrix product AB is always assumed to imply that matrices A and B are
compatible.) If A = (a_(ik)) is a p × q matrix and B = (b_(kj)) is a q ×
r matrix, then their matrix product C = AB is the p × r matrix C =
(c_(ij)), where

[art]

for i = 1, 2, … , m and j = 1, 2, … , p. The procedure
RECTANGULAR-MATRIX-MULTIPLY on page 374 implements matrix multiplication
in the straightforward manner based on equation (D.2), assuming that C
is initialized to 0, using pqr multiplications and p(q − 1)r additions
for a running time of Θ(pqr). If the matrices are n×n square matrices,
so that n = p = q = r, the pseudocode reduces to MATRIX-MULTIPLY on page
81, whose running time is Θ(n³). (Section 4.2 describes an
asymptotically faster Θ(n^(lg7))-time algorithm due to V. Strassen.)

Matrices have many (but not all) of the algebraic properties typical of
numbers. Identity matrices are identities for matrix multiplication:

I_(m)A = AI_(n) = A

for any m × n matrix A. Multiplying by a zero matrix gives a zero
matrix:

A · 0 = 0.

Matrix multiplication is associative:

A(BC) = (AB)C

for compatible matrices A, B, and C. Matrix multiplication distributes
over addition:

  ---------- --- ----------
  A(B + C)   =   AB + AC,
  (B + C)D   =   BD + CD.
  ---------- --- ----------

For n > 1, multiplication of n × n matrices is not commutative. For
example, if [art] and [art], then [art] and [art].

We define matrix-vector products or vector-vector products as if the
vector were the equivalent n × 1 matrix (or a 1 × n matrix, in the case
of a row vector). Thus, if A is an m × n matrix and x is an n-vector,
then Ax is an m-vector. If x and y are n-vectors, then

[art]

is a scalar number (actually a 1 × 1 matrix) called the inner product of
x and y. We also use the notation 〈x, y〉 to denote x^(T)y. The
inner-product operator is commutative: 〈x, y〉 = 〈y, x〉. The matrix
xy^(T) is an n × n matrix Z called the outer product of x and y, where
z_(ij) = x_(i)y_(j). The (euclidean) norm ∥x∥ of an n-vector x is
defined by

[art]

Thus, the norm of x is its length in n-dimensional euclidean space. A
useful fact, which follows from the equality

[art]

is that for any real number a and n-vector x,

[art]

Exercises

D.1-1

Show that if A and B are symmetric n × n matrices, then so are A + B and
A − B.

D.1-2

Prove that (AB)^(T) = B^(T)A^(T) and that A^(T)A is always a symmetric
matrix.

D.1-3

Prove that the product of two lower-triangular matrices is
lower-triangular.

D.1-4

Prove that if P is an n × n permutation matrix and A is an n × n matrix,
then the matrix product PA is A with its rows permuted, and the matrix
product AP is A with its columns permuted. Prove that the product of two
permutation matrices is a permutation matrix.

D.2 Basic matrix properties

We now define some basic properties pertaining to matrices: inverses,
linear dependence and independence, rank, and determinants. We also
define the class of positive-definite matrices.

Matrix inverses, ranks, and determinants

The inverse of an n × n matrix A is the n × n matrix, denoted A⁻¹ (if it
exists), such that AA⁻¹ = I_(n) = A⁻¹A. For example,

[art]

Many nonzero n × n matrices do not have inverses. A matrix without an
inverse is called noninvertible, or singular. An example of a nonzero
singular matrix is

[art]

If a matrix has an inverse, it is called invertible, or nonsingular.
Matrix inverses, when they exist, are unique. (See Exercise D.2-1.) If A
and B are nonsingular n × n matrices, then

(BA)⁻¹ = A⁻¹B⁻¹.

The inverse operation commutes with the transpose operation:

(A⁻¹)^(T) = (A^(T))⁻¹.

The vectors x₁, x₂, … , x_(n) are linearly dependent if there exist
coefficients c₁, c₂, … , c_(n), not all of which are 0, such that c₁x₁ +
c₂x₂ + ⋯ + c_(n)x_(n) = 0. The row vectors x₁ = ( 1 2 3 ), x₂ = ( 2 6 4
), and x₃ = ( 4 11 9 ) are linearly dependent, for example, since
2x₁+3x₂−2x₃ = 0. If vectors are not linearly dependent, they are
linearly independent. For example, the columns of an identity matrix are
linearly independent.

The column rank of a nonzero m × n matrix A is the size of the largest
set of linearly independent columns of A. Similarly, the row rank of A
is the size of the largest set of linearly independent rows of A. A
fundamental property of any matrix A is that its row rank always equals
its column rank, so that we can simply refer to the rank of A. The rank
of an m × n matrix is an integer between 0 and min {m, n}, inclusive.
(The rank of a zero matrix is 0, and the rank of an n × n identity
matrix is n.) An alternate, but equivalent and often more useful,
definition is that the rank of a nonzero m×n matrix A is the smallest
number r such that there exist matrices B and C of respective sizes m ×
r and r × n such that A = BC. A square n × n matrix has full rank if its
rank is n. An m × n matrix has full column rank if its rank is n. The
following theorem gives a fundamental property of ranks.

Theorem D.1

A square matrix has full rank if and only if it is nonsingular.

▪

A null vector for a matrix A is a nonzero vector x such that Ax = 0. The
following theorem (whose proof is left as Exercise D.2-7) and its
corollary relate the notions of column rank and singularity to null
vectors.

Theorem D.2

A matrix has full column rank if and only if it does not have a null
vector.

▪

Corollary D.3

A square matrix is singular if and only if it has a null vector.

▪

The ijth minor of an n×n matrix A, for n > 1, is the (n−1)×(n−1) matrix
A_([ij]) obtained by deleting the ith row and jth column of A. The
determinant of an n×n matrix A is defined recursively in terms of its
minors by

[art]

The term (−1)^(i+j) det(A_([ij])) is known as the cofactor of the
element a_(ij).

The following theorems, whose proofs are omitted, express fundamental
properties of the determinant.

Theorem D.4 (Determinant properties)

The determinant of a square matrix A has the following properties:

- If any row or any column of A is zero, then det(A) = 0.
- The determinant of A is multiplied by λ if the entries of any one row
  (or any one column) of A are all multiplied by λ.
- The determinant of A is unchanged if the entries in one row
  (respectively, column) are added to those in another row
  (respectively, column).
- The determinant of A equals the determinant of A^(T).
- The determinant of A is multiplied by −1 if any two rows (or any two
  columns) are exchanged.

Also, for any square matrices A and B, we have det(AB) = det(A) det(B).

▪

Theorem D.5

An n × n matrix A is singular if and only if det(A) = 0.

▪

Positive-definite matrices

Positive-definite matrices play an important role in many applications.
An n × n matrix A is positive-definite if x^(T)Ax > 0 for all n-vectors
x ≠ 0. For example, the identity matrix is positive-definite, since if x
= ( x₁ x₂ ⋯ x_(n))^(T) is a nonzero vector, then

[art]

Matrices that arise in applications are often positive-definite due to
the following theorem.

Theorem D.6

For any matrix A with full column rank, the matrix A^(T)A is
positive-definite.

Proof   We must show that x^(T)(A^(T)A)x > 0 for any nonzero vector x.
For any vector x,

  ---------------- --- -------------- ---------------------
  x^(T)(A^(T)A)x   =   (Ax)^(T)(Ax)   (by Exercise D.1-2)
                   =   ∥Ax∥².         
  ---------------- --- -------------- ---------------------

The value ∥Ax∥² is just the sum of the squares of the elements of the
vector Ax. Therefore, ∥Ax∥² ≥ 0. We’ll show by contradiction that
∥Ax∥² > 0. Suppose that ∥Ax∥² = 0. Then, every element of Ax is 0, which
is to say Ax = 0. Since A has full column rank, Theorem D.2 says that x
= 0, which contradicts the requirement that x is nonzero. Hence, A^(T)A
is positive-definite.

▪

Section 28.3 explores other properties of positive-definite matrices.
Section 33.3 uses a similar condition, known as positive-semidefinite.
An n × n matrix A is positive-semidefinite if x^(T)Ax ≥ 0 for all
n-vectors x ≠ 0.

Exercises

D.2-1

Prove that matrix inverses are unique, that is, if B and C are inverses
of A, then B = C.

D.2-2

Prove that the determinant of a lower-triangular or upper-triangular
matrix is equal to the product of its diagonal elements. Prove that the
inverse of a lower-triangular matrix, if it exists, is lower-triangular.

D.2-3

Prove that if P is a permutation matrix, then P is invertible, its
inverse is P^(T), and P^(T) is a permutation matrix.

D.2-4

Let A and B be n × n matrices such that AB = I. Prove that if A′ is
obtained from A by adding row j into row i, where i ≠ j, then
subtracting column i from column j of B yields the inverse B′ of A′.

D.2-5

Let A be a nonsingular n × n matrix with complex entries. Show that
every entry of A⁻¹ is real if and only if every entry of A is real.

D.2-6

Show that if A is a nonsingular, symmetric, n × n matrix, then A⁻¹ is
symmetric. Show that if B is an arbitrary m × n matrix, then the m × m
matrix given by the product BAB^(T) is symmetric.

D.2-7

Prove Theorem D.2. That is, show that a matrix A has full column rank if
and only if Ax = 0 implies x = 0. (Hint: Express the linear dependence
of one column on the others as a matrix-vector equation.)

D.2-8

Prove that for any two compatible matrices A and B,

rank(AB) ≤ min {rank(A), rank(B)},

where equality holds if either A or B is a nonsingular square matrix.
(Hint: Use the alternate definition of the rank of a matrix.)

Problems

D-1 Vandermonde matrix

Given numbers x₀, x₁, … , x_(n−1), prove that the determinant of the
Vandermonde matrix

[art]

is

[art]

(Hint: Multiply column i by −x₀ and add it to column i + 1 for i = n −
1, n − 2, … , 1, and then use induction.)

D-2 Permutations defined by matrix-vector multiplication over GF.(2)

One class of permutations of the integers in the set S_(n) = {0, 1, 2, …
, 2^(n) − 1} is defined by matrix multiplication over GF(2), the Galois
field of two elements. For each integer x ∈ S_(n), we view its binary
representation as an n-bit vector

[art]

where [art]. If A is an n × n matrix in which each entry is either 0 or
1, then we can define a permutation mapping each value x ∈ S_(n) to the
number whose binary representation is the matrix-vector product Ax. All
this arithmetic is performed over GF(2): all values are either 0 or 1,
and with one exception, the usual rules of addition and multiplication
apply. The exception is that 1 + 1 = 0. You can think of arithmetic over
GF(2) as being just like regular integer arithmetic, except that you use
only the least-significant bit.

As an example, for S₂ = {0, 1, 2, 3}, the matrix

[art]

defines the following permutation π_(A): π_(A)(0) = 0, π_(A)(1) = 3,
π_(A)(2) = 2, π_(A)(3) = 1. To see why π_(A)(3) = 1, observe that,
working in GF(2),

[art]

which is the binary representation of 1.

For the remainder of this problem, we’ll work over GF(2), and all matrix
and vector entries will be 0 or 1. Define the rank of a 0-1 matrix (a
matrix for which each entry is either 0 or 1) over GF(2) the same as for
a regular matrix, but with all arithmetic that determines linear
independence performed over GF(2). We define the range of an n × n 0-1
matrix A by

R(A) = {y : y = Ax for some x ∈ S_(n)},

so that R(A) is the set of numbers in S_(n) that are produced by
multiplying each value x ∈ S_(n) by A.

a. If r is the rank of matrix A, prove that |R(A)| = 2^(r). Conclude
that A defines a permutation on S_(n) only if A has full rank.

For a given n × n matrix A and a given value y ∈ R(A), we define the
preimage of y by

P (A, y) = {x : Ax = y},

so that P(A, y) is the set of values in S_(n) that map to y when
multiplied by A.

b. If r is the rank of n × n matrix A and y ∈ R(A), prove that |P(A, y)|
= 2^(n−r).

Let 0 ≤ m ≤ n, and suppose that we partition the set S_(n) into blocks
of consecutive numbers, where the ith block consists of the 2^(m)
numbers i2^(m), i2^(m) + 1, i2^(m) +2, … , (i +1)2^(m) −1. For any
subset S ⊆ S_(n), define B(S, m) to be the set of size-2^(m) blocks of
S_(n) containing some element of S. As an example, when n = 3, m = 1,
and S = {1, 4, 5}, then B(S, m) consists of blocks 0 (since 1 is in the
0th block) and 2 (since both 4 and 5 belong to block 2).

c. Let r be the rank of the lower left (n − m) × m submatrix of A, that
is, the matrix formed by taking the intersection of the bottom n − m
rows and the leftmost m columns of A. Let S be any size-2^(m) block of
S_(n), and let S′ = {y : y = Ax for some x ∈ S}. Prove that |B(S′, m)| =
2^(r) and that for each block in B(S′, m), exactly 2^(m−r) numbers in S
map to that block.

Because multiplying the zero vector by any matrix yields a zero vector,
the set of permutations of S_(n) defined by multiplying by n × n 0-1
matrices with full rank over GF(2) cannot include all permutations of
S_(n). Let’s extend the class of permutations defined by matrix-vector
multiplication to include an additive term, so that x ∈ S_(n) maps to
Ax + c, where c is an n-bit vector and addition is performed over GF(2).
For example, when

[art]

and

[art]

we get the following permutation π_(A,c): π_(A,c)(0) = 2, π_(A,c)(1) =
1, π_(A,c)(2) = 0, π_(A,c)(3) = 3. We call any permutation that maps x ∈
S_(n) to Ax + c, for some n × n 0-1 matrix A with full rank and some
n-bit vector c, a linear permutation.

d. Use a counting argument to show that the number of linear
permutations of S_(n) is much less than the number of permutations of
S_(n).

e. Give an example of a value of n and a permutation of S_(n) that
cannot be achieved by any linear permutation. (Hint: For a given
permutation, think about how multiplying a matrix by a unit vector
relates to the columns of the matrix.)

Appendix notes

Linear-algebra textbooks provide plenty of background information on
matrices. The books by Strang [422, 423] are particularly good.

Bibliography

    [1]  Milton Abramowitz and Irene A. Stegun, editors. Handbook of
Mathematical Functions. Dover, 1965.

    [2]  G. M. Adel’son-Vel’skiĭ and E. M. Landis. An algorithm for the
organization of information. Soviet Mathematics Doklady, 3(5):1259–1263,
1962.

    [3]  Alok Aggarwal and Jeffrey Scott Vitter. The input/output
complexity of sorting and related problems. Communications of the ACM,
31(9):1116–1127, 1988.

    [4]  Manindra Agrawal, Neeraj Kayal, and Nitin Saxena. PRIMES is in
P. Annals of Mathematics, 160(2):781–793, 2004.

    [5]  Alfred V. Aho, John E. Hopcroft, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. The
Design and Analysis of Computer Algorithms. Addison-Wesley, 1974.

    [6]  Alfred V. Aho, John E. Hopcroft, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Data
Structures and Algorithms. Addison-Wesley, 1983.

    [7]  Ravindra K. Ahuja, Thomas L. Magnanti, and James B. Orlin.
Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. Prentice Hall,
1993.

    [8]  Ravindra K. Ahuja, Kurt Mehlhorn, James B. Orlin, and Robert E.
Tarjan. Faster algorithms for the shortest path problem. Journal of the
ACM, 37(2):213–223, 1990.

    [9]  Ravindra K. Ahuja and James B. Orlin. A fast and simple
algorithm for the maximum flow problem. Operations Research,
37(5):748–759, 1989.

  [10]  Ravindra K. Ahuja, James B. Orlin, and Robert E. Tarjan.
Improved time bounds for the maximum flow problem. SIAM Journal on
Computing, 18(5):939–954, 1989.

  [11]  Miklós Ajtai, Nimrod Megiddo, and Orli Waarts. Improved
algorithms and analysis for secretary problems and generalizations. SIAM
Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 14(1):1–27, 2001.

  [12]  Selim G. Akl. The Design and Analysis of Parallel Algorithms.
Prentice Hall, 1989.

  [13]  Mohamad Akra and Louay Bazzi. On the solution of linear
recurrence equations. Computational Optimization and Applications,
10(2):195–210, 1998.

  [14]  Susanne Albers. Online algorithms: A survey. Mathematical
Programming, 97(1-2):3–26, 2003.

  [15]  Noga Alon. Generating pseudo-random permutations and maximum
flow algorithms. Information Processing Letters, 35:201–204, 1990.

  [16]  Arne Andersson. Balanced search trees made simple. In
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Algorithms and Data Structures,
volume 709 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 60–71. Springer,
1993.

  [17]  Arne Andersson. Faster deterministic sorting and searching in
linear space. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Symposium on Foundations
of Computer Science, pages 135–141, 1996.

  [18]  Arne Andersson, Torben Hagerup, Stefan Nilsson, and Rajeev
Raman. Sorting in linear time? Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
57:74–93, 1998.

  [19]  Tom M. Apostol. Calculus, volume 1. Blaisdell Publishing
Company, second edition, 1967.

  [20]  Nimar S. Arora, Robert D. Blumofe, and C. Greg Plaxton. Thread
scheduling for multiprogrammed multiprocessors. Theory of Computing
Systems, 34(2):115–144, 2001.

  [21]  Sanjeev Arora. Probabilistic checking of proofs and the hardness
of approximation problems. PhD thesis, University of California,
Berkeley, 1994.

  [22]  Sanjeev Arora. The approximability of NP-hard problems. In
Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
pages 337–348, 1998.

  [23]  Sanjeev Arora. Polynomial time approximation schemes for
euclidean traveling salesman and other geometric problems. Journal of
the ACM, 45(5):753–782, 1998.

  [24]  Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational Complexity: A Modern
Approach. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

  [25]  Sanjeev Arora, Elad Hazan, and Satyen Kale. The multiplicative
weights update method: A meta-algorithm and applications. Theory of
Computing, 8(1):121–164, 2012.

  [26]  Sanjeev Arora and Carsten Lund. Hardness of approximations. In
Dorit S. Hochbaum, editor, Approximation Algorithms for NP-Hard
Problems, pages 399–446. PWS Publishing Company, 1997.

  [27]  Mikhail J. Atallah and Marina Blanton, editors. Algorithms and
Theory of Computation Handbook, volume 1. Chapman & Hall/CRC Press,
second edition, 2009.

  [28]  Mikhail J. Atallah and Marina Blanton, editors. Algorithms and
Theory of Computation Handbook, volume 2. Chapman & Hall/CRC Press,
second edition, 2009.

  [29]  G. Ausiello, P. Crescenzi, G. Gambosi, V. Kann, A.
Marchetti-Spaccamela, and M. Protasi. Complexity and Approximation:
Combinatorial Optimization Problems and Their Approximability
Properties. Springer, 1999.

  [30]  Shai Avidan and Ariel Shamir. Seam carving for content-aware
image resizing. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 26(3), article 10, 2007.

  [31]  László Babai, Eugene M. Luks, and Ákos Seress. Fast management
of permutation groups I. SIAM Journal on Computing, 26(5):1310–1342,
1997.

  [32]  Eric Bach. Private communication, 1989.

  [33]  Eric Bach. Number-theoretic algorithms. In Annual Review of
Computer Science, volume 4, pages 119–172. Annual Reviews, Inc., 1990.

  [34]  Eric Bach and Jeffrey Shallit. Algorithmic Number Theory—Volume
I: Efficient Algorithms. The MIT Press, 1996.

  [35]  Nikhil Bansal and Anupam Gupta. Potential-function proofs for
first-order methods. CoRR, abs/1712.04581, 2017.

  [36]  Hannah Bast, Daniel Delling, Andrew V. Goldberg, Matthias
Müller-Hannemann, Thomas Pajor, Peter Sanders, Dorothea Wagner, and
Renato F. Werneck. Route planning in transportation networks. In
Algorithm Engineering - Selected Results and Surveys, volume 9220 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 19–80. Springer, 2016.

  [37]  Surender Baswana, Ramesh Hariharan, and Sandeep Sen. Improved
decremental algorithms for maintaining transitive closure and all-pairs
shortest paths. Journal of Algorithms, 62(2):74–92, 2007.

  [38]  R. Bayer. Symmetric binary B-trees: Data structure and
maintenance algorithms. Acta Informatica, 1(4):290–306, 1972.

  [39]  R. Bayer and E. M. McCreight. Organization and maintenance of
large ordered indexes. Acta Informatica, 1(3):173–189, 1972.

  [40]  Pierre Beauchemin, Gilles Brassard, Claude Crépeau, Claude
Goutier, and Carl Pomerance. The generation of random numbers that are
probably prime. Journal of Cryptology, 1(1):53–64, 1988.

  [41]  L. A. Belady. A study of replacement algorithms for a
virtual-storage computer. IBM Systems Journal, 5(2):78–101, 1966.

  [42]  Mihir Bellare, Joe Kilian, and Phillip Rogaway. The security of
cipher block chaining message authentication code. Journal of Computer
and System Sciences, 61(3):362–399, 2000.

  [43]  Mihir Bellare and Phillip Rogaway. Random oracles are practical:
A paradigm for designing efficient protocols. In CCS ’93, Proceedings of
the 1st ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages
62–73, 1993.

  [44]  Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton University
Press, 1957.

  [45]  Richard Bellman. On a routing problem. Quarterly of Applied
Mathematics, 16(1):87–90, 1958.

  [46]  Michael Ben-Or. Lower bounds for algebraic computation trees. In
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing, pages 80–86, 1983.

  [47]  Michael A. Bender, Erik D. Demaine, and Martin Farach-Colton.
Cache-oblivious B-trees. SIAM Journal on Computing, 35(2):341–358, 2005.

  [48]  Samuel W. Bent and John W. John. Finding the median requires 2n
comparisons. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing, pages 213–216, 1985.

  [49]  Jon L. Bentley. Writing Efficient Programs. Prentice Hall, 1982.

  [50]  Jon L. Bentley. More Programming Pearls: Confessions of a Coder.
Addison-Wesley, 1988.

  [51]  Jon L. Bentley. Programming Pearls. Addison-Wesley, second
edition, 1999.

  [52]  Jon L. Bentley, Dorothea Haken, and James B. Saxe. A general
method for solving divide-and-conquer recurrences. SIGACT News,
12(3):36–44, 1980.

  [53]  Claude Berge. Two theorems in graph theory. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 43(9):842–844, 1957.

  [54]  Aditya Y. Bhargava. Grokking Algorithms: An Illustrated Guide
For Programmers and Other Curious People. Manning Publications, 2016.

  [55]  Daniel Bienstock and Benjamin McClosky. Tightening simplex
mixed-integer sets with guaranteed bounds. Optimization Online, 2008.

  [56]  Patrick Billingsley. Probability and Measure. John Wiley & Sons,
second edition, 1986.

  [57]  Guy E. Blelloch. Scan Primitives and Parallel Vector Models. PhD
thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT,
1989. Available as MIT Laboratory for Computer Science Technical Report
MIT/LCS/TR-463.

  [58]  Guy E. Blelloch. Programming parallel algorithms. Communications
of the ACM, 39(3):85–97, 1996.

  [59]  Guy E. Blelloch, Jeremy T. Fineman, Phillip B. Gibbons, and
Julian Shun. Internally deterministic parallel algorithms can be fast.
In 17th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel
Programming, pages 181–192, 2012.

  [60]  Guy E. Blelloch, Jeremy T. Fineman, Yan Gu, and Yihan Sun.
Optimal parallel algorithms in the binary-forking model. In Proceedings
of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and
Architectures, pages 89–102, 2020.

  [61]  Guy E. Blelloch, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Yossi Matias. Provably
efficient scheduling for languages with fine-grained parallelism.
Journal of the ACM, 46(2):281–321, 1999.

  [62]  Manuel Blum, Robert W. Floyd, Vaughan Pratt, Ronald L. Rivest,
and Robert E. Tarjan. Time bounds for selection. Journal of Computer and
System Sciences, 7(4):448–461, 1973.

  [63]  Robert D. Blumofe and Charles E. Leiserson. Scheduling
multithreaded computations by work stealing. Journal of the ACM,
46(5):720–748, 1999.

  [64]  Robert L Bocchino, Jr., Vikram S. Adve, Sarita V. Adve, and Marc
Snir. Parallel programming must be deterministic by default. In
Proceedings of the First USENIX Conference on Hot Topics in Parallelism
(HotPar), 2009.

  [65]  Béla Bollobás. Random Graphs. Academic Press, 1985.

  [66]  Leonardo Bonacci. Liber Abaci, 1202.

  [67]  J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty. Graph Theory with Applications.
American Elsevier, 1976.

  [68]  A. Borodin and R. El-Yaniv. Online Computation and Competitive
Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1998.

  [69]  Stephen P. Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization.
Cambridge University Press, 2004.

  [70]  Gilles Brassard and Paul Bratley. Fundamentals of Algorithmics.
Prentice Hall, 1996.

  [71]  Richard P. Brent. The parallel evaluation of general arithmetic
expressions. Journal of the ACM, 21(2):201–206, 1974.

  [72]  Gerth Stølting Brodal. A survey on priority queues. In Andrej
Brodnik, Alejandro López-Ortiz, Venkatesh Raman, and Alfredo Viola,
editors, Space-Efficient Data Structures, Streams, and Algorithms:
Papers in Honor of J. Ian Munro on the Occasion of His 66th Birthday,
volume 8066 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 150–163.
Springer, 2013.

  [73]  Gerth Stølting Brodal, George Lagogiannis, and Robert E. Tarjan.
Strict Fibonacci heaps. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual ACM Symposium
on Theory of Computing, pages 1177–1184, 2012.

  [74]  George W. Brown. Some notes on computation of games solutions.
RAND Corporation Report, P-78, 1949.

  [75]  Sébastien Bubeck. Convex optimization: Algorithms and
complexity. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 8(3-4):231–357,
2015.

  [76]  Niv Buchbinder and Joseph Naor. The design of competitive online
algorithms via a primal-dual approach. Foundations and Trends in
Theoretical Computer Science, 3(2–3):93–263, 2009.

  [77]  J. P. Buhler, H. W. Lenstra, Jr., and Carl Pomerance. Factoring
integers with the number field sieve. In A. K. Lenstra and H. W.
Lenstra, Jr., editors, The Development of the Number Field Sieve, volume
1554 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 50–94. Springer, 1993.

  [78]  M. Burrows and D. J. Wheeler. A block-sorting lossless data
compression algorithm. SRC Research Report 124, Digital Equipment
Corporation Systems Research Center, May 1994.

  [79]  Neville Campbell. Recurrences. Unpublished treatise available at
https://nevillecampbell.com/Recurrences.pdf, 2020.

  [80]  J. Lawrence Carter and Mark N. Wegman. Universal classes of hash
functions. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 18(2):143–154, 1979.

  [81]  Barbara Chapman, Gabriele Jost, and Ruud van der Pas. Using
OpenMP: Portable Shared Memory Parallel Programming. The MIT Press,
2007.

  [82]  Philippe Charles, Christian Grothoff, Vijay Saraswat,
Christopher Donawa, Allan Kielstra, Kemal Ebcioglu, Christoph Von Praun,
and Vivek Sarkar. X10: An object-oriented approach to non-uniform
cluster computing. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-oriented
Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA), pages
519–538, 2005.

  [83]  Bernard Chazelle. A minimum spanning tree algorithm with
inverse-Ackermann type complexity. Journal of the ACM, 47(6):1028–1047,
2000.

  [84]  Ke Chen and Adrian Dumitrescu. Selection algorithms with small
groups. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science,
31(3):355–369, 2020.

  [85]  Guang-Ien Cheng, Mingdong Feng, Charles E. Leiserson, Keith H.
Randall, and Andrew F. Stark. Detecting data races in Cilk programs that
use locks. In Proceedings of the 10th Annual ACM Symposium on Parallel
Algorithms and Architectures, pages 298–309, 1998.

  [86]  Joseph Cheriyan and Torben Hagerup. A randomized maximum-flow
algorithm. SIAM Journal on Computing, 24(2):203–226, 1995.

  [87]  Joseph Cheriyan and S. N. Maheshwari. Analysis of preflow push
algorithms for maximum network flow. SIAM Journal on Computing,
18(6):1057–1086, 1989.

  [88]  Boris V. Cherkassky and Andrew V. Goldberg. On implementing the
push-relabel method for the maximum flow problem. Algorithmica,
19(4):390–410, 1997.

  [89]  Boris V. Cherkassky, Andrew V. Goldberg, and Tomasz Radzik.
Shortest paths algorithms: Theory and experimental evaluation.
Mathematical Programming, 73(2):129–174, 1996.

  [90]  Boris V. Cherkassky, Andrew V. Goldberg, and Craig Silverstein.
Buckets, heaps, lists and monotone priority queues. SIAM Journal on
Computing, 28(4):1326–1346, 1999.

  [91]  H. Chernoff. A measure of asymptotic efficiency for tests of a
hypothesis based on the sum of observations. Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 23(4):493–507, 1952.

  [92]  Brian Christian and Tom Griffiths. Algorithms to Live By: The
Computer Science of Human Decisions. Picador, 2017.

  [93]  Kai Lai Chung. Elementary Probability Theory with Stochastic
Processes. Springer, 1974.

  [94]  V. Chvátal. Linear Programming. W. H. Freeman and Company, 1983.

  [95]  V. Chvátal, D. A. Klarner, and D. E. Knuth. Selected
combinatorial research problems. Technical Report STAN-CS-72-292,
Computer Science Department, Stanford University, 1972.

  [96]  Alan Cobham. The intrinsic computational difficulty of
functions. In Proceedings of the 1964 Congress for Logic, Methodology,
and the Philosophy of Science, pages 24–30. North-Holland, 1964.

  [97]  H. Cohen and H. W. Lenstra, Jr. Primality testing and Jacobi
sums. Mathematics of Computation, 42(165):297–330, 1984.

  [98]  Michael B. Cohen, Aleksander Madry, Piotr Sankowski, and Adrian
Vladu. Negative-weight shortest paths and unit capacity minimum cost
flow in Õ(m^(10/7) log w) time (extended abstract). In Proceedings of
the 28th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 752–771, 2017.

  [99]  Douglas Comer. The ubiquitous B-tree. ACM Computing Surveys,
11(2):121–137, 1979.

[100]  Stephen Cook. The complexity of theorem proving procedures. In
Proceedings of the Third Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
pages 151–158, 1971.

[101]  James W. Cooley and John W. Tukey. An algorithm for the machine
calculation of complex Fourier series. Mathematics of Computation,
19(90):297–301, 1965.

[102]  Don Coppersmith. Modifications to the number field sieve. Journal
of Cryptology, 6(3):169–180, 1993.

[103]  Don Coppersmith and Shmuel Winograd. Matrix multiplication via
arithmetic progression. Journal of Symbolic Computation, 9(3):251–280,
1990.

[104]  Thomas H. Cormen. Algorithms Unlocked. The MIT Press, 2013.

[105]  Thomas H. Cormen, Thomas Sundquist, and Leonard F. Wisniewski.
Asymptotically tight bounds for performing BMMC permutations on parallel
disk systems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(1):105–136, 1998.

[106]  Don Dailey and Charles E. Leiserson. Using Cilk to write
multiprocessor chess programs. In H. J. van den Herik and B. Monien,
editors, Advances in Computer Games, volume 9, pages 25–52. University
of Maastricht, Netherlands, 2001.

[107]  Sanjoy Dasgupta, Christos Papadimitriou, and Umesh Vazirani.
Algorithms. McGraw-Hill, 2008.

[108]  Abraham de Moivre. De fractionibus algebraicis radicalitate
immunibus ad fractiones simpliciores reducendis, deque summandis
terminis quarundam serierum aequali intervallo a se distantibus.
Philosophical Transactions, 32(373):162–168, 1722.

[109]  Erik D. Demaine, Dion Harmon, John Iacono, and Mihai Pǎtraşcu.
Dynamic optimality—almost. SIAM Journal on Computing, 37(1):240–251,
2007.

[110]  Camil Demetrescu, David Eppstein, Zvi Galik, and Giuseppe F.
Italiano. Dynamic graph algorithms. In Mikhail J. Attalah and Marina
Blanton, editors, Algorithms and Theory of Computation Handbook, chapter
9, pages 9-1–9-28. Chapman & Hall/CRC, second edition, 2009.

[111]  Camil Demetrescu and Giuseppe F. Italiano. Fully dynamic all
pairs shortest paths with real edge weights. Journal of Computer and
System Sciences, 72(5):813–837, 2006.

[112]  Eric V. Denardo and Bennett L. Fox. Shortest-route methods: 1.
Reaching, pruning, and buckets. Operations Research, 27(1):161–186,
1979.

[113]  Martin Dietzfelbinger, Torben Hagerup, Jyrki Katajainen, and
Martti Penttonen. A reliable randomized algorithm for the closest-pair
problem. Journal of Algorithms, 25(1):19–51, 1997.

[114]  Martin Dietzfelbinger, Anna Karlin, Kurt Mehlhorn, Friedhelm
Meyer auf der Heide, Hans Rohnert, and Robert E. Tarjan. Dynamic perfect
hashing: Upper and lower bounds. SIAM Journal on Computing,
23(4):738–761, 1994.

[115]  Whitfield Diffie and Martin E. Hellman. New directions in
cryptography. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-22(6):644–654,
1976.

[116]  Edsger W. Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with
graphs. Numerische Mathematik, 1(1):269–271, 1959.

[117]  Edsger W. Dijkstra. A Discipline of Programming. Prentice-Hall,
1976.

[118]  Dimitar Dimitrov, Martin Vechev, and Vivek Sarkar. Race detection
in two dimensions. ACM Transactions on Parallel Computing, 4(4):1–22,
2018.

[119]  E. A. Dinic. Algorithm for solution of a problem of maximum flow
in a network with power estimation. Soviet Mathematics Doklady,
11(5):1277–1280, 1970.

[120]  Brandon Dixon, Monika Rauch, and Robert E. Tarjan. Verification
and sensitivity analysis of minimum spanning trees in linear time. SIAM
Journal on Computing, 21(6):1184–1192, 1992.

[121]  John D. Dixon. Factorization and primality tests. The American
Mathematical Monthly, 91(6):333–352, 1984.

[122]  Dorit Dor, Johan Håstad, Staffan Ulfberg, and Uri Zwick. On lower
bounds for selecting the median. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics,
14(3):299–311, 2001.

[123]  Dorit Dor and Uri Zwick. Selecting the median. SIAM Journal on
Computing, 28(5):1722–1758, 1999.

[124]  Dorit Dor and Uri Zwick. Median selection requires (2 + ϵ)n
comparisons. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 14(3):312–325, 2001.

[125]  Alvin W. Drake. Fundamentals of Applied Probability Theory.
McGraw-Hill, 1967.

[126]  James R. Driscoll, Neil Sarnak, Daniel D. Sleator, and Robert E.
Tarjan. Making data structures persistent. Journal of Computer and
System Sciences, 38(1):86–124, 1989.

[127]  Ran Duan, Seth Pettie, and Hsin-Hao Su. Scaling algorithms for
weighted matching in general graphs. ACM Transactions on Algorithms,
14(1):8:1–8:35, 2018.

[128]  Richard Durstenfeld. Algorithm 235 (RANDOM PERMUTATION).
Communications of the ACM, 7(7):420, 1964.

[129]  Derek L. Eager, John Zahorjan, and Edward D. Lazowska. Speedup
versus efficiency in parallel systems. IEEE Transactions on Computers,
38(3):408–423, 1989.

[130]  Jack Edmonds. Paths, trees, and flowers. Canadian Journal of
Mathematics, 17:449–467, 1965.

[131]  Jack Edmonds. Matroids and the greedy algorithm. Mathematical
Programming, 1(1):127–136, 1971.

[132]  Jack Edmonds and Richard M. Karp. Theoretical improvements in the
algorithmic efficiency for network flow problems. Journal of the ACM,
19(2):248–264, 1972.

[133]  Jeff Edmonds. How To Think About Algorithms. Cambridge University
Press, 2008.

[134]  Mourad Elloumi and Albert Y. Zomaya, editors. Algorithms in
Computational Molecular Biology: Techniques, Approaches and
Applications. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.

[135]  Jeff Erickson. Algorithms.
https://archive.org/details/Algorithms-Jeff-Erickson, 2019.

[136]  Martin Erwig. Once Upon an Algorithm: How Stories Explain
Computing. The MIT Press, 2017.

[137]  Shimon Even. Graph Algorithms. Computer Science Press, 1979.

[138]  Shimon Even and Yossi Shiloach. An on-line edge-deletion problem.
Journal of the ACM, 28(1):1–4, 1981.

[139]  William Feller. An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its
Applications. John Wiley & Sons, third edition, 1968.

[140]  Mingdong Feng and Charles E. Leiserson. Efficient detection of
determinacy races in Cilk programs. In Proceedings of the 9th Annual ACM
Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and Architectures, pages 1–11, 1997.

[141]  Amos Fiat, Richard M. Karp, Michael Luby, Lyle A. McGeoch, Daniel
Dominic Sleator, and Neal E. Young. Competitive paging algorithms.
Journal of Algorithms, 12(4):685–699, 1991.

[142]  Amos Fiat and Gerhard J. Woeginger, editors. Online Algorithms,
The State of the Art, volume 1442 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer, 1998.

[143]  Sir Ronald A. Fisher and Frank Yates. Statistical Tables for
Biological, Agricultural and Medical Research. Hafner Publishing
Company, fifth edition, 1957.

[144]  Robert W. Floyd. Algorithm 97 (SHORTEST PATH). Communications of
the ACM, 5(6):345, 1962.

[145]  Robert W. Floyd. Algorithm 245 (TREESORT). Communications of the
ACM, 7(12):701, 1964.

[146]  Robert W. Floyd. Permuting information in idealized two-level
storage. In Raymond E. Miller and James W. Thatcher, editors, Complexity
of Computer Computations, pages 105–109. Plenum Press, 1972.

[147]  Robert W. Floyd and Ronald L. Rivest. Expected time bounds for
selection. Communications of the ACM, 18(3):165–172, 1975.

[148]  L. R. Ford. Network Flow Theory. RAND Corporation, Santa Monica,
CA, 1956.

[149]  Lestor R. Ford, Jr. and D. R. Fulkerson. Flows in Networks.
Princeton University Press, 1962.

[150]  Lestor R. Ford, Jr. and Selmer M. Johnson. A tournament problem.
The American Mathematical Monthly, 66(5):387–389, 1959.

[151]  E. W. Forgy. Cluster analysis of multivariate efficiency versus
interpretatbility of classifications. Biometrics, 21(3):768–769, 1965.

[152]  Lance Fortnow. The Golden Ticket: P, NP, and the Search for the
Impossible. Princeton University Press, 2013.

[153]  Michael L. Fredman. New bounds on the complexity of the shortest
path problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 5(1):83–89, 1976.

[154]  Michael L. Fredman, János Komlós, and Endre Szemerédi. Storing a
sparse table with O(1) worst case access time. Journal of the ACM,
31(3):538–544, 1984.

[155]  Michael L. Fredman and Michael E. Saks. The cell probe complexity
of dynamic data structures. In Proceedings of the Twenty First Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 345–354, 1989.

[156]  Michael L. Fredman and Robert E. Tarjan. Fibonacci heaps and
their uses in improved network optimization algorithms. Journal of the
ACM, 34(3):596–615, 1987.

[157]  Michael L. Fredman and Dan E. Willard. Surpassing the information
theoretic bound with fusion trees. Journal of Computer and System
Sciences, 47(3):424–436, 1993.

[158]  Michael L. Fredman and Dan E. Willard. Trans-dichotomous
algorithms for minimum spanning trees and shortest paths. Journal of
Computer and System Sciences, 48(3):533–551, 1994.

[159]  Yoav Freund and Robert E. Schapire. A decision-theoretic
generalization of on-line learning and an application to boosting.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 55(1):119–139, 1997.

[160]  Matteo Frigo, Pablo Halpern, Charles E. Leiserson, and Stephen
Lewin-Berlin. Reducers and other Cilk++ hyperobjects. In Proceedings of
the 21st Annual ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and
Architectures, pages 79–90, 2009.

[161]  Matteo Frigo and Steven G. Johnson. The design and implementation
of FFTW3. Proceedings of the IEEE, 93(2):216–231, 2005.

[162]  Hannah Fry. Hello World: Being Human in the Age of Algorithms. W.
W. Norton & Company, 2018.

[163]  Harold N. Gabow. Path-based depth-first search for strong and
biconnected components. Information Processing Letters, 74(3–4):107–114,
2000.

[164]  Harold N. Gabow. The weighted matching approach to maximum
cardinality matching. Fundamenta Informaticae, 154(1-4):109–130, 2017.

[165]  Harold N. Gabow, Z. Galil, T. Spencer, and Robert E. Tarjan.
Efficient algorithms for finding minimum spanning trees in undirected
and directed graphs. Combinatorica, 6(2):109–122, 1986.

[166]  Harold N. Gabow and Robert E. Tarjan. A linear-time algorithm for
a special case of disjoint set union. Journal of Computer and System
Sciences, 30(2):209–221, 1985.

[167]  Harold N. Gabow and Robert E. Tarjan. Faster scaling algorithms
for network problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 18(5):1013–1036, 1989.

[168]  Harold N. Gabow and Robert Endre Tarjan. Faster scaling
algorithms for general graph-matching problems. Journal of the ACM,
38(4):815–853, 1991.

[169]  D. Gale and L. S. Shapley. College admissions and the stability
of marriage. American Mathematical Monthly, 69(1):9–15, 1962.

[170]  Zvi Galil and Oded Margalit. All pairs shortest distances for
graphs with small integer length edges. Information and Computation,
134(2):103–139, 1997.

[171]  Zvi Galil and Oded Margalit. All pairs shortest paths for graphs
with small integer length edges. Journal of Computer and System
Sciences, 54(2):243–254, 1997.

[172]  Zvi Galil and Kunsoo Park. Dynamic programming with convexity,
concavity and sparsity. Theoretical Computer Science, 92(1):49–76, 1992.

[173]  Zvi Galil and Joel Seiferas. Time-space-optimal string matching.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 26(3):280–294, 1983.

[174]  Igal Galperin and Ronald L. Rivest. Scapegoat trees. In
Proceedings of the 4th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages
165–174, 1993.

[175]  Michael R. Garey, R. L. Graham, and J. D. Ullman. Worst-case
analyis of memory allocation algorithms. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 143–150, 1972.

[176]  Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson. Computers and
Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman,
1979.

[177]  Naveen Garg and Jochen Könemann. Faster and simpler algorithms
for multicommodity flow and other fractional packing problems. SIAM
Journal on Computing, 37(2):630–652, 2007.

[178]  Saul Gass. Linear Programming: Methods and Applications.
International Thomson Publishing, fourth edition, 1975.

[179]  Fănică Gavril. Algorithms for minimum coloring, maximum clique,
minimum covering by cliques, and maximum independent set of a chordal
graph. SIAM Journal on Computing, 1(2):180–187, 1972.

[180]  Alan George and Joseph W-H Liu. Computer Solution of Large Sparse
Positive Definite Systems. Prentice Hall, 1981.

[181]  E. N. Gilbert and E. F. Moore. Variable-length binary encodings.
Bell System Technical Journal, 38(4):933–967, 1959.

[182]  Ashish Goel, Sanjeev Khanna, Daniel H. Larkin, and Rober E.
Tarjan. Disjoint set union with randomized linking. In Proceedings of
the 25th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1005–1017,
2014.

[183]  Michel X. Goemans and David P. Williamson. Improved approximation
algorithms for maximum cut and satisfiability problems using
semidefinite programming. Journal of the ACM, 42(6):1115–1145, 1995.

[184]  Michel X. Goemans and David P. Williamson. The primal-dual method
for approximation algorithms and its application to network design
problems. In Dorit S. Hochbaum, editor, Approximation Algorithms for
NP-Hard Problems, pages 144–191. PWS Publishing Company, 1997.

[185]  Andrew V. Goldberg. Efficient Graph Algorithms for Sequential and
Parallel Computers. PhD thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, MIT, 1987.

[186]  Andrew V. Goldberg. Scaling algorithms for the shortest paths
problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 24(3):494–504, 1995.

[187]  Andrew V. Goldberg and Satish Rao. Beyond the flow decomposition
barrier. Journal of the ACM, 45(5):783–797, 1998.

[188]  Andrew V. Goldberg and Robert E. Tarjan. A new approach to the
maximum flow problem. Journal of the ACM, 35(4):921–940, 1988.

[189]  D. Goldfarb and M. J. Todd. Linear programming. In G. L.
Nemhauser, A. H. G. Rinnooy-Kan, and M. J. Todd, editors, Handbooks in
Operations Research and Management Science, Vol. 1, Optimization, pages
73–170. Elsevier Science Publishers, 1989.

[190]  Shafi Goldwasser and Silvio Micali. Probabilistic encryption.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 28(2):270–299, 1984.

[191]  Shafi Goldwasser, Silvio Micali, and Ronald L. Rivest. A digital
signature scheme secure against adaptive chosen-message attacks. SIAM
Journal on Computing, 17(2):281–308, 1988.

[192]  Gene H. Golub and Charles F. Van Loan. Matrix Computations. The
Johns Hopkins University Press, third edition, 1996.

[193]  G. H. Gonnet and R. Baeza-Yates. Handbook of Algorithms and Data
Structures in Pascal and C. Addison-Wesley, second edition, 1991.

[194]  Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods. Digital Image
Processing. Addison-Wesley, 1992.

[195]  Michael T. Goodrich and Roberto Tamassia. Algorithm Design:
Foundations, Analysis, and Internet Examples. John Wiley & Sons, 2001.

[196]  Michael T. Goodrich and Roberto Tamassia. Data Structures and
Algorithms in Java. John Wiley & Sons, sixth edition, 2014.

[197]  Ronald L. Graham. Bounds for certain multiprocessor anomalies.
Bell System Technical Journal, 45(9):1563–1581, 1966.

[198]  Ronald L. Graham and Pavol Hell. On the history of the minimum
spanning tree problem. Annals of the History of Computing, 7(1):43–57,
1985.

[199]  Ronald L. Graham, Donald E. Knuth, and Oren Patashnik. Concrete
Mathematics. Addison-Wesley, second edition, 1994.

[200]  David Gries. The Science of Programming. Springer, 1981.

[201]  M. Grötschel, László Lovász, and Alexander Schrijver. Geometric
Algorithms and Combinatorial Optimization. Springer, 1988.

[202]  Leo J. Guibas and Robert Sedgewick. A dichromatic framework for
balanced trees. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science, pages 8–21, 1978.

[203]  Dan Gusfield and Robert W. Irving. The Stable Marriage Problem:
Structure and Algorithms. The MIT Press, 1989.

[204]  Gregory Gutin and Abraham P. Punnen, editors. The Traveling
Salesman Problem and Its Variations. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.

[205]  Torben Hagerup. Improved shortest paths on the word RAM. In
Procedings of 27th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and
Programming, ICALP 2000, volume 1853 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 61–72. Springer, 2000.

[206]  H. Halberstam and R. E. Ingram, editors. The Mathematical Papers
of Sir William Rowan Hamilton, volume III (Algebra). Cambridge
University Press, 1967.

[207]  Yijie Han. Improved fast integer sorting in linear space.
Information and Computation, 170(1):81–94, 2001.

[208]  Frank Harary. Graph Theory. Addison-Wesley, 1969.

[209]  Gregory C. Harfst and Edward M. Reingold. A potential-based
amortized analysis of the union-find data structure. SIGACT News,
31(3):86–95, 2000.

[210]  J. Hartmanis and R. E. Stearns. On the computational complexity
of algorithms. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society,
117:285–306, 1965.

[211]  Michael T. Heideman, Don H. Johnson, and C. Sidney Burrus. Gauss
and the history of the Fast Fourier Transform. IEEE ASSP Magazine,
1(4):14–21, 1984.

[212]  Monika R. Henzinger and Valerie King. Fully dynamic
biconnectivity and transitive closure. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 664–672, 1995.

[213]  Monika R. Henzinger and Valerie King. Randomized fully dynamic
graph algorithms with polylogarithmic time per operation. Journal of the
ACM, 46(4):502–516, 1999.

[214]  Monika R. Henzinger, Satish Rao, and Harold N. Gabow. Computing
vertex connectivity: New bounds from old techniques. Journal of
Algorithms, 34(2):222–250, 2000.

[215]  Nicholas J. Higham. Exploiting fast matrix multiplication within
the level 3 BLAS. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software,
16(4):352–368, 1990.

[216]  Nicholas J. Higham. Accuracy and Stability of Numerical
Algorithms. SIAM, second edition, 2002.

[217]  W. Daniel Hillis and Jr. Guy L. Steele. Data parallel algorithms.
Communications of the ACM, 29(12):1170–1183, 1986.

[218]  C. A. R. Hoare. Algorithm 63 (PARTITION) and algorithm 65 (FIND).
Communications of the ACM, 4(7):321–322, 1961.

[219]  C. A. R. Hoare. Quicksort. The Computer Journal, 5(1):10–15,
1962.

[220]  Dorit S. Hochbaum. Efficient bounds for the stable set, vertex
cover and set packing problems. Discrete Applied Mathematics,
6(3):243–254, 1983.

[221]  Dorit S. Hochbaum, editor. Approximation Algorithms for NP-Hard
Problems. PWS Publishing Company, 1997.

[222]  W. Hoeffding. On the distribution of the number of successes in
independent trials. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 27(3):713–721,
1956.

[223]  Micha Hofri. Probabilistic Analysis of Algorithms. Springer,
1987.

[224]  John E. Hopcroft and Richard M. Karp. An n^(5/2) algorithm for
maximum matchings in bipartite graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing,
2(4):225–231, 1973.

[225]  John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeffrey D. Ullman.
Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation. Addison
Wesley, third edition, 2006.

[226]  John E. Hopcroft and Robert E. Tarjan. Efficient algorithms for
graph manipulation. Communications of the ACM, 16(6):372–378, 1973.

[227]  John E. Hopcroft and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Set merging algorithms.
SIAM Journal on Computing, 2(4):294–303, 1973.

[228]  John E. Hopcroft and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Introduction to Automata
Theory, Languages, and Computation. Addison-Wesley, 1979.

[229]  Juraj Hromkovič. Algorithmics for Hard Problems: Introduction to
Combinatorial Optimization, Randomization, Approximation, and
Heuristics. Springer-Verlag, 2001.

[230]  T. C. Hu and M. T. Shing. Computation of matrix chain products.
Part I. SIAM Journal on Computing, 11(2):362–373, 1982.

[231]  T. C. Hu and M. T. Shing. Computation of matrix chain products.
Part II. SIAM Journal on Computing, 13(2):228–251, 1984.

[232]  T. C. Hu and A. C. Tucker. Optimal computer search trees and
variable-length alphabetic codes. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics,
21(4):514–532, 1971.

[233]  David A. Huffman. A method for the construction of
minimum-redundancy codes. Proceedings of the IRE, 40(9):1098–1101, 1952.

[234]  Oscar H. Ibarra and Chul E. Kim. Fast approximation algorithms
for the knapsack and sum of subset problems. Journal of the ACM,
22(4):463–468, 1975.

[235]  E. J. Isaac and R. C. Singleton. Sorting by address calculation.
Journal of the ACM, 3(3):169–174, 1956.

[236]  David S. Johnson. Approximation algorithms for combinatorial
problems. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 9(3):256–278, 1974.

[237]  David S. Johnson. The NP-completeness column: An ongoing
guide—The tale of the second prover. Journal of Algorithms,
13(3):502–524, 1992.

[238]  Donald B. Johnson. Efficient algorithms for shortest paths in
sparse networks. Journal of the ACM, 24(1):1–13, 1977.

[239]  Richard Johnsonbaugh and Marcus Schaefer. Algorithms. Pearson
Prentice Hall, 2004.

[240]  Neil C. Jones and Pavel Pevzner. An Introduction to
Bioinformatics Algorithms. The MIT Press, 2004.

[241]  T. Kanungo, D. M. Mount, N. S. Netanyahu, C. D. Piatko, R.
Silverman, and A. Y. Wu. A local search approximation algorithm for
k-means clustering. Computational Geometry, 28:89–112, 2004.

[242]  A. Karatsuba and Yu. Ofman. Multiplication of multidigit numbers
on automata. Soviet Physics—Doklady, 7(7):595–596, 1963. Translation of
an article in Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, 145(2), 1962.

[243]  David R. Karger, Philip N. Klein, and Robert E. Tarjan. A
randomized linear-time algorithm to find minimum spanning trees. Journal
of the ACM, 42(2):321–328, 1995.

[244]  David R. Karger, Daphne Koller, and Steven J. Phillips. Finding
the hidden path: Time bounds for all-pairs shortest paths. SIAM Journal
on Computing, 22(6):1199–1217, 1993.

[245]  Juha Kärkkäinen, Peter Sanders, and Stefan Burkhardt. Linear work
suffix array construction. Journal of the ACM, 53(6):918–936, 2006.

[246]  Howard Karloff. Linear Programming. Birkhäuser, 1991.

[247]  N. Karmarkar. A new polynomial-time algorithm for linear
programming. Combinatorica, 4(4):373–395, 1984.

[248]  Richard M. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In
Raymond E. Miller and James W. Thatcher, editors, Complexity of Computer
Computations, pages 85–103. Plenum Press, 1972.

[249]  Richard M. Karp. An introduction to randomized algorithms.
Discrete Applied Mathematics, 34(1–3):165–201, 1991.

[250]  Richard M. Karp and Michael O. Rabin. Efficient randomized
pattern-matching algorithms. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
31(2):249–260, 1987.

[251]  A. V. Karzanov. Determining the maximal flow in a network by the
method of preflows. Soviet Mathematics Doklady, 15(2):434–437, 1974.

[252]  Toru Kasai, Gunho Lee, Hiroki Arimura, Setsuo Arikawa, and Kunsoo
Park. Linear-time longest-common-prefix computation in suffix arrays and
its applications. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual Symposium on
Combinatorial Pattern Matching, volume 2089, pages 181–192.
Springer-Verlag, 2001.

[253]  Jonathan Katz and Yehuda Lindell. Introduction to Modern
Cryptography. CRC Press, second edition, 2015.

[254]  Valerie King. A simpler minimum spanning tree verification
algorithm. Algorithmica, 18(2):263–270, 1997.

[255]  Valerie King, Satish Rao, and Robert E. Tarjan. A faster
deterministic maximum flow algorithm. Journal of Algorithms,
17(3):447–474, 1994.

[256]  Philip N. Klein and Neal E. Young. Approximation algorithms for
NP-hard optimization problems. In CRC Handbook on Algorithms, pages
34-1–34-19. CRC Press, 1999.

[257]  Jon Kleinberg and Éva Tardos. Algorithm Design. Addison-Wesley,
2006.

[258]  Robert D. Kleinberg. A multiple-choice secretary algorithm with
applications to online auctions. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM-SIAM
Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 630–631, 2005.

[259]  Donald E. Knuth. Fundamental Algorithms, volume 1 of The Art of
Computer Programming. Addison-Wesley, third edition, 1997.

[260]  Donald E. Knuth. Seminumerical Algorithms, volume 2 of The Art of
Computer Programming. Addison-Wesley, third edition, 1997.

[261]  Donald E. Knuth. Sorting and Searching, volume 3 of The Art of
Computer Programming. Addison-Wesley, second edition, 1998.

[262]  Donald E. Knuth. Combinatorial Algorithms, volume 4A of The Art
of Computer Programming. Addison-Wesley, 2011.

[263]  Donald E. Knuth. Satisfiability, volume 4, fascicle 6 of The Art
of Computer Programming. Addison-Wesley, 2015.

[264]  Donald E. Knuth. Optimum binary search trees. Acta Informatica,
1(1):14–25, 1971.

[265]  Donald E. Knuth. Big omicron and big omega and big theta. SIGACT
News, 8(2):18–23, 1976.

[266]  Donald E. Knuth. Stable Marriage and Its Relation to Other
Combinatorial Problems: An Introduction to the Mathematical Analysis of
Algorithms, volume 10 of CRM Proceedings and Lecture Notes. American
Mathematical Society, 1997.

[267]  Donald E. Knuth, James H. Morris, Jr., and Vaughan R. Pratt. Fast
pattern matching in strings. SIAM Journal on Computing, 6(2):323–350,
1977.

[268]  Mykel J. Kochenderfer and Tim A. Wheeler. Algorithms for
Optimization. The MIT Press, 2019.

[269]  J. Komlós. Linear verification for spanning trees. Combinatorica,
5(1):57–65, 1985.

[270]  Dexter C. Kozen. The Design and Analysis of Algorithms. Springer,
1992.

[271]  David W. Krumme, George Cybenko, and K. N. Venkataraman.
Gossiping in minimal time. SIAM Journal on Computing, 21(1):111–139,
1992.

[272]  Joseph B. Kruskal, Jr. On the shortest spanning subtree of a
graph and the traveling salesman problem. Proceedings of the American
Mathematical Society, 7(1):48–50, 1956.

[273]  Harold W. Kuhn. The Hungarian method for the assignment problem.
Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 2:83–97, 1955.

[274]  William Kuszmaul and Charles E. Leiserson. Floors and ceilings in
divide-and-conquer recurrences. In Proceedings of the 3rd SIAM Symposium
on Simplicity in Algorithms, pages 133–141, 2021.

[275]  Leslie Lamport. How to make a multiprocessor computer that
correctly executes multiprocess programs. IEEE Transactions on
Computers, C-28(9):690–691, 1979.

[276]  Eugene L. Lawler. Combinatorial Optimization: Networks and
Matroids. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1976.

[277]  Eugene L. Lawler, J. K. Lenstra, A. H. G. Rinnooy Kan, and D. B.
Shmoys, editors. The Traveling Salesman Problem. John Wiley & Sons,
1985.

[278]  François Le Gall. Powers of tensors and fast matrix
multiplication. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Symposium on
Symbolic and Algebraic Computation, (ISSAC), pages 296–303, 2014.

[279]  Doug Lea. A Java fork/join framework. In ACM 2000 Conference on
Java Grande, pages 36–43, 2000.

[280]  C. Y. Lee. An algorithm for path connection and its applications.
IRE Transactions on Electronic Computers, EC-10(3):346–365, 1961.

[281]  Edward A. Lee. The problem with threads. IEEE Computer,
39(3):33–42, 2006.

[282]  I-Ting Angelina Lee, Charles E. Leiserson, Tao B. Schardl,
Zhunping Zhang, and Jim Sukha. On-the-fly pipeline parallelism. ACM
Transactions on Parallel Computing, 2(3):17:1–17:42, 2015.

[283]  I-Ting Angelina Lee and Tao B. Schardl. Efficient race detection
for reducer hyperobjects. ACM Transactions on Parallel Computing,
4(4):1–40, 2018.

[284]  Mun-Kyu Lee, Pierre Michaud, Jeong Seop Sim, and Daehun Nyang. A
simple proof of optimality for the MIN cache replacement policy.
Information Processing Letters, 116(2):168–170, 2016.

[285]  Yin Tat Lee and Aaron Sidford. Path finding methods for linear
programming: Solving linear programs in [art] iterations and faster
algorithms for maximum flow. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 424–433, 2014.

[286]  Tom Leighton. Tight bounds on the complexity of parallel sorting.
IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-34(4):344–354, 1985.

[287]  Tom Leighton. Notes on better master theorems for
divide-and-conquer recurrences. Class notes. Available at
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.39.1636, 1996.

[288]  Tom Leighton and Satish Rao. Multicommodity max-flow min-cut
theorems and their use in designing approximation algorithms. Journal of
the ACM, 46(6):787–832, 1999.

[289]  Daan Leijen and Judd Hall. Optimize managed code for multi-core
machines. MSDN Magazine, 2007.

[290]  Charles E. Leiserson. The Cilk++ concurrency platform. Journal of
Supercomputing, 51(3):244–257, March 2010.

[291]  Charles E. Leiserson. Cilk. In David Padua, editor, Encyclopedia
of Parallel Computing, pages 273–288. Springer, 2011.

[292]  Charles E. Leiserson, Tao B. Schardl, and Jim Sukha.
Deterministic parallel random-number generation for
dynamic-multithreading platforms. In Proceddings of the 17th ACM SIGPLAN
Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (PPoPP),
pages 193–204, 2012.

[293]  Charles E. Leiserson, Neil C. Thompson, Joel S. Emer, Bradley C.
Kuszmaul, Butler W. Lampson, Daniel Sanchez, and Tao B. Schardl. There’s
plenty of room at the Top: What will drive computer performance after
Moore’s law? Science, 368(6495), 2020.

[294]  Debra A. Lelewer and Daniel S. Hirschberg. Data compression. ACM
Computing Surveys, 19(3):261–296, 1987.

[295]  A. K. Lenstra, H. W. Lenstra, Jr., M. S. Manasse, and J. M.
Pollard. The number field sieve. In A. K. Lenstra and H. W. Lenstra,
Jr., editors, The Development of the Number Field Sieve, volume 1554 of
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 11–42. Springer, 1993.

[296]  H. W. Lenstra, Jr. Factoring integers with elliptic curves.
Annals of Mathematics, 126(3):649–673, 1987.

[297]  L. A. Levin. Universal sequential search problems. Problems of
Information Transmission, 9(3):265–266, 1973. Translated from the
original Russian article in Problemy Peredachi Informatsii 9(3):
115–116, 1973.

[298]  Anany Levitin. Introduction to the Design & Analysis of
Algorithms. Addison-Wesley, third edition, 2011.

[299]  Harry R. Lewis and Christos H. Papadimitriou. Elements of the
Theory of Computation. Prentice Hall, second edition, 1998.

[300]  Nick Littlestone. Learning quickly when irrelevant attributes
abound: A new linear-threshold algorithm. Machine Learning,
2(4):285–318, 1988.

[301]  Nick Littlestone and Manfred K. Warmuth. The weighted majority
algorithm. Information and Computation, 108(2):212–261, 1994.

[302]  C. L. Liu. Introduction to Combinatorial Mathematics.
McGraw-Hill, 1968.

[303]  Yang P. Liu and Aaron Sidford. Faster energy maximization for
faster maximum flow. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing, pages 803–814, 2020.

[304]  S. P. Lloyd. Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, 28(2):129–137, 1982.

[305]  Panos Louridas. Real-World Algorithms: A Beginner’s Guide. The
MIT Press, 2017.

[306]  László Lovász and Michael D. Plummer. Matching Theory, volume 121
of Annals of Discrete Mathematics. North Holland, 1986.

[307]  John MacCormick. 9 Algorithms That Changed the Future: The
Ingenious Ideas That Drive Today’s Computers. Princeton University
Press, 2012.

[308]  Aleksander Madry. Navigating central path with electrical flows:
From flows to matchings, and back. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 253–262, 2013.

[309]  Bruce M. Maggs and Serge A. Plotkin. Minimum-cost spanning tree
as a path-finding problem. Information Processing Letters,
26(6):291–293, 1988.

[310]  M. Mahajan, P. Nimbhorkar, and K. Varadarajan. The planar k-means
problem is NP-hard. In S. Das and R. Uehara, editors, WALCOM 2009:
Algorithms and Computation, volume 5431 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 274–285. Springer, 2009.

[311]  Michael Main. Data Structures and Other Objects Using Java.
Addison-Wesley, 1999.

[312]  Udi Manber and Gene Myers. Suffix arrays: A new method for
on-line string searches. SIAM Journal on Computing, 22(5):935–948, 1993.

[313]  David F. Manlove. Algorithmics of Matching Under Preferences,
volume 2 of Series on Theoretical Computer Science. World Scientific,
2013.

[314]  Giovanni Manzini. An analysis of the Burrows-Wheeler transform.
Journal of the ACM, 48(3):407–430, 2001.

[315]  Mario Andrea Marchisio, editor. Computational Methods in
Synthetic Biology. Humana Press, 2015.

[316]  William J. Masek and Michael S. Paterson. A faster algorithm
computing string edit distances. Journal of Computer and System
Sciences, 20(1):18–31, 1980.

[317]  Yu. V. Matiyasevich. Real-time recognition of the inclusion
relation. Journal of Soviet Mathematics, 1(1):64–70, 1973. Translated
from the original Russian article in Zapiski Nauchnykh Seminarov
Leningradskogo Otdeleniya Matematicheskogo Institute im. V. A. Steklova
Akademii Nauk SSSR 20: 104–114, 1971.

[318]  H. A. Maurer, Th. Ottmann, and H.-W. Six. Implementing
dictionaries using binary trees of very small height. Information
Processing Letters, 5(1):11–14, 1976.

[319]  Ernst W. Mayr, Hans Jürgen Prömel, and Angelika Steger, editors.
Lectures on Proof Verification and Approximation Algorithms, volume 1367
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 1998.

[320]  Catherine C. McGeoch. All pairs shortest paths and the essential
subgraph. Algorithmica, 13(5):426–441, 1995.

[321]  Catherine C. McGeoch. A Guide to Experimental Algorithmics.
Cambridge University Press, 2012.

[322]  Andrew McGregor. Graph stream algorithms: A survey. SIGMOD
Record, 43(1):9–20, 2014.

[323]  M. D. McIlroy. A killer adversary for quicksort.
Software—Practice and Experience, 29(4):341–344, 1999.

[324]  Kurt Mehlhorn and Stefan Näher. LEDA: A Platform for
Combinatorial and Geometric Computing. Cambridge University Press, 1999.

[325]  Kurt Mehlhorn and Peter Sanders. Algorithms and Data Structures:
The Basic Toolbox. Springer, 2008.

[326]  Dinesh P. Mehta and Sartaj Sahni. Handbook of Data Structures and
Applications. Chapman and Hall/CRC, second edition, 2018.

[327]  Gary L. Miller. Riemann’s hypothesis and tests for primality.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 13(3):300–317, 1976.

[328]  Marvin Minsky and Seymore A. Pappert. Perceptrons. The MIT Press,
1969.

[329]  John C. Mitchell. Foundations for Programming Languages. The MIT
Press, 1996.

[330]  Joseph S. B. Mitchell. Guillotine subdivisions approximate
polygonal subdivisions: A simple polynomial-time approximation scheme
for geometric TSP, k-MST, and related problems. SIAM Journal on
Computing, 28(4):1298–1309, 1999.

[331]  Michael Mitzenmacher and Eli Upfal. Probability and Computing.
Cambridge University Press, second edition, 2017.

[332]  Louis Monier. Algorithmes de Factorisation D’Entiers. PhD thesis,
L’Université Paris-Sud, 1980.

[333]  Louis Monier. Evaluation and comparison of two efficient
probabilistic primality testing algorithms. Theoretical Computer
Science, 12(1):97–108, 1980.

[334]  Edward F. Moore. The shortest path through a maze. In Proceedings
of the International Symposium on the Theory of Switching, pages
285–292. Harvard University Press, 1959.

[335]  Rajeev Motwani, Joseph (Seffi) Naor, and Prabhakar Raghavan.
Randomized approximation algorithms in combinatorial optimization. In
Dorit Hochbaum, editor, Approximation Algorithms for NP-Hard Problems,
chapter 11, pages 447–481. PWS Publishing Company, 1997.

[336]  Rajeev Motwani and Prabhakar Raghavan. Randomized Algorithms.
Cambridge University Press, 1995.

[337]  James Munkres. Algorithms for the assignment and transportation
problems. Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
5(1):32–38, 1957.

[338]  J. I. Munro and V. Raman. Fast stable in-place sorting with O(n)
data moves. Algorithmica, 16(2):151–160, 1996.

[339]  Yoichi Muraoka and David J. Kuck. On the time required for a
sequence of matrix products. Communications of the ACM, 16(1):22–26,
1973.

[340]  Kevin P. Murphy. Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective.
MIT Press, 2012.

[341]  S. Muthukrishnan. Data streams: Algorithms and applications.
Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 1(2), 2005.

[342]  Richard Neapolitan. Foundations of Algorithms. Jones & Bartlett
Learning, fifth edition, 2014.

[343]  Yurii Nesterov. Introductory Lectures on Convex Optimization: A
Basic Course, volume 87 of Applied Optimization. Springer, 2004.

[344]  J. Nievergelt and E. M. Reingold. Binary search trees of bounded
balance. SIAM Journal on Computing, 2(1):33–43, 1973.

[345]  Ivan Niven and Herbert S. Zuckerman. An Introduction to the
Theory of Numbers. John Wiley & Sons, fourth edition, 1980.

[346]  National Institute of Standards and Technology. Hash functions.
https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/hash-functions, 2019.

[347]  Alan V. Oppenheim and Ronald W. Schafer, with John R. Buck.
Discrete-Time Signal Processing. Prentice Hall, second edition, 1998.

[348]  Alan V. Oppenheim and Alan S. Willsky, with S. Hamid Nawab.
Signals and Systems. Prentice Hall, second edition, 1997.

[349]  James B. Orlin. A polynomial time primal network simplex
algorithm for minimum cost flows. Mathematical Programming,
78(1):109–129, 1997.

[350]  James B. Orlin. Max flows in O(nm) time, or better. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
pages 765–774, 2013.

[351]  Anna Pagh, Rasmus Pagh, and Milan Ruzic. Linear probing with
constant independence. https://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0612055, 2006.

[352]  Christos H. Papadimitriou. Computational Complexity.
Addison-Wesley, 1994.

[353]  Christos H. Papadimitriou and Kenneth Steiglitz. Combinatorial
Optimization: Algorithms and Complexity. Prentice Hall, 1982.

[354]  Michael S. Paterson. Progress in selection. In Proceedings of the
Fifth Scandinavian Workshop on Algorithm Theory, pages 368–379, 1996.

[355]  Seth Pettie. A new approach to all-pairs shortest paths on
real-weighted graphs. Theoretical Computer Science, 312(1):47–74, 2004.

[356]  Seth Pettie and Vijaya Ramachandran. An optimal minimum spanning
tree algorithm. Journal of the ACM, 49(1):16–34, 2002.

[357]  Seth Pettie and Vijaya Ramachandran. A shortest path algorithm
for real-weighted undirected graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing,
34(6):1398–1431, 2005.

[358]  Steven Phillips and Jeffery Westbrook. Online load balancing and
network flow. Algorithmica, 21(3):245–261, 1998.

[359]  Serge A. Plotkin, David. B. Shmoys, and Éva Tardos. Fast
approximation algorithms for fractional packing and covering problems.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 20:257–301, 1995.

[360]  J. M. Pollard. Factoring with cubic integers. In A. K. Lenstra
and H. W. Lenstra, Jr., editors, The Development of the Number Field
Sieve, volume 1554 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 4–10.
Springer, 1993.

[361]  Carl Pomerance. On the distribution of pseudoprimes. Mathematics
of Computation, 37(156):587–593, 1981.

[362]  Carl Pomerance, editor. Proceedings of the AMS Symposia in
Applied Mathematics: Computational Number Theory and Cryptography.
American Mathematical Society, 1990.

[363]  William K. Pratt. Digital Image Processing. John Wiley & Sons,
fourth edition, 2007.

[364]  Franco P. Preparata and Michael Ian Shamos. Computational
Geometry: An Introduction. Springer, 1985.

[365]  William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and
Brian P. Flannery. Numerical Recipes in C++: The Art of Scientific
Computing. Cambridge University Press, second edition, 2002.

[366]  William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and
Brian P. Flannery. Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing.
Cambridge University Press, third edition, 2007.

[367]  R. C. Prim. Shortest connection networks and some
generalizations. Bell System Technical Journal, 36(6):1389–1401, 1957.

[368]  Robert L. Probert. On the additive complexity of matrix
multiplication. SIAM Journal on Computing, 5(2):187–203, 1976.

[369]  William Pugh. Skip lists: A probabilistic alternative to balanced
trees. Communications of the ACM, 33(6):668–676, 1990.

[370]  Simon J. Puglisi, W. F. Smyth, and Andrew H. Turpin. A taxonomy
of suffix array construction algorithms. ACM Computing Surveys, 39(2),
2007.

[371]  Paul W. Purdom, Jr. and Cynthia A. Brown. The Analysis of
Algorithms. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1985.

[372]  Michael O. Rabin. Probabilistic algorithms. In J. F. Traub,
editor, Algorithms and Complexity: New Directions and Recent Results,
pages 21–39. Academic Press, 1976.

[373]  Michael O. Rabin. Probabilistic algorithm for testing primality.
Journal of Number Theory, 12(1):128–138, 1980.

[374]  P. Raghavan and C. D. Thompson. Randomized rounding: A technique
for provably good algorithms and algorithmic proofs. Combinatorica,
7(4):365–374, 1987.

[375]  Rajeev Raman. Recent results on the single-source shortest paths
problem. SIGACT News, 28(2):81–87, 1997.

[376]  James Reinders. Intel Threading Building Blocks: Outfitting C++
for Multi-core Processor Parallelism. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2007.

[377]  Edward M. Reingold, Kenneth J. Urban, and David Gries. K-M-P
string matching revisited. Information Processing Letters,
64(5):217–223, 1997.

[378]  Hans Riesel. Prime Numbers and Computer Methods for
Factorization, volume 126 of Progress in Mathematics. Birkhäuser, second
edition, 1994.

[379]  Ronald L. Rivest, M. J. B. Robshaw, R. Sidney, and Y. L. Yin. The
RC6 block cipher. In First Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)
Conference, 1998.

[380]  Ronald L. Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard M. Adleman. A method
for obtaining digital signatures and public-key cryptosystems.
Communications of the ACM, 21(2):120–126, 1978. See also U.S. Patent
4,405,829.

[381]  Herbert Robbins. A remark on Stirling’s formula. American
Mathematical Monthly, 62(1):26–29, 1955.

[382]  Julia Robinson. An iterative method of solving a game. The Annals
of Mathematics, 54(2):296–301, 1951.

[383]  Arch D. Robison and Charles E. Leiserson. Cilk Plus. In Pavan
Balaji, editor, Programming Models for Parallel Computing, chapter 13,
pages 323–352. The MIT Press, 2015.

[384]  D. J. Rosenkrantz, R. E. Stearns, and P. M. Lewis. An analysis of
several heuristics for the traveling salesman problem. SIAM Journal on
Computing, 6(3):563–581, 1977.

[385]  Tim Roughgarden. Algorithms Illuminated, Part 1: The Basics.
Soundlikeyourself Publishing, 2017.

[386]  Tim Roughgarden. Algorithms Illuminated, Part 2: Graph Algorithms
and Data Structures. Soundlikeyourself Publishing, 2018.

[387]  Tim Roughgarden. Algorithms Illuminated, Part 3: Greedy
Algorithms and Dynamic Programming. Soundlikeyourself Publishing, 2019.

[388]  Tim Roughgarden. Algorithms Illuminated, Part 4: Algorithms for
NP-Hard Problems. Soundlikeyourself Publishing, 2020.

[389]  Salvador Roura. Improved master theorems for divide-and-conquer
recurrences. Journal of the ACM, 48(2):170–205, 2001.

[390]  Y. A. Rozanov. Probability Theory: A Concise Course. Dover, 1969.

[391]  Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A
Modern Approach. Pearson, fourth edition, 2020.

[392]  S. Sahni and T. Gonzalez. P-complete approximation problems.
Journal of the ACM, 23(3):555–565, 1976.

[393]  Peter Sanders, Kurt Mehlhorn, Martin Dietzfelbinger, and Roman
Dementiev. Sequential and Parallel Algorithms and Data Structures: The
Basic Toolkit. Springer, 2019.

[394]  Piotr Sankowski. Shortest paths in matrix multiplication time. In
Proceedings of the 13th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms, pages
770–778, 2005.

[395]  Russel Schaffer and Robert Sedgewick. The analysis of heapsort.
Journal of Algorithms, 15(1):76–100, 1993.

[396]  Tao B. Schardl, I-Ting Angelina Lee, and Charles E. Leiserson.
Brief announcement: Open Cilk. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM
Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, pages 351–353,
2018.

[397]  A. Schönhage, M. Paterson, and N. Pippenger. Finding the median.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 13(2):184–199, 1976.

[398]  Alexander Schrijver. Theory of Linear and Integer Programming.
John Wiley & Sons, 1986.

[399]  Alexander Schrijver. Paths and flows—A historical survey. CWI
Quarterly, 6(3):169–183, 1993.

[400]  Alexander Schrijver. On the history of the shortest paths
problem. Documenta Mathematica, 17(1):155–167, 2012.

[401]  Robert Sedgewick. Implementing quicksort programs. Communications
of the ACM, 21(10):847–857, 1978.

[402]  Robert Sedgewick and Kevin Wayne. Algorithms. Addison-Wesley,
fourth edition, 2011.

[403]  Raimund Seidel. On the all-pairs-shortest-path problem in
unweighted undirected graphs. Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
51(3):400–403, 1995.

[404]  Raimund Seidel and C. R. Aragon. Randomized search trees.
Algorithmica, 16(4–5):464–497, 1996.

[405]  João Setubal and João Meidanis. Introduction to Computational
Molecular Biology. PWS Publishing Company, 1997.

[406]  Clifford A. Shaffer. A Practical Introduction to Data Structures
and Algorithm Analysis. Prentice Hall, second edition, 2001.

[407]  Jeffrey Shallit. Origins of the analysis of the Euclidean
algorithm. Historia Mathematica, 21(4):401–419, 1994.

[408]  M. Sharir. A strong-connectivity algorithm and its applications
in data flow analysis. Computers and Mathematics with Applications,
7(1):67–72, 1981.

[409]  David B. Shmoys. Computing near-optimal solutions to
combinatorial optimization problems. In William Cook, László Lovász, and
Paul Seymour, editors, Combinatorial Optimization, volume 20 of DIMACS
Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science.
American Mathematical Society, 1995.

[410]  Avi Shoshan and Uri Zwick. All pairs shortest paths in undirected
graphs with integer weights. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 605–614, 1999.

[411]  Victor Shoup. A Computational Introduction to Number Theory and
Algebra. Cambridge University Press, second edition, 2009.

[412]  Julian Shun. Shared-Memory Parallelism Can Be Simple, Fast, and
Scalable. Association for Computing Machinery and Morgan & Claypool,
2017.

[413]  Michael Sipser. Introduction to the Theory of Computation.
Cengage Learning, third edition, 2013.

[414]  Steven S. Skiena. The Algorithm Design Manual. Springer, second
edition, corrected printing, 2012.

[415]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. Tarjan. A data structure for
dynamic trees. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 26(3):362–391,
1983.

[416]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. Tarjan. Amortized efficiency of
list update rules. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual ACM Symposium
on Theory of Computing, pages 488–492, 1984.

[417]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. Tarjan. Amortized efficiency of
list update and paging rules. Communications of the ACM, 28(2):202–208,
1985.

[418]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. Tarjan. Self-adjusting binary
search trees. Journal of the ACM, 32(3):652–686, 1985.

[419]  Michael Soltys-Kulinicz. An Introduction to the Analysis of
Algorithms. World Scientific, third edition, 2018.

[420]  Joel Spencer. Ten Lectures on the Probabilistic Method, volume 64
of CBMS-NSF Regional Conference Series in Applied Mathematics. Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1993.

[421]  Daniel A. Spielman and Shang-Hua Teng. Smoothed analysis of
algorithms: Why the simplex algorithm usually takes polynomial time.
Journal of the ACM, 51(3):385–463, 2004.

[422]  Gilbert Strang. Introduction to Applied Mathematics.
Wellesley-Cambridge Press, 1986.

[423]  Gilbert Strang. Linear Algebra and Its Applications. Thomson
Brooks/Cole, fourth edition, 2006.

[424]  Volker Strassen. Gaussian elimination is not optimal. Numerische
Mathematik, 14(3):354–356, 1969.

[425]  T. G. Szymanski. A special case of the maximal common subsequence
problem. Technical Report TR-170, Computer Science Laboratory, Princeton
University, 1975.

[426]  Robert E. Tarjan. Depth first search and linear graph algorithms.
SIAM Journal on Computing, 1(2):146–160, 1972.

[427]  Robert E. Tarjan. Efficiency of a good but not linear set union
algorithm. Journal of the ACM, 22(2):215–225, 1975.

[428]  Robert E. Tarjan. A class of algorithms which require nonlinear
time to maintain disjoint sets. Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
18(2):110–127, 1979.

[429]  Robert E. Tarjan. Data Structures and Network Algorithms. Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1983.

[430]  Robert E. Tarjan. Amortized computational complexity. SIAM
Journal on Algebraic and Discrete Methods, 6(2):306–318, 1985.

[431]  Robert E. Tarjan. Class notes: Disjoint set union. COS 423,
Princeton University, 1999. Available at
https://www.cs.princeton.edu/courses/archive/spr00/cs423/handout3.pdf.

[432]  Robert E. Tarjan and Jan van Leeuwen. Worst-case analysis of set
union algorithms. Journal of the ACM, 31(2):245–281, 1984.

[433]  George B. Thomas, Jr., Maurice D. Weir, Joel Hass, and Frank R.
Giordano. Thomas’ Calculus. Addison-Wesley, eleventh edition, 2005.

[434]  Mikkel Thorup. Faster deterministic sorting and priority queues
in linear space. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM-SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms, pages 550–555, 1998.

[435]  Mikkel Thorup. Undirected single-source shortest paths with
positive integer weights in linear time. Journal of the ACM,
46(3):362–394, 1999.

[436]  Mikkel Thorup. On RAM priority queues. SIAM Journal on Computing,
30(1):86–109, 2000.

[437]  Mikkel Thorup. High speed hashing for integers and strings.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.06804, 2015.

[438]  Mikkel Thorup. Linear probing with 5-independent hashing.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.04549, 2015.

[439]  Richard Tolimieri, Myoung An, and Chao Lu. Mathematics of
Multidimensional Fourier Transform Algorithms. Springer, second edition,
1997.

[440]  P. van Emde Boas. Preserving order in a forest in less than
logarithmic time and linear space. Information Processing Letters,
6(3):80–82, 1977.

[441]  P. van Emde Boas, R. Kaas, and E. Zijlstra. Design and
implementation of an efficient priority queue. Mathematical Systems
Theory, 10(1):99–127, 1976.

[442]  Charles Van Loan. Computational Frameworks for the Fast Fourier
Transform. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1992.

[443]  Benjamin Van Roy. A short proof of optimality for the MIN cache
replacement algorithm. Information Processing Letters, 102(2–3):72–73,
2007.

[444]  Robert J. Vanderbei. Linear Programming: Foundations and
Extensions. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996.

[445]  Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Multiplying matrices faster than
Coppersmith-Winograd. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing, pages 887–898, 2012.

[446]  Vijay V. Vazirani. Approximation Algorithms. Springer, 2001.

[447]  Rakesh M. Verma. General techniques for analyzing recursive
algorithms with applications. SIAM Journal on Computing, 26(2):568–581,
1997.

[448]  Berthold Vöcking, Helmut Alt, Martin Dietzfelbinger, Rüdiger
Reischuk, Christian Scheideler, Heribert Vollmer, and Dorothea Wager,
editors. Algorithms Unplugged. Springer, 2011.

[449]  Antony F. Ware. Fast approximate Fourier transforms for
irregularly spaced data. SIAM Review, 40(4):838–856, 1998.

[450]  Stephen Warshall. A theorem on boolean matrices. Journal of the
ACM, 9(1):11–12, 1962.

[451]  Mark Allen Weiss. Data Structures and Problem Solving Using C++.
Addison-Wesley, second edition, 2000.

[452]  Mark Allen Weiss. Data Structures and Problem Solving Using Java.
Addison-Wesley, third edition, 2006.

[453]  Mark Allen Weiss. Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++.
Addison-Wesley, third edition, 2007.

[454]  Mark Allen Weiss. Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in Java.
Addison-Wesley, second edition, 2007.

[455]  Herbert S. Wilf. Algorithms and Complexity. A K Peters, second
edition, 2002.

[456]  J. W. J. Williams. Algorithm 232 (HEAPSORT). Communications of
the ACM, 7(6):347–348, 1964.

[457]  Ryan Williams. Faster all-pairs shortest paths via circuit
complexity. SIAM Journal on Computing, 47(5):1965–1985, 2018.

[458]  David P. Williamson. Network Flow Algorithms. Cambridge
University Press, 2019.

[459]  David P. Williamson and David B. Shmoys. The Design of
Approximation Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2011.

[460]  Shmuel Winograd. On the algebraic complexity of functions. In
Actes du Congrès International des Mathématiciens, volume 3, pages
283–288, 1970.

[461]  Yifan Xu, I-Ting Angelina Lee, and Kunal Agrawal. Efficient
parallel determinacy race detection for two-dimensional dags. In
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice
of Parallel Programming (PPoPP), pages 368–380, 2018.

[462]  Chee Yap. A real elementary approach to the master recurrence and
generalizations. In M. Ogihara and J. Tarui, editors, Theory and
Applications of Models of Computation. TAMC 2011, volume 6648 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 14–26. Springer, 2011.

[463]  Yinyu Ye. Interior Point Algorithms: Theory and Analysis. John
Wiley & Sons, 1997.

[464]  Neal E. Young. Online paging and caching. In Encyclopedia of
Algorithms, pages 1457–1461. Springer, 2016.

[465]  Raphael Yuster and Uri Zwick. Answering distance queries in
directed graphs using fast matrix multiplication. In Proceedings of the
46th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 389–396,
2005.

[466]  Jisheng Zhao and Vivek Sarkar. The design and implementation of
the Habanero-Java parallel programming language. In Symposium on
Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages and Applications
(OOPSLA), pages 185–186, 2011.

[467]  Uri Zwick. All pairs shortest paths using bridging sets and
rectangular matrix multiplication. Journal of the ACM, 49(3):289–317,
2002.

[468]  Daniel Zwillinger, editor. CRC Standard Mathematical Tables and
Formulae. Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, 31st edition, 2003.

Index

This index uses the following conventions. Numbers are alphabetized as
if spelled out; for example, “2-3-4 tree” is indexed as if it were
“two-three-four tree.” When an entry refers to a place other than the
main text, the page number is followed by a tag: ex. for exercise, pr.
for problem, fig. for figure, and n. for footnote. A tagged page number
often indicates the first page of an exercise or problem, which is not
necessarily the page on which the reference actually appears.

α(n), 533

α-strongly convex function, 1041

β-smooth function, 1041

δ

(shortest-path distance), 558

(shortest-path weight), 604

ϕ(golden ratio), 69

[art] (conjugate of the golden ratio), 69

ϕ(n) (Euler’s phi function), 920

π

(predecessor in a breadth-first tree), 555

(predecessor in a shortest-paths tree), 608

ρ(n)-approximation algorithm, 1104, 1120

o-notation, 60

O-notation, 50, 54–55

O′-notation, 73 pr.

[art]-notation, 73 pr.

ω-notation, 61

Ω-notation, 51, 54 fig., 55–56

[art]-notation, 73 pr.

[art]-notation, 73 pr.

Θ-notation, 33, 51, 54 fig., 56

[art]-notation, 73 pr.

{ } (set), 1153

∈ (set member), 1153

∉ (not a set member), 1153

∅

(empty language), 1052

(empty set), 1153

⊆ (subset), 1154

⊂ (proper subset), 1154

: (such that), 54 n., 1154

∩ (set intersection), 1154

∪ (set union), 1154

− (set difference), 1154

| |

(flow value), 672

(length of a string), 959

(set cardinality), 1156

× (Cartesian product), 1157

〈 〉

(sequence), 1162

(standard encoding), 1052

: (subarray), 19, 23

[a, b] (closed interval), 1157

(a, b) (open interval), 1157

[a, b) or (a, b] (half-open interval), 1157

[art] (choose), 1180

∥ ∥ (euclidean norm), 1219

! (factorial), 67–68

⌈ ⌉ (ceiling), 63

⌊ ⌋ (floor), 63

∂ (partial derivative), 1023

∑ (sum), 1140

∏ (product), 1144

→ (adjacency relation), 1165

↝ (reachability relation), 1165

∧ (AND), 659, 1065

∥ (concatenation), 291

¬ (NOT), 1065

∨ (OR), 659, 1065

⋘ (left shift), 305

⋙ (logical right shift), 285

⊕

(group operator), 917

(semiring operator), 651 n.

(symmetric difference), 706

⊗

(convolution operator), 880

(semiring operator), 651 n.

* (closure operator), 1052

| (divides relation), 904

∤ (does-not-divide relation), 904

= (mod n) (equivalent, modulo n), 64

≠ (mod n) (not equivalent, modulo n), 64

[a]_(n) (equivalence class modulo n), 905

+_(n) (addition modulo n), 917

·_(n) (multiplication modulo n), 917

[art] (Legendre symbol), 954 pr.

ε (empty string), 959, 1052

⊏ (prefix relation), 959

⊐ (suffix relation), 959

// (comment symbol), 22

≫ (much-greater-than relation), 533

≪ (much-less-than relation), 761

≤_(P) (polynomial-time reducibility relation), 1062, 1071 ex.

AA-tree, 358

abelian group, 917

absent child, 1173

absolutely convergent series, 1140

absorption laws for sets, 1155

abstract problem, 1048

abuse of asymptotic notation, 55, 59–60

acceptable pair of integers, 950

acceptance

by an algorithm, 1053

by a finite automaton, 968

accepting state, 967

accounting method, 453–456

for binary counters, 455

for dynamic tables, 463

for stack operations, 454–455

Ackermann’s function, 544

activity-selection problem, 418–425

acyclic graph, 1166

ADD-BINARY-INTEGERS, 25 ex.

add instruction, 26

addition

of matrices, 1217

modulo n (+_(n)), 917

of polynomials, 877

additive group modulo n, 918

addressing, open, see open-address hash table

ADD-SUBARRAY, 783 pr.

adjacency-list representation, 550–551

replaced by a hash table, 553 ex.

adjacency-matrix representation, 551–552

adjacency relation (→), 1165

adjacent vertices, 1165

Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), 291

adversary, 204, 286, 805, 807, 941

AES, 291

aggregate analysis, 449–453

for binary counters, 451–453

for breadth-first search, 558

for depth-first search, 566–567

for Dijkstra’s algorithm, 623–624

for disjoint-set data structures, 525–526, 527 ex.

for dynamic tables, 462–463

for the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, 977–978

for Prim’s algorithm, 597

for rod cutting, 370

for shortest paths in a dag, 617

for stack operations, 449–451

aggregate flow, 864

Akra-Bazzi recurrence, 115–119

solving by Akra-Bazzi method, 117–118

algorithm, 1–1226

analysis of, 25–34

approximation, 1104–1136

compare-exchange, 222 pr.

correctness of, 6

decision, 1053

deterministic, 135

lookahead, 815 ex.

nondeterministic, 765

oblivious, 222 pr.

offline, 791

online, see online algorithm

origin of word, 48

parallel, see parallel algorithm

push-relabel, 702

randomized, see randomized algorithm

recursive, 34

reduction, 1046, 1062

running time of, 29

scaling, 641 pr., 699 pr.

streaming, 818

as a technology, 13

verification, 1058

algorithmic recurrence, 77–78

ALLOCATE-NODE, 506

all-pairs shortest paths, 605, 646–669

in dynamic graphs, 669

in ϵ-dense graphs, 668 pr.

Floyd-Warshall algorithm for, 655–659

Johnson’s algorithm for, 662–667

by matrix multiplication, 648–655, 668–669

by repeated squaring, 652–653

α-balanced, 472 pr.

α(n), 533

α-strongly convex function, 1041

alphabet, 967, 1052

alternating path, 705

amortized analysis, 448–475

by accounting method, 453–456

by aggregate analysis, 370, 449–453

for breadth-first search, 558

for depth-first search, 566–567

for Dijkstra’s algorithm, 623–624

for disjoint-set data structures, 525–526, 527 ex., 531 ex., 534–540,
541 ex.

for dynamic tables, 460–471

for the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, 977–978

for making binary search dynamic, 472 pr.

by potential method, 456–460

for Prim’s algorithm, 597

for restructuring red-black trees, 473 pr.

for shortest paths in a dag, 617

for stacks on secondary storage, 517 pr.

for weight-balanced trees, 472 pr.

amortized cost

in the accounting method, 453

in aggregate analysis, 449

in the potential method, 456

amortized progress, 1028

analysis of algorithms, 25–34

see also amortized analysis, competitive analysis, probabilistic
analysis

ancestor, 1172

lowest common, 543 pr.

AND function (∧), 659, 1065

AND gate, 1065

and, in pseudocode, 24

antiparallel edges, 673–674

antisymmetric relation, 1160

approximation

by least squares, 841–845

of summation by integrals, 1150

approximation algorithm, 1103–1136

for bin packing, 1131 pr.

for MAX-CNF satisfiability, 1124 ex.

for maximum clique, 1131 pr.

for maximum matching, 1132 pr.

for maximum spanning tree, 1134 pr.

for maximum-weight cut, 1124 ex.

for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1120–1121

for parallel machine scheduling, 1133 pr.

randomized, 1120

for set cover, 1115–1119

for subset sum, 1124–1130

for traveling-salesperson problem, 1109–1115

for vertex cover, 1106–1109, 1121–1124

for weighted set cover, 1132 pr.

for 0-1 knapsack problem, 1134 pr.

approximation error, 842

approximation ratio, 1104, 1120

approximation scheme, 1105

APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC, 1123

APPROX-SUBSET-SUM, 1128

APPROX-TSP-TOUR, 1111

APPROX-VERTEX-COVER, 1107

arbitrage, 641 pr.

arc, see edge

argument of a function, 1161–1162

arithmetic instructions, 26

arithmetic, modular, 64, 916–923

arithmetic series, 1141

arithmetic with infinities, 611

arm in a disk drive, 498

array

indexing into, 22–23, 26 n., 252

inversion in, 47 pr.

Monge, 123 pr.

passing as a parameter, 24

in pseudocode, 22–23

storage of, 26 n., 252

articulation point, 582 pr.

assignment

optimal, 723–739

satisfying, 1066, 1074

truth, 1066, 1073

assignment problem, 723–739

associative laws for sets, 1155

associative operation, 917

asymptotically larger, 62

asymptotically nonnegative, 54

asymptotically positive, 54

asymptotically smaller, 62

asymptotically tight bound, 56

asymptotic lower bound, 55

asymptotic notation, 53–63, 72 pr.

and graph algorithms, 548

and linearity of summations, 1141

asymptotic running time, 49

asymptotic upper bound, 54

attribute

in clustering, 1006

in a graph, 552

of an object, 23

augmentation of a flow, 678

augmented primal linear program, 870

augmenting data structures, 480–496

augmenting path, 681–682, 705

widest, 700 pr.

authentication, 309 pr., 938–939, 942

automaton, 967–974

auxiliary hash function, 295

average-case running time, 32, 128

AVL tree, 357 pr., 358

back edge, 569, 573

back substitution, 823

balanced search tree

AA-trees, 358

AVL trees, 357 pr., 358

B-trees, 497–519

k-neighbor trees, 358

left-leaning red-black binary search trees, 358

red-black trees, 331–359

scapegoat trees, 358

splay trees, 359, 478

treaps, 358

2-3-4 trees, 502, 518 pr.

2-3 trees, 358, 519

weight-balanced trees, 358, 472 pr.

balls and bins, 143–144, 1212 pr.

base-a pseudoprime, 944

base case

of a divide-and-conquer algorithm, 34, 76

of a recurrence, 41, 77–78

base, in DNA, 393

basis function, 841

Bayes’s theorem, 1189

BELLMAN-FORD, 612

Bellman-Ford algorithm, 612–616

for all-pairs shortest paths, 647

in Johnson’s algorithm, 664–666

and objective functions, 632 ex.

to solve systems of difference constraints, 630–631

Yen’s improvement to, 640 pr.

Bernoulli trial, 1196

and balls and bins, 143–144

in bucket sort analysis, 217

in finding prime numbers, 943

in randomized selection analysis, 232

and streaks, 144–150

best-case running time, 34 ex.

β-smooth function, 1041

BFS, 556

see also breadth-first search

BIASED-RANDOM, 129 ex.

biconnected component, 582 pr.

big-oh notation (O), 50, 54–55

big-omega notation (Ω), 51, 54 fig., 55–56

bijective function, 1162

binary character code, 431

binary counter

analyzed by accounting method, 455

analyzed by aggregate analysis, 451–453

analyzed by potential method, 458–459

binary entropy function, 1182

binary gcd algorithm, 953 pr.

binary heap, see heap

binary logarithm (lg), 66

binary reflected Gray code, 471 pr.

binary relation, 1158

binary search, 44 ex.

with fast insertion, 472 pr.

in insertion sort, 45 ex.

in parallel merging, 777–778

in searching B-trees, 512 ex.

binary search tree, 312–330

AA-trees, 358

AVL trees, 357 pr., 358

deletion from, 322–325, 326 ex.

with equal keys, 327 pr.

insertion into, 321–322

k-neighbor trees, 358

left-leaning red-black binary search trees, 358

maximum key of, 317–318

minimum key of, 317–318

optimal, 400–407

persistent, 355 pr.

predecessor in, 318–319

querying, 316–320

randomly built, 328 pr.

red-black trees, 331–359

right-converting of, 337 ex.

scapegoat trees, 358

searching, 316–317

for sorting, 326 ex.

splay trees, 359

successor in, 318–319

weight-balanced trees, 358

see also red-black tree

binary-search-tree property, 313–314

vs. min-heap property, 315 ex.

binary tree, 1173

full, 433, 1174

number of different ones, 329 pr.

representation of, 265

see also binary search tree

binomial coefficient, 1181–1182

binomial distribution, 1198–1201

and balls and bins, 143

in bucket sort analysis, 217

maximum value of, 1202 ex.

tails of, 1203–1210

binomial expansion, 1181

binomial theorem, 1181

bin packing, 1131 pr.

bipartite graph, 1167

complete, 716

corresponding flow network of, 694

d-regular, 716 ex., 740 pr.

matching in, 693–697, 704–743

bipartite matching, 693–697, 704–743

birthday paradox, 140–143

bisection of a tree, 1177 pr.

bitonic euclidean traveling-salesperson problem, 407 pr.

bitonic sequence, 644 pr.

bitonic tour, 407 pr.

bit operation, 904

in Euclid’s algorithm, 954 pr.

bit-reversal permutation, 897

bit vector, 274 ex.

black-height, 332

black vertex, 554, 564

block

in a cache, 440, 802

on a disk, 499, 512 ex., 517 pr.

blocking flow, 702

blocking pair, 716

block representation of matrices, 254

block structure in pseudocode, 21–22

body, 1032

Boole’s inequality, 1190 ex.

boolean combinational circuit, 1065

boolean combinational element, 1065

boolean connective, 1073

boolean data type, 26

boolean formula, 1043, 1060 ex., 1073–1074

boolean function, 1182 ex.

boolean operators, 24

Borůvka’s algorithm, 603

bottleneck spanning tree, 601 pr.

bottleneck traveling-salesperson problem, 1115 ex.

bottoming out, 76

bottom of a stack, 254

BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD, 369

bottom-up method, for dynamic programming, 368

bound

asymptotically tight, 56

asymptotic lower, 55

asymptotic upper, 54

on binomial coefficients, 1181–1182

on binomial distributions, 1201

polylogarithmic, 67

on the tails of a binomial distribution, 1203–1210

see also lower bounds

bounding a summation, 1145–1152

box, nesting, 640 pr.

B⁺-tree, 501

branch instructions, 26

breadth-first forest, 728

breadth-first search, 554–563

in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, 711

in the Hungarian algorithm, 727–728

in maximum flow, 689–691

and shortest paths, 558–561, 605

similarity to Dijkstra’s algorithm, 624, 625 ex.

breadth-first tree, 555, 561

bridge, 582 pr.

B*-tree, 502 n.

B-tree, 497–519

compared with red-black trees, 497, 503

creating, 505–506

deletion from, 513–516

full node in, 502

height of, 502–504

insertion into, 506–511

minimum degree of, 502

properties of, 501–504

searching, 504–505

splitting a node in, 506–508

2-3-4 trees, 502

B-TREE-CREATE, 506

B-TREE-DELETE, 513

B-TREE-INSERT, 508

B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL, 511

B-TREE-SEARCH, 505, 512 ex.

B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD, 507

B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT, 509

BUBBLESORT, 46 pr.

bucket, 215

bucket sort, 215–219

BUCKET-SORT, 216

BUILD-MAX-HEAP, 167

BUILD-MAX-HEAP′, 179 pr.

BUILD-MIN-HEAP, 169

Burrows-Wheeler transform (BWT), 1000 pr.

butterfly operation, 894

BWT (Burrows-Wheeler transform), 1000 pr.

by, in pseudocode, 22

cache, 27, 301, 440, 802

cache block, 301, 440, 802

cache hit, 440, 803

cache line, see cache block

cache miss, 440, 803

cache obliviousness, 519

caching

offline, 440–446

online, 802–815

call

in a parallel computation, 753

of a subroutine, 26, 29 n.

by value, 23

cancellation lemma, 886

cancellation of flow, 679

capacity

of a cut, 682

of an edge, 671

residual, 677, 681

of a vertex, 676 ex.

capacity constraint, 672

cardinality of a set (| |), 1156

Carmichael number, 945, 953 ex.

Cartesian product (×), 1157

Cartesian sum, 885 ex.

Catalan numbers, 329 pr., 375

CBC-MAC, 291, 306

c-competitive, 793

ceiling function (⌈ ⌉), 63

in recurrences, 116–117

ceiling instruction, 26

center of a cluster, 1008

centralized scheduler, 759

centroid of a cluster, 1009

certain event, 1185

certificate

in a cryptosystem, 942

for verification algorithms, 1058

CHAINED-HASH-DELETE, 278

CHAINED-HASH-INSERT, 278

CHAINED-HASH-SEARCH, 278

chaining, 277–281, 308 pr.

changing variables, to solve a recurrence, 120 pr.

character code, 431

character data type, 26

chess-playing program, 768–769

child

in a binary tree, 1173

in a parallel computation, 753

in a rooted tree, 1172

Chinese remainder theorem, 928–931

chirp transform, 893 ex.

choose [art], 1180

chord, 486 ex.

Cilk, 750, 790

ciphertext, 938

circuit

boolean combinational, 1065

depth of, 894

for fast Fourier transform, 894–897

CIRCUIT-SAT, 1067

circuit satisfiability, 1064–1071

circular, doubly linked list with a sentinel, 262

circular linked list, 259

class

complexity, 1054

equivalence, 1159

classification of edges

in breadth-first search, 581 pr.

in depth-first search, 569–570, 571 ex.

clause, 1075–1076

clean area, 222 pr.

climate change, 845

clique, 1081

CLIQUE, 1081

clique problem

approximation algorithm for, 1131 pr.

NP-completeness of, 1081–1084

closed convex body, 1032

closed interval ([a, b]), 1157

closed semiring, 669

closest-point heuristic, 1115 ex.

closure

group property, 917

of a language (*), 1052

transitive, see transitive closure

cluster, 1008

for parallel computing, 748

clustering, 1005–1013

Lloyd’s procedure for, 1011–1013

primary, 303

CNF (conjunctive normal form), 1043, 1076

CNF satisfiability, 1124 ex.

coarsening leaves of recursion

in merge sort, 45 pr.

in quicksort, 198 ex.

when recursively spawning, 764

code, 431–432

Huffman, 431–439

codeword, 432

codomain, 1161

coefficient

binomial, 1181

of a polynomial, 65, 877

coefficient representation, 879

and fast multiplication, 882–884

cofactor, 1221

coin changing, 446 pr.

coin flipping, 131–132

collection of sets, 1156

collision, 275

resolution by chaining, 277–281

resolution by open addressing, 293–301

collision-resistant hash function, 941

coloring, 425 ex., 1100 pr., 1176 pr.

color, of a red-black-tree node, 331

column-major order, 222 pr., 253

column rank, 1220

columnsort, 222 pr.

column vector, 1215

combination, 1180

combinational circuit, 1065

combinational element, 1065

combine step, in divide-and-conquer, 34, 76

comment, in pseudocode (//), 22

commodity, 864

common divisor, 906

greatest, see greatest common divisor

common multiple, 916 ex.

common subexpression, 894

common subsequence, 394

longest, 393–399

commutative laws for sets, 1154

commutative operation, 917

compact list, 269 pr.

COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH, 269 pr.

COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH′, 270 pr.

COMPARE-EXCHANGE, 222 pr.

COMPARE-EXCHANGE-INSERTION-SORT, 223 pr.

compare-exchange operation, 222 pr.

comparison sort, 205

and binary search trees, 315 ex.

randomized, 219 pr.

and selection, 241

compatible activities, 418

compatible matrices, 1218

competitive analysis, 792

competitive ratio, 793

expected, 808

unbounded, 804

complement

of an event, 1186

of a graph, 1085

of a language, 1052

Schur, 825, 839

of a set, 1155

complementary slackness, 873 pr.

complete graph, 1167

bipartite, 716

complete k-ary tree, 1174

see also heap

completeness of a language, 1072 ex.

complete step, 759

completion time, 446 pr., 816 pr., 1133 pr.

COMPLETION-TIME-SCHEDULE, 817 pr.

complexity class, 1054

co-NP, 1059

NP, 1043, 1058, 1060 ex.

NPC, 1044, 1063

P, 1043, 1050, 1054, 1055 ex.

complexity measure, 1054

complex numbers

inverting matrices of, 838 ex.

multiplication of, 90 ex.

complex root of unity, 885

interpolation at, 891–892

component

biconnected, 582 pr.

connected, 1166

strongly connected, 1166

component graph, 576

composite number, 905

witness to, 946

composition

of logarithms, 66

of parallel traces, 762 fig.

compression

by Huffman code, 431–439

of images, 412 pr.

compulsory miss, 440

computational depth, see span

computational problem, 5–6

computation dag, 754 n.

COMPUTE-LCP, 993

COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION, 978

COMPUTE-SUFFIX-ARRAY, 988

COMPUTE-TRANSITION-FUNCTION, 974

concatenation

of languages, 1052

operator (∥), 291

of strings, 959

concrete problem, 1049

conditional branch instruction, 26

conditional independence, 1190 ex.

conditional probability, 1187, 1189

configuration, 1068

conjugate of the golden ratio ([art]), 69, 70 ex.

conjugate transpose, 838 ex.

conjunctive normal form, 1043, 1076

connected component, 1166

identified using depth-first search, 572 ex.

identified using disjoint-set data structures, 521–523

CONNECTED-COMPONENTS, 522

connected graph, 1166

connective, 1073

co-NP (complexity class), 1059

conquer step, in divide-and-conquer, 34, 76

conservation of flow, 672

consistency

of literals, 1082

sequential, 756

constrained gradient descent, 1032–1034

constraint

difference, 627

equality, 632 ex.

linear, 851, 853–854

nonnegativity, 854

constraint graph, 628–630

contain, in a path, 1165

continuous master theorem, 112

proof of, 107–115

continuous uniform probability distribution, 1187

contraction

of a dynamic table, 465–470

of an undirected graph by an edge, 1168

contraction algorithm, 701 pr.

control instructions, 26

convergence property, 611, 634–635

convergent series, 1140

converting binary to decimal, 910 ex.

convex body, 1032

convex function, 1025–1027, 1194

α-strongly convex, 1041

convex set, 675 ex.

convolution (⊗), 880

convolution theorem, 892

copy instruction, 26

correctness of an algorithm, 6

corresponding flow network for bipartite matching, 694

countably infinite set, 1156

counter, see binary counter

counting, 1178–1184

probabilistic, 153 pr.

counting sort, 208–211

in computing suffix arrays, 992

in radix sort, 213

COUNTING-SORT, 209

coupon collector’s problem, 144

cover

path, 698 pr.

by a subfamily, 1116

vertex, 1084, 1106

credit, 453

critical edge, 690

critical path

in a dag, 619

of a PERT chart, 617

of a task-parallel trace, 757

cross a cut, 587, 701 pr.

cross edge, 569

cryptographic hash function, 291

cryptosystem, 936–942

cubic spline, 847 pr.

currency exchange, 641 pr.

curve fitting, 841–845

cut

capacity of, 682

of a flow network, 682–685

global, 701 pr.

minimum, 682

net flow across, 682

of an undirected graph, 587

weight of, 1124 ex.

CUT-ROD, 366

cycle of a graph, 1165–1166

hamiltonian, 1043, 1056, 1085–1090

minimum mean-weight, 642 pr.

negative-weight, see negative-weight cycle

and shortest paths, 607–608

cycle cover, 741 pr.

cyclic group, 932

dag, see directed acyclic graph

DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS, 617

d-ary heap, 179 pr.

in shortest-paths algorithms, 668 pr.

data-movement instructions, 26

data-parallel model, 789

data science, 14–15

data structure, 9, 249–359, 477–545

AA-trees, 358

augmentation of, 480–496

AVL trees, 357 pr., 358

binary search trees, 312–330

bit vectors, 274 ex.

B-trees, 497–519

deques, 258 ex.

dictionaries, 249

direct-address tables, 273–275

for disjoint sets, 520–545

for dynamic graphs, 479

dynamic sets, 249–251

dynamic trees, 478

exponential search trees, 226, 478

Fibonacci heaps, 478

fusion trees, 226, 478

hash tables, 275–282

heaps, 161–181

interval trees, 489–495

k-neighbor trees, 358

left-leaning red-black binary search trees, 358

linked lists, 258–264

order-statistic trees, 480–486

persistent, 355 pr., 478

potential of, 456

priority queues, 172–178

queues, 254, 256–257

radix trees, 327 pr.

red-black trees, 331–359

rooted trees, 265–268

scapegoat trees, 358

on secondary storage, 498–501

skip lists, 359

splay trees, 359, 478

stacks, 254–255

treaps, 358

2-3-4 trees, 502, 518 pr.

2-3 trees, 358, 519

van Emde Boas trees, 478

weight-balanced trees, 358

data type, 26

decision by an algorithm, 1053

decision problem, 1045, 1049

and optimization problems, 1045

decision tree, 206–207, 219 pr.

decision variable, 851

DECREASE-KEY, 173

decrementing, 22

decryption, 936

default vertex labeling, 724

degree

minimum, of a B-tree, 502

of a node, 1173

of a polynomial, 65, 877

of a vertex, 1165

degree-bound, 877

DELETE, 250

DELETE-LARGER-HALF, 460 ex.

deletion

from binary search trees, 322–325, 326 ex.

from B-trees, 513–516

from chained hash tables, 278

from direct-address tables, 274

from dynamic tables, 465–470

from hash tables with linear probing, 302–303

from heaps, 178 ex.

from interval trees, 491

from linked lists, 261

from open-address hash tables, 294–295

from order-statistic trees, 484–485

from queues, 256

from red-black trees, 346–355

from stacks, 254

DeMorgan’s laws

for propositional logic, 1078

for sets, 1155, 1158 ex.

dense graph, 549

ϵ-dense, 668 pr.

dense matrix, 81

density

of prime numbers, 943

of a rod, 372 ex.

dependence

and indicator random variables, 131

linear, 1220

see also independence

depth

average, of a node in a randomly built binary search tree, 328 pr.

of a circuit, 894

of a node in a rooted tree, 1173

of quicksort recursion tree, 191 ex.

of a stack, 202 pr.

depth-determination problem, 542 pr.

depth-first forest, 564

depth-first search, 563–572

in finding articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components, 582
pr.

in finding strongly connected components, 576–581

in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, 711

in topological sorting, 573–576

depth-first tree, 564

deque, 258 ex.

DEQUEUE, 257

derivative of a series, 1142

descendant, 1172

destination vertex, 605

det, 1221

determinacy race, 765–768

determinant, 1221

deterministic algorithm, 135

parallel, 765

DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH, 154 pr.

DFS, 565

see also depth-first search

DFS-VISIT, 565

DFT, 888

diagonal matrix, 1215

diameter

of a network, 646

of a tree, 563 ex.

dictionary, 249

difference

of sets (−), 1154

symmetric, 706

difference constraints, 626–632

differentiation of a series, 1142

digital signature, 938

digraph, see directed graph

DIJKSTRA, 620

Dijkstra’s algorithm, 620–626

for all-pairs shortest paths, 646, 666

with edge weights in a range, 626 ex.

implemented with a Fibonacci heap, 623–624

implemented with a min-heap, 623

with integer edge weights, 625–626 ex.

in Johnson’s algorithm, 664

similarity to breadth-first search, 624, 625 ex.

similarity to Prim’s algorithm, 624

d-independent family of hash functions, 288

DIRECT-ADDRESS-DELETE, 274

direct addressing, 273–275

DIRECT-ADDRESS-INSERT, 274

DIRECT-ADDRESS-SEARCH, 274

direct-address table, 273–275

directed acyclic graph (dag), 1167

and back edges, 573

and component graphs, 578

and hamiltonian paths, 1060 ex.

longest simple path in, 407 pr.

for representing a parallel computation, 754

single-source shortest-paths algorithm for, 616–619

topological sort of, 573–576

directed equality subgraph, 727

directed graph, 1164

all-pairs shortest paths in, 646–669

constraint graph, 628

Euler tour of, 583 pr., 1043

hamiltonian cycle of, 1043

incidence matrix of, 553 ex.

and longest paths, 1042

path cover of, 698 pr.

PERT chart, 617, 619 ex.

semiconnected, 581 ex.

shortest path in, 604

single-source shortest paths in, 604–645

singly connected, 572 ex.

square of, 553 ex.

transitive closure of, 659

transpose of, 553 ex.

universal sink in, 553 ex.

see also directed acyclic graph, graph, network

directed version of an undirected graph, 1166

dirty area, 222 pr.

discovered vertex, 554, 564

discovery time, 565

discrete Fourier transform, 888

discrete logarithm, 933

discrete logarithm theorem, 933

discrete probability distribution, 1186

discrete random variable, 1191–1196

disjoint-set data structure, 520–545

analysis of, 534–540

in connected components, 521–523

in depth determination, 542 pr.

disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 527–531

in Kruskal’s algorithm, 593

linear-time special case of, 545

linked-list implementation of, 523–527

lower bound for, 545

in offline lowest common ancestors, 543 pr.

in offline minimum, 541 pr.

disjoint-set forest, 527–531

analysis of, 534–540

rank properties of, 533–534, 540 ex.

see also disjoint-set data structure

disjoint sets, 1156

disjunctive normal form, 1078

disk drive, 498–500

see also secondary storage

DISK-READ, 500

DISK-WRITE, 500

dissimilarity, 1006

distance

edit, 409 pr.

Manhattan, 244 pr.

of a shortest path (δ), 558

distributed memory, 748

distribution

binomial, see binomial distribution

continuous uniform, 1187

discrete, 1186

geometric, see geometric distribution

of inputs, 128, 134

of prime numbers, 943

probability, 218 ex., 1185

uniform, 1186

distributive laws for sets, 1155

divergent series, 1140

divide-and-conquer method, 34, 76

analysis of, 39–41, 90–119

for binary search, 44 ex.

for conversion of binary to decimal, 910 ex.

for fast Fourier transform, 888–891, 895

for matrix inversion, 834–837

for matrix multiplication, 81–90, 770–775, 783 pr.

for merge sort, 34–44, 775–782

for multiplication, 899 pr.

for quicksort, 182–204

relation to dynamic programming, 362

for selection, 230–243

solving recurrences for, 90–119

for Strassen’s algorithm, 85–90, 773–774

divide instruction, 26

divides relation (|), 904

divide step, in divide-and-conquer, 34, 76

division method, 284, 292 ex.

division theorem, 905

divisor, 904

common, 906

see also greatest common divisor

DNA, 6, 393–394, 409 pr.

DNF (disjunctive normal form), 1078

does-not-divide relation (∤), 904

Dog River, 717

dolphins, allowing to vote, 850

domain, 1161

double hashing, 295–297, 301 ex.

doubly linked list, 258–259, 264 ex.

circular, with a sentinel, 262

downto, in pseudocode, 22

d-regular graph, 716 ex., 740 pr.

driving function, 101

duality, 734, 866–873, 874 pr.

weak, 868–869, 874 pr.

dual linear program, 866

dummy key, 400

dynamic graph, 523

all-pairs shortest paths algorithms for, 669

data structures for, 479

minimum-spanning-tree algorithm for, 599 ex.

transitive closure of, 667 pr., 669

dynamic graph algorithm, 817

dynamic multiset, 460 ex.

dynamic order statistics, 480–486

dynamic-programming method, 362–416

for activity selection, 424 ex.

for all-pairs shortest paths, 648–659

for bitonic euclidean traveling-salesperson problem, 407 pr.

bottom-up, 368

for breaking a string, 412 pr.

compared with greedy method, 384–385, 393 ex., 421, 426–430

for edit distance, 409 pr.

elements of, 382–393

for Floyd-Warshall algorithm, 655–659

for inventory planning, 414 pr.

for longest common subsequence, 393–399

for longest palindrome subsequence, 407 pr.

for longest simple path in a weighted directed acyclic graph, 407 pr.

for matrix-chain multiplication, 373–382

and memoization, 390–392

for optimal binary search trees, 400–407

optimal substructure in, 382–387

overlapping subproblems in, 387–390

for printing neatly, 408 pr.

reconstructing an optimal solution in, 390

relation to divide-and-conquer, 362

for rod cutting, 363–373

for seam carving, 412 pr.

for signing free agents, 414 pr.

top-down with memoization, 368

for transitive closure, 659–661

for Viterbi algorithm, 411 pr.

for the 0-1 knapsack problem, 430 ex.

dynamic set, 249–251

see also data structure

dynamic table, 460–471

analyzed by accounting method, 463

analyzed by aggregate analysis, 462–463

analyzed by potential method, 463–470

load factor of, 461

dynamic tree, 478

E[ ], see expected value

e (base of the natural logarithm), 65

edge, 1164

antiparallel, 673–674

attributes of, 552

back, 569

bridge, 582 pr.

capacity of, 671

classification in breadth-first search, 581 pr.

classification in depth-first search, 569–570, 571 ex.

critical, 690

cross, 569

forward, 569

light, 587

negative-weight, 606–607

residual, 678

safe, 587

tree, 561, 564, 569

weight of, 551

edge connectivity, 692 ex.

edge set, 1164

edit distance, 409 pr.

Edmonds-Karp algorithm, 689–691

elementary event, 1185

elementary insertion, 461

element of a set (∈), 1153

ellipsoid algorithm, 857

elliptic-curve factorization method, 956

elseif, in pseudocode, 22 n.

else, in pseudocode, 22

empty language (∅), 1052

empty set (∅), 1153

empty set laws, 1154

empty stack, 255

empty string (ε), 959, 1052

empty tree, 1173

encoding of problem instances, 1049–1052

encryption, 936

endpoint of an interval, 489

ENQUEUE, 257

entering a vertex, 1164

entropy function, 1182

epoch, 805

ϵ-dense graph, 668 pr.

ϵ-universal family of hash functions, 287, 292 ex.

equality

of functions, 1162

linear, 853

of sets, 1153

equality constraint, 632 ex.

equality subgraph, 724

directed, 727

equations and asymptotic notation, 58–59

equivalence class, 1159

modulo n([a]_(n)), 905

equivalence, modular (= (mod n)), 64

equivalence relation, 1159

error bound, 1027

error, in pseudocode, 24

escape problem, 697 pr.

EUCLID, 912

Euclid’s algorithm, 911–916, 954 pr.

euclidean norm (∥ ∥), 1219

Euler’s constant, 921

Euler’s phi function, 920

Euler’s theorem, 932, 953 ex.

Euler tour, 583 pr., 740 pr.

and hamiltonian cycles, 1043

evaluation of a polynomial, 46 pr., 879, 884 ex.

derivatives of, 900 pr.

at multiple points, 900 pr.

event, 1185

event-driven simulation, 173, 181

EXACT-SUBSET-SUM, 1125

example, in clustering, 1006

exclusion and inclusion, 1158 ex.

execute a subroutine, 29 n.

expansion of a dynamic table, 461–465

expectation, see expected value

expected competitive ratio, 808

expected running time, 32, 129

expected value, 1192–1194

of a binomial distribution, 1198

of a geometric distribution, 1197

of an indicator random variable, 130

explored edge, 565

exponential function, 65–66

exponential search tree, 226, 478

exponentiation

of logarithms, 66

modular, 934–935

exponentiation instruction, 27

EXTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD, 372

EXTENDED-EUCLID, 914

EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS, 650

external node, 1172

external path length, 1175 ex.

extracting the maximum key

from d-ary heaps, 179 pr.

from max-heaps, 174

extracting the minimum key

from Young tableaus, 179 pr.

EXTRACT-MAX, 173–174

EXTRACT-MIN, 173

factor, 904

twiddle, 891

factorial function (!), 67–68

factorization, 956

unique, 909

failure, in a Bernoulli trial, 1196

fair coin, 1186

family of hash functions, 286–288, 292 ex.

fan-out, 1066

Farkas’s lemma, 869

FASTER-APSP, 653, 655 ex.

fast Fourier transform (FFT), 877–902

circuit for, 894–897

multidimensional, 899 pr.

recursive implementation of, 888–891

using modular arithmetic, 901 pr.

feasibility problem, 627, 873 pr.

feasible linear program, 854

feasible region, 854

feasible solution, 627, 854

feasible vertex labeling, 724, 742 pr.

feature vector, 1006

Fermat’s theorem, 932

FFT, 890

see also fast Fourier transform

FFTW, 902

FIB, 751

Fibonacci heap, 478

in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 623–624

in Johnson’s algorithm, 666

in Prim’s algorithm, 597

Fibonacci numbers, 69, 70 ex., 121 pr.

computation of, 750–753, 954 pr.

FIFO, see first-in, first-out; queue

final-state function, 968

FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH, 738

FIND-DEPTH, 542 pr.

find path, 528

FIND-POM, 496 pr.

FIND-SET, 521

disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 530, 544

linked-list implementation of, 523

FIND-SPLIT-POINT, 778

finished vertex, 564

finish time

in activity selection, 418

in depth-first search, 565

and strongly connected components, 578

finite automaton, 967–975

FINITE-AUTOMATON-MATCHER, 971

finite group, 917

finite sequence, 1162

finite set, 1156

finite sum, 1140

first-fit heuristic, 1131 pr.

first-in, first-out (FIFO), 254, 803–804, 814 ex.

implemented with a priority queue, 178 ex.

see also queue

fixed-length code, 432

floating-point data type, 26

floor function (⌊ ⌋), 63

in recurrences, 116–117

floor instruction, 26

flow, 671–676

aggregate, 864

augmentation of, 678

blocking, 702

cancellation of, 679

integer-valued, 695

net, across a cut, 682

value of, 672

flow conservation, 672

flow network, 671–676

corresponding to a bipartite graph, 694

cut of, 682–685

with multiple sources and sinks, 674

FLOYD-WARSHALL, 657

FLOYD-WARSHALL′, 661 ex.

Floyd-Warshall algorithm, 655–659, 661–662 ex.

flying cars, highways for, 850

FORD-FULKERSON, 686

Ford-Fulkerson method, 676–693

FORD-FULKERSON-METHOD, 676

FORESEE, 797

forest, 1167, 1169

breadth-first, 728

depth-first, 564

disjoint-set, 527–531

for, in pseudocode, 22

and loop invariants, 21 n.

fork-join parallelism, 749–770

see also parallel algorithm

fork-join scheduling, 759–761, 769 ex.

formal power series, 121 pr.

formula satisfiability, 1073–1076

forward edge, 569

forward substitution, 822–823

Fourier transform, see discrete Fourier transform, fast Fourier
transform

fractional knapsack problem, 429

fractional matching, 741 pr.

free tree, 1167, 1169–1171

frequency count, 802 ex.

frequency domain, 877

full binary tree, 1174

relation to optimal code, 433

full node, 502

full rank, 1220

full walk of a tree, 1112

fully parenthesized matrix-chain product, 374

fully polynomial-time approximation scheme, 1105

for subset sum, 1124–1130

function, 1161–1163

Ackermann’s, 544

α-strongly convex, 1041

basis, 841

β-smooth, 1041

boolean, 1182 ex.

convex, 1025–1027, 1194

driving, 101

final-state, 968

hash, see hash function

iterated, 68, 74 pr.

linear, 30, 853

objective, 626, 852, 854

potential, 456

prefix, 975–977

probability distribution, 218 ex.

quadratic, 31

reduction, 1062

suffix, 968

transition, 967, 973–974

watershed, 103

functional iteration, 68

fundamental theorem of linear programming, 872

furthest-in-future, 441

fusion tree, 226, 478

fuzzy sorting, 203 pr.

Gabow’s scaling algorithm for single-source shortest paths, 641 pr.

gadget, 1086, 1097

GALE-SHAPLEY, 719

Gale-Shapley algorithm, 718–722

Galois field of two elements (GF(2)), 1224 pr.

gap character, 961 ex., 975 ex.

gate, 1065

Gaussian elimination, 825

gcd, see greatest common divisor

GCD recursion theorem, 911

general arithmetic series, 1141

general number-field sieve, 956

generating function, 121 pr.

generation of partitioned sets, 234

generator

of a subgroup, 922

of [art], 932

GENERIC-MST, 587

geometric distribution, 1196–1198

and balls and bins, 143–144

in finding prime numbers, 943

in randomized selection analysis, 232

geometric series, 1142

GF(2) (Galois field of two elements), 1224 pr.

global cut, 701 pr.

global minimizer, 1022, 1024 fig., 1026 fig.

global variable, 22

golden ratio (ϕ), 69, 70 ex.

gossiping, 475

gradient descent, 1022–1038

constrained, 1032–1034

in machine learning, 1035–1037

for solving systems of linear equations, 1034–1035

stochastic, 1040 pr.

unconstrained, 1023–1031

GRADIENT-DESCENT, 1025

GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED, 1032

gradient of a function, 1023

GRAFT, 542 pr.

grain size in a parallel algorithm, 783 pr.

graph, 1164–1169

adjacency-list representation of, 550–551

adjacency-matrix representation of, 551–552

and asymptotic notation, 548

attributes of, 548, 552

breadth-first search of, 554–563

coloring of, 1100 pr.

complement of, 1085

component, 576

constraint, 628–630

dense, 549

depth-first search of, 563–572

dynamic, 523, 817

ϵ-dense, 668 pr.

hamiltonian, 1056

interval, 425 ex.

matching in, 693–697, 704–743

nonhamiltonian, 1056

planar, 584 pr.

regular, 716 ex., 740 pr.

shortest path in, 558

singly connected, 572 ex.

sparse, 549

static, 522

subproblem, 370–371

tour of, 1090

weighted, 551

see also directed acyclic graph, directed graph, flow network,
undirected graph, tree

GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM, 1060 ex.

Gray code, 471 pr.

gray vertex, 554, 564

greatest common divisor (gcd), 906–907, 910 ex.

binary gcd algorithm for, 953 pr.

Euclid’s algorithm for, 911–916, 954 pr.

with more than two arguments, 916 ex.

recursion theorem for, 911

GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR, 424

GREEDY-BIPARTITE-MATCHING, 726

greedy-choice property, 427–428

of activity selection, 420–421

of Huffman codes, 436–437

of offline caching, 442–445

greedy method, 417–447

for activity selection, 418–425

for coin changing, 446 pr.

compared with dynamic programming, 384–385, 393 ex., 421, 426–430

Dijkstra’s algorithm, 620–626

elements of, 426–431

for the fractional knapsack problem, 429

greedy-choice property in, 427–428

for Huffman code, 431–439

Kruskal’s algorithm, 592–594

for maximal bipartite matching, 726

for minimum spanning tree, 591–599

for offline caching, 440–446

optimal substructure in, 428

Prim’s algorithm, 594–597

for set cover, 1115–1119

for task-parallel scheduling, 759–761, 769 ex.

for task scheduling, 446 pr.

for weighted set cover, 1132 pr.

greedy scheduler, 759

GREEDY-SET-COVER, 1117

grid, 697 pr.

group, 916–923

cyclic, 932

operator (⊕), 917

growth step, 736

guessing the solution, in the substitution method, 92

Habanero-Java, 750

half 3-CNF satisfiability, 1099 ex.

half-open interval ([a, b) or (a, b]), 1157

Hall’s theorem, 715 ex.

halting, 6

halting problem, 1042

halving lemma, 887

HAM-CYCLE, 1056

hamiltonian cycle, 1043, 1056

NP completeness of, 1085–1090

hamiltonian graph, 1056

hamiltonian path, 1060 ex., 1098 ex.

HAM-PATH, 1060 ex.

handle, 173

handshaking lemma, 1168 ex.

harmonic number, 1142, 1149

harmonic series, 1142, 1149

HASH-DELETE, 300 ex.

hash function, 275, 282–292

auxiliary, 295

collision-resistant, 941

cryptographic, 291

division method for, 284, 292 ex.

for hierarchical memory, 304–307

multiplication method for, 284–286

multiply-shift method for, 285–286

random, 286–290

static, 282, 284–286

universal, 286–290

wee, 305–307

see also family of hash functions

hashing, 272–311

with chaining, 277–281, 308 pr.

double, 295–297, 301 ex.

independent uniform, 276

with linear probing, 297, 302–304

in memoization, 368, 391

with open addressing, 293–301, 308 pr.

perfect, 310

random, 286–290

to replace adjacency lists, 553 ex.

of static sets, 308 pr.

of strings, 290–291, 292 ex.

uniform, 278

universal, 286–290, 309 pr.

of variable-length inputs, 290–291

of vectors, 290–291

HASH-INSERT, 294, 300 ex.

HASH-SEARCH, 294, 300 ex.

hash table, 275–282

dynamic, 470 ex.

used within a priority queue, 174

see also hashing

hash value, 275

hat-check problem, 134 ex.

head

in a disk drive, 498

of a linked list, 259

of a queue, 256

heap, 161–181

analyzed by potential method, 459 ex.

building, 167–170, 178 pr.

in constructing Huffman codes, 436

d-ary, 179 pr., 668 pr.

deletion from, 178 ex.

in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 623

extracting the maximum key from, 174

Fibonacci, 478

height of, 163

increasing a key in, 174–175

insertion into, 175

in Johnson’s algorithm, 666

max-heap, 162

maximum key of, 174

mergeable, 268 pr.

min-heap, 163

in Prim’s algorithm, 597

as a priority queue, 172–178

HEAP-DECREASE-KEY, 176 ex.

HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN, 176 ex.

HEAP-MINIMUM, 176 ex.

heap property, 162

maintenance of, 164–167

vs. binary-search-tree property, 315 ex.

heapsort, 161–181

lower bound for, 207

HEAPSORT, 170

HEDGE, 1039 pr.

height

black-, 332

of a B-tree, 502–504

of a d-ary heap, 179 pr.

of a decision tree, 207

of a heap, 163

of a node in a heap, 163, 170 ex.

of a node in a tree, 1173

of a red-black tree, 332

of a tree, 1173

height-balanced tree, 357 pr.

helpful partitioning, 232

Hermitian matrix, 838 ex.

Hessian matrix, 1035

heuristic

first-fit for bin packing, 1131 pr.

path compression, 528

in the Rabin-Karp algorithm, 965

for the set-covering problem, 1116, 1132 pr.

table doubling, 461

for the traveling-salesperson problem, 1115 ex.

union by rank, 528

weighted union, 525

high endpoint of an interval, 489

high side of a partition, 183

HIRE-ASSISTANT, 127

hiring problem, 126–127, 135–136

online, 150–152

probabilistic analysis of, 132–133

hit, 965

HOARE-PARTITION, 199 pr.

HOPCROFT-KARP, 709

Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, 709–715

HORNER, 47 pr.

Horner’s rule, 46 pr., 879, 963

HUFFMAN, 434

Huffman code, 431–439

Human Genome Project, 6

HUNGARIAN, 737

Hungarian algorithm, 723–739, 740 pr.

hybrid cryptosystem, 941

hyperedge, 1167

hypergraph, 1167

hypotheses, 1003

ideal parallel computer, 756

idempotency laws, 1154

identity, 917

identity matrix, 1215

identity permutation, 138 ex.

if, in pseudocode, 22

ill-defined recurrence, 77

image, 1162

image compression, 412 pr.

incidence, 1164–1165

incidence matrix

and difference constraints, 628

of a directed graph, 553 ex.

inclusion and exclusion, 1158 ex.

incomplete step, 759

INCREASE-KEY, 173

increasing a key, in a max-heap, 174–175

INCREMENT, 451

incremental design method, 34

incrementing, 21

in-degree, 1165

indentation in pseudocode, 21–22

independence

of events, 1188, 1190 ex.

of random variables, 1192

of subproblems in dynamic programming, 386–387

independent family of hash functions, 288

independent set, 1099 pr.

independent uniform hash function, 276

independent uniform hashing, 276, 278

independent uniform permutation hashing, 295

indexing into an array, 22–23, 26 n., 252

index of an element of [art], 933

indicator random variable, 130–133

in approximation algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1120–1121

in birthday paradox analysis, 142–143

in bounding the right tail of the binomial distribution, 1207–1208

in coin flipping analysis, 131–132

expected value of, 130

in hashing analysis, 279–281

in the hat-check problem, 134 ex.

in hiring-problem analysis, 132–133

and linearity of expectation, 131

in quicksort analysis, 197–198, 200 pr.

in randomized caching analysis, 812

in randomized-selection analysis, 245 pr.

in streak analysis, 148–150

induced subgraph, 1166

inequality, linear, 853

infeasible linear program, 854

infeasible solution, 854

inference, 1004

infinite sequence, 1162

infinite set, 1156

infinite sum, 1140

infinity, arithmetic with, 611

initialization of a loop invariant, 20

INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE, 609

injective function, 1162

inner product, 1219

inorder tree walk, 314, 320 ex.

INORDER-TREE-WALK, 314

in-place permuting, 136

in-place sorting, 158, 220 pr.

in play, 232

input

to an algorithm, 5

to a combinational circuit, 1066

distribution of, 128, 134

to a logic gate, 1065

size of, 28

input alphabet, 967

INSERT, 173, 250, 460 ex.

insertion

into binary search trees, 321–322

into B-trees, 506–511

into chained hash tables, 278

into d-ary heaps, 179 pr.

into direct-address tables, 274

into dynamic tables, 461–465

elementary, 461

into heaps, 175

into interval trees, 491

into linked lists, 260

into open-address hash tables, 293–294

into order-statistic trees, 484

into queues, 256

into red-black trees, 338–346

into stacks, 254

into Young tableaus, 179 pr.

insertion sort, 17–21, 29–31, 51–53, 56–57

in bucket sort, 216–218

compared with merge sort, 12–13, 15 ex.

compared with quicksort, 191 ex.

decision tree for, 206 fig.

lower bound for, 52–53

in merge sort, 45 pr.

in quicksort, 198 ex.

using binary search, 45 ex.

INSERTION-SORT, 19, 30, 51

instance

of an abstract problem, 1045, 1049

of a problem, 6

instructions of the RAM model, 26

integer data type, 26

integer linear programming, 857, 874 pr., 1098 ex.

integers (ℤ), 1153

integer-valued flow, 695

integrality theorem, 696

integral, to approximate summations, 1150

integration of a series, 1142

interior-point methods, 857

intermediate vertex, 655

internal node, 1172

internal path length, 1175 ex.

interpolation by a cubic spline, 847 pr.

interpolation by a polynomial, 880, 885 ex.

at complex roots of unity, 891–892

intersection

of chords, 486 ex.

of languages, 1052

of sets (∩), 1154

interval, 489–490, 1157

fuzzy sorting of, 203 pr.

INTERVAL-DELETE, 490, 496 pr.

interval graph, 425 ex.

INTERVAL-INSERT, 490, 496 pr.

INTERVAL-SEARCH, 490, 492

INTERVAL-SEARCH-EXACTLY, 495 ex.

interval tree, 489–495

interval trichotomy, 490

intractability, 1042

invalid shift, 957

inventory planning, 414 pr.

inverse

of a bijective function, 1163

in a group, 917

of a matrix, 784 pr., 833–837, 1220

multiplicative, modulo n, 927

inversion

in an array, 47 pr.

in linked lists, 798

in a sequence, 134 ex., 486 ex.

inversion count, 798

inverter, 1065

invertible matrix, 1220

invocation tree, 756

isolated vertex, 1165

isomorphic graphs, 1166

iterated function, 68, 74 pr.

iterated logarithm function (lg*), 68

ITERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH, 316

iter function, 536

Java Fork-Join Framework, 750

Jensen’s inequality, 1194

JOHNSON, 666

Johnson’s algorithm, 662–667

joining

of red-black trees, 356 pr.

of 2-3-4 trees, 518 pr.

joint probability density function, 1191

Josephus permutation, 496 pr.

Karmarkar’s algorithm, 876

Karp’s minimum mean-weight cycle algorithm, 642 pr.

k-ary tree, 1174

k-clustering, 1008

k-CNF, 1043

k-coloring, 1100 pr., 1176 pr.

k-combination, 1180

k-conjunctive normal form, 1043

Keeling curve, 845 fig.

key, 17, 157, 173, 249, 283–284

in a cryptosystem, 936, 939

dummy, 400

median, of a B-tree node, 506

keywords, in pseudocode, 21–22, 24

parallel, 750, 752–754, 762–763

Kleene star (*), 1052

k-means problem, 1008

KMP algorithm, 975–985

KMP-MATCHER, 978

knapsack problem

decision version, 1096

fractional, 429

0-1, 428, 430 ex., 1134 pr.

k-neighbor tree, 358

knot, of a spline, 847 pr.

Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, 975–985

k-permutation, 136, 1180

Kraft inequality, 1176 ex.

Kruskal’s algorithm, 592–594

with integer edge weights, 598 ex.

k-sorted, 221 pr.

k-string, 1179

k-subset, 1156

k-substring, 1179

kth power, 910 ex.

label

in machine learning, 1003, 1035

of a vertex, 724, 742 pr.

Lagrange’s formula, 881

Lagrange’s theorem, 921

Lamé’s theorem, 913

language, 1052

completeness of, 1072 ex.

proving NP-completeness of, 1072–1073

verification of, 1058

lasers, sharks with, 850

last-in, first-out (LIFO), 254, 803–804

implemented with a priority queue, 178 ex.

see also stack

latency, 499

LCA, 544 pr.

lcm (least common multiple), 916 ex.

LCP, see longest common prefix array

LCS, 393–399

LCS-LENGTH, 397

leading submatrix, 839

leaf, 1172

least common multiple, 916 ex.

least frequently used (LFU), 803, 814 ex.

least recently used (LRU), 445 ex., 803–805

least-squares approximation, 841–845, 1035–1037

leaving a vertex, 1164

LEFT, 162

left child, 1173

left-child, right-sibling representation, 265, 268 ex.

left-leaning red-black binary search tree, 358

LEFT-ROTATE, 336, 495 ex.

left rotation, 335

left shift (⋘), 305

left subtree, 1173

Legendre symbol [art], 954 pr.

length

of a cycle, 1165

of a path, 1165

of a sequence, 1162

of a string, 959, 1179

level

of a function, 532

of a node in a disjoint-set forest, 535

of a tree, 1173

lexicographically less than, 327 pr.

lexicographic sorting, 327 pr., 986 n.

LFU (least frequently used), 803, 814 ex.

lg (binary logarithm), 66

lg* (iterated logarithm function), 68

lg^(k) (exponentiation of logarithms), 66

lg lg (composition of logarithms), 66

LIFO, see last-in, first-out; stack

light edge, 587

linear constraint, 853–854

linear dependence, 1220

linear equality, 853

linear equations

solving modular, 924–928

solving systems of, 819–833, 1034–1035

solving tridiagonal systems of, 847 pr.

linear function, 30, 853

linear independence, 1220

linear inequality, 853

linear-inequality feasibility problem, 873 pr.

linearity of expectation, 1192–1193

and indicator random variables, 131

linearity of summations, 1141

linear order, 1160

linear permutation, 1224 pr.

linear probing, 297, 302–304

LINEAR-PROBING-HASH-DELETE, 303

linear programming, 850–876, 1121–1124

applications of, 860–866

duality in, 866–873

ellipsoid algorithm for, 857

fundamental theorem of, 872

integer, 857, 874 pr.

interior-point methods for, 857

Karmarkar’s algorithm for, 876

and maximum flow, 862

and minimum-cost circulation, 875 pr.

and minimum-cost flow, 862–864

and multicommodity flow, 864–865

simplex algorithm for, 857

and single-pair shortest path, 861

and single-source shortest paths, 626–632

standard form for, 854

see also integer linear programming, 0-1 integer programming

linear-programming relaxation, 1122

linear regression, 1036

linear search, 25 ex.

linear speedup, 758

line search, 1031

LINK, 530

linked list, 258–264

compact, 269 pr.

deletion from, 261

to implement disjoint sets, 523–527

insertion into, 260

maintained by an online algorithm, 795–802

searching, 260, 292 ex.

linking of trees in a disjoint-set forest, 529

list, see linked list

LIST-DELETE, 261

LIST-DELETE′, 262

LIST-INSERT, 261

LIST-INSERT′, 263

LIST-PREPEND, 260

LIST-SEARCH, 260

LIST-SEARCH′, 263

literal, 1076

little-oh notation (o), 60

little-omega notation (ω), 61

Lloyd’s procedure, 1011–1013, 1039 pr.

ln (natural logarithm), 66

load factor

of a dynamic table, 461

of a hash table, 278

load instruction, 26, 756

local minimizer, 1026 fig.

local variable, 22

logarithm function (log), 66–67

discrete, 933

iterated (lg*), 68

logical parallelism, 753

logical right shift (⋙), 285

logic gate, 1065

longest common prefix (LCP) array, 986, 992–994

longest common subsequence, 393–399

longest common substring, 995 ex.

longest monotonically increasing subsequence, 399 ex.

longest palindrome subsequence, 407 pr.

LONGEST-PATH, 1055 ex.

LONGEST-PATH-LENGTH, 1055 ex.

longest repeated substring, 987

longest simple cycle, 1098 ex.

longest simple path, 1042

in an unweighted graph, 385

in a weighted directed acyclic graph, 407 pr.

lookahead algorithm, 815 ex.

LOOKUP-CHAIN, 391

loop, in pseudocode, 22

parallel, 762–765

loop invariant, 19–20

for breadth-first search, 555

for building a heap, 167

for counting sort, 211 ex.

for determining the rank of an element in an order-statistic tree, 483

and for loops, 21 n.

for the generic minimum-spanning-tree method, 586

for heapsort, 172 ex.

for Horner’s rule, 46 pr.

for increasing a key in a heap, 177 ex.

for insertion sort, 19–20

for partitioning, 184

for Prim’s algorithm, 597

for the Rabin-Karp algorithm, 965

for randomly permuting an array, 137

for red-black tree insertion, 340

for string-matching automata, 970, 973

loss function, 1036

low endpoint of an interval, 489

lower bounds

asymptotic, 55

on binomial coefficients, 1181, 1184 ex.

for comparing water jugs, 220 pr.

for competitive ratios for online caching, 804–806

for constructing binary search trees, 315 ex.

for disjoint-set data structures, 545

for finding the minimum, 228

for insertion sort, 52–53

for k-sorting, 221 pr.

for median finding, 247

for merging, 222 pr.

and potential functions, 475

for simultaneous minimum and maximum, 229 ex.

for sorting, 205–208, 219 pr., 225

for streaks, 147–148, 153 ex.

on summations, 1148, 1150

for task-parallel computations, 757

for traveling-salesperson tour, 1110–1113

for vertex cover, 1108, 1121–1123, 1132 pr.

lower median, 227

lower-triangular matrix, 1216

lowest common ancestor, 543 pr.

low side of a partition, 183

LRU (least recently used), 445 ex., 803–805

LU decomposition, 824–827

parallel algorithm for, 784 pr.

LU-DECOMPOSITION, 827

LUP decomposition, 821

computation of, 828–832

in matrix inversion, 833–834

and matrix multiplication, 838 ex.

parallel algorithm for, 784 pr.

use of, 821–824

LUP-DECOMPOSITION, 830

LUP-SOLVE, 824

machine learning, 14, 1003–1041

main memory, 498

maintenance of a loop invariant, 20

MAKE-RANKS, 988

MAKE-SET, 521

disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 530

linked-list implementation of, 523

makespan, 1133 pr.

MAKE-TREE, 542 pr.

Manhattan distance, 244 pr.

MARKING, 807, 815 ex.

Markov’s inequality, 1196 ex.

master method for solving a recurrence, 101–107

master recurrence, 101

master theorem, 102

continuous, 112

proof of, 107–115

matched vertex, 693, 705

matching, 704–743

bipartite, 693–697, 704–743

fractional, 741 pr.

by Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, 709–715

maximal, 705, 1108, 1132 pr.

maximum, 704–716, 1132 pr.

and maximum flow, 693–697

perfect, 715 ex., 740 pr.

stable, 716

of strings, 957–1002

unstable, 717

matrix, 1214–1226

addition of, 1217

adjacency, 551–552

conjugate transpose of, 838 ex.

dense, 81

determinant of, 1221

diagonal, 1215

Hermitian, 838 ex.

Hessian, 1035

identity, 1215

incidence, 553 ex.

inverse of, 784 pr., 833–837, 1220

lower-triangular, 1216

minor of, 1221

multiplication of, see matrix multiplication

negative of, 1217

permutation, 1217

positive-definite, 1222

positive-semidefinite, 1222

predecessor, 647, 655 ex., 657–659, 661 ex.

product of, with a vector, 762–765, 767, 1218

pseudoinverse of, 843

representation of, 253–254

scalar multiple of, 1217

sparse, 81

subtraction of, 1218

symmetric, 1217

symmetric positive-definite, 838–841

transpose of, 1214

tridiagonal, 1216

unit lower-triangular, 1216

unit upper-triangular, 1216

upper-triangular, 1216

Vandermonde, 881, 1223 pr.

matrix-chain multiplication, 373–382

MATRIX-CHAIN-MULTIPLY, 381 ex.

MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER, 378

matrix multiplication, 80–90, 1218

for all-pairs shortest paths, 648–655, 668–669

divide-and-conquer method for, 81–90, 770–775, 783 pr.

and LUP decomposition, 838 ex.

and matrix inversion, 834–837

Pan’s method for, 89 ex.

parallel algorithm for, 770–775, 783 pr.

Strassen’s algorithm for, 85–90, 124–125, 773–774

and transitive closure, 838 ex.

MATRIX-MULTIPLY, 81

MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, 83

matrix-vector multiplication, 762–765, 767, 1218

MAX-CNF satisfiability, 1124 ex.

MAX-CUT problem, 1124 ex.

MAX-FLOW-BY-SCALING, 700 pr.

max-flow min-cut theorem, 684

max-heap, 162

building, 167–170

d-ary, 179 pr.

deletion from, 178 ex.

extracting the maximum key from, 174

in heapsort, 170–172

increasing a key in, 174–175

insertion into, 175

maximum key of, 174

as a max-priority queue, 172–178

mergeable, 268 n.

MAX-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY, 176 ex.

MAX-HEAP-DELETE, 178 ex.

MAX-HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX, 175

MAX-HEAPIFY, 165

MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY, 176

MAX-HEAP-INSERT, 176

building a heap with, 178 pr.

MAX-HEAP-MAXIMUM, 175

max-heap property, 162

maintenance of, 164–167

maximal element, 1160

maximal matching, 705, 1108, 1132 pr.

greedy method for, 726

maximization linear program, 853

maximum, 227

in binary search trees, 317–318

of a binomial distribution, 1202 ex.

finding, 228–229

in heaps, 174

in red-black trees, 334

MAXIMUM, 173–174, 250

maximum bipartite matching, 693–697, 705–716

maximum flow, 670–703

Edmonds-Karp algorithm for, 689–691

Ford-Fulkerson method for, 676–693

as a linear program, 862

and maximum bipartite matching, 693–697

push-relabel algorithms for, 702

scaling algorithm for, 699 pr.

updating, 699 pr.

maximum matching, 693, 704, 1132 pr.

see also maximum bipartite matching

maximum spanning tree, 1134 pr.

max-priority queue, 173

MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1120–1121

MAYBE-MST-A, 602 pr.

MAYBE-MST-B, 602 pr.

MAYBE-MST-C, 602 pr.

mean

of a cluster, 1009

see also expected value

mean weight of a cycle, 642 pr.

median, 227–247

weighted, 244 pr.

median key, of a B-tree node, 506

median-of-3 method, 203 pr.

member of a set (∈), 1153

memoization, 368, 390–392

MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD, 369

MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX, 369

MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN, 391

memory hierarchy, 27, 301

hash functions for, 304–307

MERGE, 36

mergeable heap, 268 pr.

MERGE-LISTS, 1125

merge sort, 34–44, 57

compared with insertion sort, 12–13, 15 ex.

lower bound for, 207

parallel algorithm for, 775–782

use of insertion sort in, 45 pr.

MERGE-SORT, 39

merging

of k sorted lists, 178 ex.

lower bounds for, 222 pr.

parallel algorithm for, 776–780

of two sorted subarrays, 35–38

MILLER-RABIN, 946

Miller-Rabin primality test, 945–953

MIN-GAP, 495 ex.

min-heap, 163

analyzed by potential method, 459 ex.

building, 167–170

in constructing Huffman codes, 436

d-ary, 668 pr.

in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 623

in Johnson’s algorithm, 666

mergeable, 268 n.

as a min-priority queue, 176 ex.

in Prim’s algorithm, 597

MIN-HEAPIFY, 166 ex.

MIN-HEAP-INSERT, 176 ex.

min-heap property, 163

maintenance of, 166 ex.

vs. binary-search-tree property, 315 ex.

minimization linear program, 853

minimizer of a function, 1022, 1024 fig., 1026 fig.

minimum, 227

in binary search trees, 317–318

finding, 228–229

offline, 541 pr.

in red-black trees, 334

MINIMUM, 173, 228, 250

minimum-cost circulation, 875 pr.

minimum-cost flow, 862–864

minimum-cost multicommodity flow, 866 ex.

minimum-cost spanning tree, see minimum spanning tree

minimum cut, 682

global, 701 pr.

minimum degree, of a B-tree, 502

minimum mean-weight cycle, 642 pr.

minimum path cover, 698 pr.

minimum spanning tree, 585–603

in approximation algorithm for traveling-salesperson problem, 1110

Borůvka’s algorithm for, 603

on dynamic graphs, 599 ex.

generic method for, 586–591

Kruskal’s algorithm for, 592–594

Prim’s algorithm for, 594–597

second-best, 599 pr.

minimum-weight spanning tree, see minimum spanning tree

minimum-weight vertex cover, 1121–1124

minor of a matrix, 1221

min-priority queue, 173

in constructing Huffman codes, 434

in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 623–624

in Prim’s algorithm, 596–597

missing child, 1173

mod, 64, 905

modeling, 851

modifying operation, 250

modular arithmetic, 64, 901 pr., 916–923

modular equivalence (= (mod n)), 64, 905

modular exponentiation, 934–935

MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION, 935

modular linear equations, 924–928

MODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVER, 926

modulo, 64, 905

Monge array, 123 pr.

monotone sequence, 181

monotonically decreasing, 63

monotonically increasing, 63

Monty Hall problem, 1210 pr.

MOVE-TO-FRONT, 796–797

MST-KRUSKAL, 594

MST-PRIM, 596

MST-REDUCE, 601 pr.

much-greater-than (≫), 533

much-less-than (≪), 761

multicommodity flow, 864–865

multicore computer, 748

multidimensional fast Fourier transform, 899 pr.

multigraph, 1167

multiple, 904

of an element modulo n, 924–928

least common, 916 ex.

scalar, 1217

multiple sources and sinks, 674

multiplication

of complex numbers, 90 ex.

divide-and-conquer method for, 899 pr.

of matrices, see matrix multiplication

of a matrix chain, 373–382

matrix-vector, 762–765, 767, 1218

modulo n (·_(n)), 917

of polynomials, 878

multiplication method, 284–286

multiplicative group modulo n, 919

multiplicative inverse, modulo n, 927

multiplicative weights, 1015–1022

multiply instruction, 26

multiply-shift method, 285–286

MULTIPOP, 450

multiset, 1153 n.

dynamic, 460 ex.

mutually exclusive events, 1185

mutually independent events, 1188

mutually noninterfering strands, 767

ℕ (set of natural numbers), 1153

naive algorithm for string matching, 960–962

NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER, 960

National Resident Matching Program, 704, 722 ex.

natural cubic spline, 847 pr.

natural logarithm (ln), 66

natural numbers (ℕ), 1153

keys interpreted as, 283–284

nearest-center rule, 1008

negative of a matrix, 1217

negative-weight cycle

and difference constraints, 629

and relaxation, 639 ex.

and shortest paths, 606–607, 614–615, 655 ex., 662 ex.

negative-weight edges, 606–607

neighbor, 1167

neighborhood, 715 ex.

nesting boxes, 640 pr.

net flow across a cut, 682

network

flow, see flow network

residual, 677–681

for sorting, 789

new request, 810

Newton’s method, 1038 pr.

NIL, 23

node, 1172

see also vertex

nondeterministic algorithm, 765

nondeterministic polynomial time, 1058 n.

see also NP

nonempty suffix, 997 pr.

nonhamiltonian graph, 1056

noninstance, 1051 n.

noninvertible matrix, 1220

nonnegativity constraint, 854

nonoblivious adversary, 807

nonoverlappable string pattern, 974 ex.

nonsample position, 997 pr.

nonsample suffix, 997 pr.

nonsingular matrix, 1220

nontrivial power, 910 ex.

nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n, 934

no-path property, 611, 634

normal equation, 843

norm of a vector (∥ ∥), 1219

NOT function (¬), 1065

not a set member (∉), 1153

not equivalent (≠ (mod n)), 64

NOT gate, 1065

NP (complexity class), 1043, 1058, 1060 ex.

NPC (complexity class), 1044, 1063

NP-complete, 1044, 1063

NP-completeness, 9–10, 1042–1103

of the circuit-satisfiability problem, 1064–1071

of the clique problem, 1081–1084

of the formula-satisfiability problem, 1073–1076

of the graph-coloring problem, 1100 pr.

of the half 3-CNF satisfiability problem, 1099 ex.

of the hamiltonian-cycle problem, 1085–1090

of the hamiltonian-path problem, 1098 ex.

of the independent-set problem, 1099 pr.

of integer linear programming, 1098 ex.

of the longest-simple-cycle problem, 1098 ex.

proving, of a language, 1072–1073

reduction strategies for, 1095–1098

of scheduling with profits and deadlines, 1102 pr.

of the set-covering problem, 1119 ex.

of the set-partition problem, 1098 ex.

of the subgraph-isomorphism problem, 1098 ex.

of the subset-sum problem, 1092–1095

of the 3-CNF-satisfiability problem, 1076–1079

of the traveling-salesperson problem, 1090–1092

of the vertex-cover problem, 1084–1085

of 0-1 integer programming, 1098 ex.

NP-hard, 1063

n-set, 1156

n-tuple, 1157

null event, 1185

null tree, 1173

null vector, 1221

number-field sieve, 956

numerical stability, 819, 821

n-vector, 1215

o-notation, 60

O-notation, 50, 54–55

O′-notation, 73 pr.

[art]-notation, 73 pr.

object, 23

objective function, 626, 852, 854

objective value, 854

oblivious adversary, 807

oblivious compare-exchange algorithm, 222 pr.

occurrence of a pattern, 957

offline algorithm, 791

OFFLINE-MINIMUM, 542 pr.

offline problem

caching, 440–446

lowest common ancestors, 543 pr.

minimum, 541 pr.

old request, 810

Omega-notation, 51, 54 fig., 55–56

1-approximation algorithm, 1105

one-pass method, 544

one-to-one correspondence, 1163

one-to-one function, 1162

online algorithm, 791–818

for caching, 802–815

for the cow-path problem, 815 pr.

for hiring, 150–152

for maintaining a linked list, 795–802

for task scheduling, 816 pr.

for waiting for an elevator, 792–794

online learning, 1003

ONLINE-MAXIMUM, 150

online task-parallel scheduler, 759

onto function, 1162

open-address hash table, 293–301, 308 pr.

with double hashing, 295–297, 301 ex.

with linear probing, 297, 302–304

open interval ((a, b)), 1157

OpenMP, 750

optimal assignment, 723–739

optimal binary search tree, 400–407

OPTIMAL-BST, 405

optimal objective value, 854

optimal solution, 854

optimal substructure, 382–387

of activity selection, 419

of binary search trees, 402–403

of the fractional knapsack problem, 429

in greedy method, 428

of Huffman codes, 438

of longest common subsequences, 394–395

of matrix-chain multiplication, 376

of offline caching, 441–442

of rod cutting, 365

of shortest paths, 605–606, 649, 655–656

of unweighted shortest paths, 385

of the 0-1 knapsack problem, 429

optimal vertex cover, 1106

optimization problem, 362, 1045, 1049

approximation algorithms for, 1104–1136

and decision problems, 1045

OR function (∨), 659, 1065

order

of a group, 922

of growth, 32

linear, 1160

partial, 1160

total, 1160

ordered pair, 1156

ordered tree, 1173

order statistics, 160, 227–247

dynamic, 480–486

order-statistic tree, 480–486

ord function, 987

OR gate, 1065

or, in pseudocode, 24

orthonormal, 849

OS-KEY-RANK, 485 ex.

OS-RANK, 483

OS-SELECT, 482

outcome, 1185

out-degree, 1165

outer product, 1219

output

of an algorithm, 5

of a combinational circuit, 1066

of a logic gate, 1065

overdetermined system of linear equations, 821

overflow

of a queue, 257

of a stack, 255

overflowing vertex, 703

overlapping intervals, 489

finding all, 495 ex.

point of maximum overlap, 496 pr.

overlapping rectangles, 495 ex.

overlapping subproblems, 387–390

overlapping-suffix lemma, 959

P (complexity class), 1043, 1050, 1054, 1055 ex.

page, in virtual memory, 440

pair

blocking, 716

ordered, 1156

pairwise disjoint sets, 1156

pairwise independence, 1188

pairwise relatively prime, 908

palindrome, 407 pr., 995 ex.

Pan’s method for matrix multiplication, 89 ex.

parallel algorithm, 748–790

for computing Fibonacci numbers, 750–753

grain size in, 783 pr.

for LU decomposition, 784 pr.

for LUP decomposition, 784 pr.

for matrix inversion, 784 pr.

for matrix multiplication, 770–775, 783 pr.

for matrix-vector product, 762–765, 767

for merge sort, 775–782

for merging, 776–780

for prefix computation, 784 pr.

for quicksort, 789 pr.

randomized, 789 pr.

for reduction, 784 pr.

for a simple stencil calculation, 787 pr.

for solving systems of linear equations, 784 pr.

Strassen’s algorithm, 773–774

for well-formed parentheses, 786 pr.

parallel computer, 10, 748, 756

parallel for, in pseudocode, 762–763

parallelism

logical, 753

of a randomized parallel algorithm, 789 pr.

spawning, 753

syncing, 754

of a task-parallel computation, 758

parallel keywords, 750, 752, 762

parallel loop, 762–765, 783 pr.

parallel-machine-scheduling problem, 1133 pr.

parallel prefix, 784 pr.

parallel random-access machine, 789

parallel slackness, 758

rule of thumb, 761

parallel, strands logically in, 756

parallel trace, 754–756

series-parallel composition of, 762 fig.

parameter, 23

costs of passing, 120 pr.

parent

in a breadth-first tree (π), 555

in a parallel computation, 753

in a rooted tree, 1172

PARENT, 162

parenthesis theorem, 567

parenthesization of a matrix-chain product, 374

Pareto optimality, 722 ex.

parse tree, 1077

partial derivative (∂), 1023

partial order, 1160

PARTITION, 184

PARTITION′, 200 pr.

PARTITION-AROUND, 237

partition function, 363 n.

partitioning, 183–186

around median of 3 elements, 198 ex.

helpful, 232

Hoare’s method for, 199 pr.

randomized, 192, 198 ex., 200 pr., 203 pr.

partition of a set, 1156, 1159

Pascal’s triangle, 1183 ex.

path, 1165

alternating, 705

augmenting, 681–682, 705

critical, 619

find, 528

hamiltonian, 1060 ex., 1098 ex.

longest, 385, 1042

shortest, see shortest paths

simple, 1165

weight of, 407 pr., 604

PATH, 1045, 1053

path compression, 528

path cover, 698 pr.

path length, of a tree, 328 pr., 1175 ex.

path-relaxation property, 611, 635

pattern, 957

nonoverlappable, 974 ex.

pattern matching, see string matching

perfect hashing, 310

perfect linear speedup, 758

perfect matching, 715 ex., 740 pr.

permutation, 1163, 1179–1180

bit-reversal, 897

identity, 138 ex.

in place, 136

Josephus, 496 pr.

k-permutation, 136, 1180

linear, 1224 pr.

random, 136–138

uniform random, 128, 136

permutation matrix, 1217

PERMUTE-BY-CYCLE, 139 ex.

PERMUTE-WITH-ALL, 139 ex.

PERMUTE-WITHOUT-IDENTITY, 138 ex.

persistent data structure, 355 pr., 478

PERSISTENT-TREE-INSERT, 355 pr.

PERT chart, 617, 619 ex.

P-FIB, 753

phi function (ϕ(n)), 920

pivot

in LU decomposition, 826

in quicksort, 183

in selection, 230

P[:k] (prefix of a pattern), 959

planar graph, 584 pr.

platter in a disk drive, 498

P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY, 771

P-MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, 772

P-MAT-VEC, 763

P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE, 763

P-MAT-VEC-WRONG, 768

P-MERGE, 779

P-MERGE-AUX, 779

P-MERGE-SORT, 775

P-NAIVE-MERGE-SORT, 775

pointer, 23

trailing, 321

point, in clustering, 1006

point-value representation, 880

polylogarithmically bounded, 67

polynomial, 65, 877–885

addition of, 877

asymptotic behavior of, 71 pr.

coefficient representation of, 879

derivatives of, 900 pr.

evaluation of, 46 pr., 879, 884 ex., 900 pr.

interpolation by, 880, 885 ex.

multiplication of, 878, 882–884, 899 pr.

point-value representation of, 880

polynomial-growth condition, 116–117

polynomially bounded, 65

polynomially related, 1051

polynomial-time acceptance, 1053

polynomial-time algorithm, 904, 1042

polynomial-time approximation scheme, 1105

for maximum clique, 1131 pr.

for subset sum, 1124–1130

polynomial-time computability, 1051

polynomial-time decision, 1053

polynomial-time reducibility (≤_(P)), 1062, 1071 ex.

polynomial-time solvability, 1050

polynomial-time verification, 1056–1061

POP, 255, 449

pop from a runtime stack, 202 pr.

positional tree, 1174

positive-definite matrix, 1222

positive-semidefinite matrix, 1222

post-office location problem, 244 pr.

postorder tree walk, 314

potential function, 456

for lower bounds, 475

potential method, 456–460

for binary counters, 458–459

for disjoint-set data structures, 534–540, 541 ex.

for dynamic tables, 463–470

for maintaining a linked list, 799–801

for min-heaps, 459 ex.

for restructuring red-black trees, 473 pr.

for stack operations, 457–458

potential of a data structure, 456

power

of an element, modulo n, 932–936

kth, 910 ex.

nontrivial, 910 ex.

power series, 121 pr.

power set, 1156

Pr { } (probability distribution), 1185

PRAM, 789

predecessor

in binary search trees, 318–319

in breadth-first trees (π), 555

in linked lists, 259

in red-black trees, 334

in shortest-paths trees (π), 608

PREDECESSOR, 250

predecessor matrix, 647, 655 ex., 657–659, 661 ex.

predecessor subgraph

in all-pairs shortest paths, 647

in breadth-first search, 561

in depth-first search, 564

in single-source shortest paths, 608

predecessor-subgraph property, 611, 637–638

prediction, 1004

prediction phase, 1003

preemption, 446 pr., 816 pr.

prefix

of a sequence, 395

of a string (⊏), 959

prefix computation, 784 pr.

prefix-free code, 432

prefix function, 975–977

prefix-function iteration lemma, 980

preflow, 703

preimage of a matrix, 1224 pr.

preorder, total, 1160

preorder tree walk, 314

Prim’s algorithm, 594–597

with an adjacency matrix, 598 ex.

in approximation algorithm for traveling-salesperson problem, 1110

with integer edge weights, 598 ex.

similarity to Dijkstra’s algorithm, 624

for sparse graphs, 599 pr.

primality testing, 942–953, 956

Miller-Rabin test, 945–953

pseudoprimality testing, 944–945

primal linear program, 866

augmented, 870

primary clustering, 303

prime distribution function, 943

prime factorization of integers, 909

prime number, 905

density of, 943

prime number theorem, 943

primitive root of [art], 932

principal root of unity, 886

principle of inclusion and exclusion, 1158 ex.

PRINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PATH, 648

PRINT-CUT-ROD-SOLUTION, 372

PRINT-LCS, 397

PRINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS, 381

PRINT-PATH, 562

PRINT-SET, 531 ex.

priority queue, 172–178

in constructing Huffman codes, 434

in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 623–624

heap implementation of, 172–178

max-priority queue, 173

min-priority queue, 173, 176 ex.

with monotone extractions, 181

in Prim’s algorithm, 596–597

see also Fibonacci heap

probabilistically checkable proof, 1103, 1136

probabilistic analysis, 127–128, 140–153

of approximation algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1120–1121

and average inputs, 32

of average node depth in a randomly built binary search tree, 328 pr.

of balls and bins, 143–144

of birthday paradox, 140–143

of bucket sort, 216–218, 218 ex.

of collisions, 281 ex.

of file comparison, 967 ex.

of fuzzy sorting of intervals, 203 pr.

of hashing with chaining, 278–281

of hiring problem, 132–133, 150–152

of insertion into a binary search tree with equal keys, 327 pr.

of longest probe bound for hashing, 308 pr.

of lower bound for sorting, 219 pr.

of Miller-Rabin primality test, 948–953

of online hiring problem, 150–152

of open-address hashing, 297–300

and parallel algorithms, 789 pr.

of partitioning, 191 ex., 198 ex., 200 pr., 203 pr.

of probabilistic counting, 153 pr.

of quicksort, 194–198, 200 pr., 203 pr.

of Rabin-Karp algorithm, 965–966

and randomized algorithms, 134–136

of randomized online caching, 809–814

of randomized selection, 232–236, 245 pr.

of randomized weighted majority, 1022 ex.

of searching a sorted compact list, 269 pr.

of slot-size bound for chaining, 308 pr.

of sorting points by distance from origin, 218 ex.

of streaks, 144–150

of universal hashing, 286–290

probabilistic counting, 153 pr.

probability, 1184–1191

probability axioms, 1185

probability density function, 1191

probability distribution, 1185

probability distribution function, 218 ex.

probe sequence, 293

probing, 293

see also linear probing, double hashing

problem

abstract, 1048

computational, 5–6

concrete, 1049

decision, 1045, 1049

intractable, 1042

optimization, 362, 1045, 1049

solution to, 6, 1049

tractable, 1042

procedure, 18

calling, 23, 26, 29 n.

product (∏), 1144

Cartesian (×), 1157

inner, 1219

of matrices, see matrix multiplication

outer, 1219

of polynomials, 878

rule of, 1179

scalar flow, 675 ex.

professional wrestler, 563 ex.

program counter, 1068

programming, see dynamic programming, linear programming

projection, 1032

proper ancestor, 1172

proper descendant, 1172

proper prefix, 959

proper subgroup, 921

proper subset (⊂), 1154

proper suffix, 959

P-SCAN-1, 785 pr.

P-SCAN-1-AUX, 785 pr.

P-SCAN-2, 786 pr.

P-SCAN-2-AUX, 786 pr.

P-SCAN-3, 787 pr.

P-SCAN-DOWN, 787 pr.

P-SCAN-UP, 787 pr.

pseudocode, 18, 21–24

pseudoinverse, 843

pseudoprime, 944–945

PSEUDOPRIME, 945

pseudorandom-number generator, 129

P-TRANSPOSE, 770 ex.

public key, 936, 939

public-key cryptosystem, 936–942

PUSH, 255, 449

push onto a runtime stack, 202 pr.

push-relabel algorithms, 702

quadratic convergence, 1039 pr.

quadratic function, 31

quadratic residue, 954 pr.

quantile, 242 ex.

query, 250

queue, 254, 256–257

in breadth-first search, 554

implemented by stacks, 258 ex., 460 ex.

linked-list implementation of, 264 ex.

priority, see priority queue

quicksort, 182–204

analysis of, 187–191, 193–198

average-case analysis of, 194–198

compared with insertion sort, 191 ex.

compared with radix sort, 214

with equal element values, 200 pr.

good worst-case implementation of, 241 ex.

with median-of-3 method, 203 pr.

parallel algorithm for, 789 pr.

randomized version of, 191–193, 200 pr., 203 pr.

stack depth of, 202 pr.

and tail recursion, 202 pr.

use of insertion sort in, 198 ex.

worst-case analysis of, 193–194

QUICKSORT, 183

QUICKSORT′, 200 pr.

quotient, 905

ℝ (set of real numbers), 1153

Rabin-Karp algorithm, 962–967

RABIN-KARP-MATCHER, 966

race condition, 765–768

RACE-EXAMPLE, 766

radix sort, 211–215

compared with quicksort, 214

in computing suffix arrays, 992

RADIX-SORT, 213

radix tree, 327 pr.

RAM, 26–27

RANDOM, 129

random-access machine, 26–27

parallel, 789

random hashing, 286–290

randomized algorithm, 128–129, 134–140

and average inputs, 32

comparison sort, 219 pr.

for fuzzy sorting of intervals, 203 pr.

for hiring problem, 135–136

for insertion into a binary search tree with equal keys, 327 pr.

for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1120–1121

Miller-Rabin primality test, 945–953

for online caching, 807–814

parallel, 789 pr.

for partitioning, 192, 198 ex., 200 pr., 203 pr.

for permuting an array, 136–138

and probabilistic analysis, 134–136

quicksort, 191–193, 200 pr., 203 pr.

random hashing, 286–290

randomized rounding, 1136

for searching a sorted compact list, 269 pr.

for selection, 230–236, 245 pr.

universal hashing, 286–290

for weighted majority, 1022 ex.

RANDOMIZED-HIRE-ASSISTANT, 135

RANDOMIZED-MARKING, 808

RANDOMIZED-PARTITION, 192

RANDOMIZED-PARTITION′, 200 pr.

RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT, 192

relation to randomly built binary search trees, 328 pr.

randomized rounding, 1136

RANDOMIZED-SELECT, 230

randomly built binary search tree, 328 pr.

RANDOMLY-PERMUTE, 136, 138 ex.

random-number generator, 129

random oracle, 276

random permutation, 136–138

uniform, 128, 136

RANDOM-SAMPLE, 139 ex.

RANDOM-SEARCH, 154 pr.

random variable, 1191–1196

indicator, see indicator random variable

range, 1162

of a matrix, 1224 pr.

rank

column, 1220

in computing suffix arrays, 987

full, 1220

of a matrix, 1220, 1224 pr.

of a node in a disjoint-set forest, 528, 533–534, 540 ex.

of a number in an ordered set, 480

in order-statistic trees, 482–484, 485–486 ex.

row, 1220

rate of growth, 32

RB-DELETE, 348

RB-DELETE-FIXUP, 351

RB-ENUMERATE, 355 ex.

RB-INSERT, 338

RB-INSERT-FIXUP, 339

RB-JOIN, 356 pr.

RB-TRANSPLANT, 347

RC6, 304

reachability in a graph (↝), 1165

real numbers (ℝ), 1153

reconstructing an optimal solution, in dynamic programming, 390

record, 17, 157

rectangle, 495 ex.

RECTANGULAR-MATRIX-MULTIPLY, 374

recurrence, 39, 76–80, 90–125

Akra-Bazzi, 115–119

algorithmic, 77–78

inequalities in, 78

master, 101

solution by Akra-Bazzi method, 117–118

solution by master method, 101–107

solution by recursion-tree method, 95–101

solution by substitution method, 90–95

recursion, 34

recursion tree, 42, 95–101

in matrix-chain multiplication analysis, 388–390

in merge sort analysis, 42–44

in proof of continuous master theorem, 108–110

in quicksort analysis, 188–190

in rod cutting analysis, 366–367

and the substitution method, 98

RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR, 422

recursive case, 34

of a divide-and-conquer algorithm, 76

of a recurrence, 77

RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN, 389

red-black properties, 331–332

red-black tree, 331–359

augmentation of, 487–489

compared with B-trees, 497, 503

deletion from, 346–355

for enumerating keys in a range, 355 ex.

height of, 332

insertion into, 338–346

in interval trees, 490–495

joining of, 356 pr.

left-leaning, 358

maximum key of, 334

minimum key of, 334

in order-statistic trees, 480–486

persistent, 355 pr.

predecessor in, 334

properties of, 331–335

relaxed, 334 ex.

restructuring, 473 pr.

rotation in, 335–338

searching in, 334

successor in, 334

see also interval tree, order-statistic tree

REDUCE, 784 pr.

reducibility, 1061–1063

reduction algorithm, 1046, 1062

reduction function, 1062

reduction, of an array, 784 pr.

reduction strategies, 1095–1098

reference, 23

reflexive relation, 1158

reflexivity of asymptotic notation, 61

region, feasible, 854

register, 301, 756

regret, 1016

regular graph, 716 ex., 740 pr.

regularity condition, 103, 112, 114 ex.

regularization, 1012, 1036–1037

reindexing summations, 1143–1144

reinforcement learning, 1004

rejection

by an algorithm, 1053

by a finite automaton, 968

relation, 1158–1161

relatively prime, 908

RELAX, 610

relaxation

of an edge, 609–611

linear programming, 1122

relaxed red-black tree, 334 ex.

release time, 446 pr., 816 pr.

remainder, 64, 905

remainder instruction, 26

repeated squaring

for all-pairs shortest paths, 652–653

for raising a number to a power, 934

repeat, in pseudocode, 22

repetition factor, of a string, 996 pr.

REPETITION-MATCHER, 996 pr.

representative of a set, 520

RESET, 456 ex.

residual capacity, 677, 681

residual edge, 678

residual network, 677–681

residue, 64, 905, 954 pr.

respecting a set of edges, 587

return, in pseudocode, 24

return instruction, 26

reweighting

in all-pairs shortest paths, 662–664

in single-source shortest paths, 641 pr.

ρ(n)-approximation algorithm, 1104, 1120

RIGHT, 162

right child, 1173

right-conversion, 337 ex.

RIGHT-ROTATE, 336

right rotation, 335

right shift (⋙), 285

right subtree, 1173

rod cutting, 363–373, 393 ex.

root

of a tree, 1171

of unity, 885–886

of [art], 932

rooted tree, 1171

representation of, 265–268

rotation, 335–338

rounding, 1122

randomized, 1136

row-major order, 253, 396

row rank, 1220

row vector, 1215

RSA public-key cryptosystem, 936–942

rule of product, 1179

rule of sum, 1178

running time, 29

asymptotic, 49

average-case, 32, 128

best-case, 34 ex.

expected, 32, 129

of a graph algorithm, 548

order of growth, 32

parallel, 757–758

and proper use of asymptotic notation, 56–57

rate of growth, 32

worst-case, 31

SA, see suffix array

sabermetrics, 415 n.

safe edge, 587

SAME-COMPONENT, 522

sample position, 997 pr.

sample space, 1185

sample suffix, 997 pr.

sampling, 139 ex.

SAT, 1074

satellite data, 17, 157, 249

satisfiability, 1066, 1073–1079, 1120–1121, 1124 ex.

satisfiable formula, 1043, 1074

satisfying assignment, 1066, 1074

scalar, 1217

scalar flow product, 675 ex.

scaling

in maximum flow, 699 pr.

in single-source shortest paths, 641 pr.

scan, 784 pr.

SCAN, 785 pr.

scapegoat tree, 358

schedule, 1133 pr.

scheduler for task-parallel computations, 753, 759–761, 769 ex., 789

scheduling, 446 pr., 816 pr., 1102 pr., 1133 pr.

Schur complement, 825, 839

Schur complement lemma, 840

SCRAMBLE-SEARCH, 154 pr.

seam carving, 412 pr.

SEARCH, 250

searching

binary search, 44 ex., 777–778

in binary search trees, 316–317

in B-trees, 504–505

in chained hash tables, 278

in direct-address tables, 274

for an exact interval, 495 ex.

in interval trees, 492–494

linear search, 25 ex.

in linked lists, 260

in open-address hash tables, 294

in red-black trees, 334

in sorted compact lists, 269 pr.

of static sets, 308 pr.

in an unsorted array, 154 pr.

search list, see linked list

search tree, see balanced search tree, binary search tree, B-tree,
exponential search tree, interval tree, optimal binary search tree,
order-statistic tree, red-black tree, splay tree, 2-3 tree, 2-3-4 tree

secondary storage

search tree for, 497–519

stacks on, 517 pr.

second-best minimum spanning tree, 599 pr.

secret key, 936, 939

SELECT, 237

used in quicksort, 241 ex.

SELECT3, 247 pr.

selection, 227

of activities, 418–425

and comparison sorts, 241

in order-statistic trees, 481–482

randomized, 230–236, 245 pr.

in worst-case linear time, 236–243

selection sort, 33 ex., 53 ex.

selector vertex, 1087

self-loop, 1164

semiconnected graph, 581 ex.

semiring, 651 n., 669

sentinel

in linked lists, 261–264

in red-black trees, 332

sequence (〈 〉), 1162

bitonic, 644 pr.

inversion in, 134 ex., 486 ex.

probe, 293

sequential consistency, 756

serial algorithm versus parallel algorithm, 748

serial projection, 750, 753

series, 1141–1144

strands logically in, 756

series-parallel composition of parallel traces, 762 fig.

set ({ }), 1153–1158

cardinality (| |), 1156

collection of, 1156

convex, 675 ex.

difference (−), 1154

independent, 1099 pr.

intersection (∩), 1154

member (∈), 1153

not a member (∉), 1153

partially ordered, 1160

static, 308 pr.

union (∪), 1154

set-covering problem, 1115–1119

weighted, 1132 pr.

set-partition problem, 1098 ex.

SHA-256, 291

shared memory, 748

sharks with lasers, 850

Shell’s sort, 48

shift

left (⋘), 305

right (⋙), 285

in string matching, 957

shift instruction, 27

short-circuiting operator, 24

SHORTEST-PATH, 1045

shortest paths, 604–669

all-pairs, 605, 646–669

Bellman-Ford algorithm for, 612–616

with bitonic shortest paths, 644 pr.

and breadth-first search, 558–561, 605

convergence property of, 611, 634–635

and cycles, 607–608

and difference constraints, 626–632

Dijkstra’s algorithm for, 620–626

in a directed acyclic graph, 616–619

distance in (δ), 558

in ϵ-dense graphs, 668 pr.

estimate of, 609

Floyd-Warshall algorithm for, 655–659, 662 ex.

Gabow’s scaling algorithm for, 641 pr.

Johnson’s algorithm for, 662–667

as a linear program, 861

and longest paths, 1042

by matrix multiplication, 648–655, 668–669

and negative-weight cycles, 606–607, 614–615, 655 ex., 662 ex.

with negative-weight edges, 606–607

no-path property of, 611, 634

optimal substructure of, 605–606, 649, 655–656

path-relaxation property of, 611, 635

predecessor in (π), 608

predecessor-subgraph property of, 611, 637–638

problem variants, 605

and relaxation, 609–611

by repeated squaring, 652–653

single-destination, 605

single-pair, 385, 605

single-source, 604–645

tree of, 608–609, 635–638

triangle inequality of, 611, 633

in an unweighted graph, 385, 558

upper-bound property of, 611, 633–634

in a weighted graph, 604

weight in (δ), 604

shortest remaining processing time (SRPT), 816 pr.

sibling, 1172

signature, 938

simple cycle, 1165–1166

simple graph, 1166

simple path, 1165

longest, 385, 1042

SIMPLER-RANDOMIZED-SELECT, 243 pr.

simplex, 857

simplex algorithm, 626, 857, 876

simulation, 173, 181

single-destination shortest paths, 605

single-pair shortest path, 385, 605

as a linear program, 861

single-source shortest paths, 604–645

Bellman-Ford algorithm for, 612–616

with bitonic shortest paths, 644 pr.

and difference constraints, 626–632

Dijkstra’s algorithm for, 620–626

in a directed acyclic graph, 616–619

in ϵ-dense graphs, 668 pr.

Gabow’s scaling algorithm for, 641 pr.

and longest paths, 1042

singleton, 1156

singly connected graph, 572 ex.

singly linked list, 259

singular matrix, 1220

singular value decomposition, 849

sink vertex, 553 ex., 671, 674

size

of an algorithm’s input, 28, 903–904, 1049–1052

of a boolean combinational circuit, 1067

of a clique, 1081

of a group, 917

of a set, 1156

of a vertex cover, 1084, 1106

skip list, 359

slackness

complementary, 873 pr.

parallel, 758

slot

of a direct-access table, 273

of a hash table, 275

SLOW-APSP, 652

smoothed analysis, 876

solution

to an abstract problem, 1049

to a computational problem, 6

to a concrete problem, 1049

feasible, 627, 854

infeasible, 854

optimal, 854

to a system of linear equations, 820

sorted linked list, 259

sorting, 5, 17–21, 34–44, 51–53, 56–57, 157–226, 775–782

bubblesort, 46 pr.

bucket sort, 215–219

columnsort, 222 pr.

comparison sort, 205

counting sort, 208–211

fuzzy, 203 pr.

heapsort, 161–181

in place, 158, 220 pr.

insertion sort, 12–13, 17–21, 51–53, 56–57

k-sorting, 221 pr.

lexicographic, 327 pr., 986 n.

in linear time, 208–219, 220 pr.

lower bounds for, 205–208, 225

merge sort, 12–13, 34–44, 57, 775–782

by an oblivious compare-exchange algorithm, 222 pr.

parallel merge sort, 775–782

parallel quicksort, 789 pr.

probabilistic lower bound for, 219 pr.

quicksort, 182–204

radix sort, 211–215

selection sort, 33 ex., 53 ex.

Shell’s sort, 48

stable, 210

table of running times, 159

topological, 573–576

using a binary search tree, 326 ex.

with variable-length items, 220 pr.

0-1 sorting lemma, 222 pr.

sorting network, 789

source vertex, 554, 605, 671, 674

span, 757

span law, 758

spanning tree, 585

bottleneck, 601 pr.

maximum, 1134 pr.

verification of, 603

see also minimum spanning tree

sparse graph, 549

all-pairs shortest paths for, 662–667

and Prim’s algorithm, 599 pr.

sparse matrix, 81

spawn, in pseudocode, 752–754

spawning, 753

speedup, 758

of a randomized parallel algorithm, 789 pr.

spindle in a disk drive, 498

spine of a string-matching automaton, 970

splay tree, 359, 478

splicing

in a binary search tree, 324–325

in a linked list, 260–261

spline, 847 pr.

splitting

of B-tree nodes, 506–508

of 2-3-4 trees, 518 pr.

splitting summations, 1148–1149

spurious hit, 965

square matrix, 1215

square of a directed graph, 553 ex.

square root, modulo a prime, 954 pr.

squaring, repeated

for all-pairs shortest paths, 652–653

for raising a number to a power, 934

SRPT (shortest remaining processing time), 816 pr.

stability

numerical, 819, 821

of sorting algorithms, 210

stable-marriage problem, 716–723

stable matching, 716

stable-roommates problem, 723 ex.

stack, 254–255

implemented by queues, 258 ex.

implemented with a priority queue, 178 ex.

linked-list implementation of, 264 ex.

operations analyzed by accounting method, 454–455

operations analyzed by aggregate analysis, 449–451

operations analyzed by potential method, 457–458

for procedure execution, 202 pr.

on secondary storage, 517 pr.

STACK-EMPTY, 255

standard deviation, 1195

standard encoding (〈 〉), 1052

standard form of a linear program, 854

start state, 967

start time, 418

state of a finite automaton, 967

static graph, 522

static hashing, 282, 284–286

static set, 308 pr.

stencil, 787 pr.

Stirling’s approximation, 67

stochastic gradient descent, 1040 pr.

STOOGE-SORT, 202 pr.

store instruction, 26, 756

strand, 754

mutually noninterfering, 767

Strassen’s algorithm, 85–90, 124–125

parallel algorithm for, 773–774

streaks, 144–150, 153 ex.

streaming algorithms, 818

strict Fibonacci heap, 478

strictly decreasing, 63

strictly increasing, 63

string, 957, 1179

interpreted as a key, 290–291, 292 ex.

string matching, 957–1002

based on repetition factors, 996 pr.

by finite automata, 967–975

with gap characters, 961 ex., 975 ex.

Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm for, 975–985

naive algorithm for, 960–962

Rabin-Karp algorithm for, 962–967

by suffix arrays, 985–996

string-matching automaton, 968–975

strongly connected component, 1166

decomposition into, 576–581

STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS, 577

strongly connected graph, 1166

subarray (:), 19, 23

subgraph, 1166

equality, 724

predecessor, see predecessor subgraph

subgraph-isomorphism problem, 1098 ex.

subgroup, 921–923

subpath, 1165

subproblem graph, 370–371

subroutine, 23, 26, 29 n.

subsequence, 394

subset (⊆), 1154, 1156

SUBSET-SUM, 1092

subset-sum problem

approximation algorithm for, 1124–1130

NP-completeness of, 1092–1095

with unary target, 1098 ex.

substitution method, 90–95

in quicksort analysis, 191 ex., 193–194

and recursion trees, 98

in selection analysis, 240–241

substring, 962, 1179

rank of, 987

subtracting a low-order term, in the substitution method, 92–93

subtract instruction, 26

subtraction of matrices, 1218

subtree, 1172

maintaining size of, in order-statistic trees, 484–485

success, in a Bernoulli trial, 1196

successor

in binary search trees, 318–319

finding ith, of a node in an order-statistic tree, 486 ex.

in linked lists, 259

in red-black trees, 334

SUCCESSOR, 250

such that (:), 1154

suffix (⊐), 959

suffix array (SA), 985–996, 997 pr.

suffix function, 968

suffix-function inequality, 971

suffix-function recursion lemma, 972

sum (∑), 1140

Cartesian, 885 ex.

of matrices, 1217

of polynomials, 877

rule of, 1178

telescoping, 1143

SUM-ARRAY, 25 ex.

SUM-ARRAYS, 783 pr.

SUM-ARRAYS′, 783 pr.

summation, 1140–1152

approximated by integrals, 1150

in asymptotic notation, 58, 1141

bounding, 1145–1152

formulas and properties of, 1140–1145

linearity of, 1141

lower bounds on, 1148, 1150

splitting, 1148–1149

summation lemma, 887

supercomputer, 748

superpolynomial time, 1042

supersink, 674

supersource, 674

supervised learning, 1004

surjection, 1162

SVD, 849

symbol table, 272

symmetric difference, 706

symmetric-key cryptosystem, 941

symmetric matrix, 1217

symmetric positive-definite matrix, 838–841

inverse of, 784 pr.

symmetric relation, 1159

symmetry of Θ-notation, 61

sync, in pseudocode, 752–754

system of difference constraints, 626–632

system of linear equations, 784 pr., 819–833, 847 pr., 1034–1035

TABLE-DELETE, 467

TABLE-INSERT, 462

tail

of a binomial distribution, 1203–1210

of a linked list, 259

of a queue, 256

tail recursion, 202 pr., 422

target, 1092

Tarjan’s offline lowest-common-ancestors algorithm, 543 pr.

task parallelism, 749

see also parallel algorithm

Task Parallel Library, 750

task-parallel scheduling, 759–761, 769 ex.

task scheduling, 446 pr., 816 pr.

tautology, 1060 ex.

Taylor series, 329 pr.

telescoping series, 1143

telescoping sum, 1143

termination of a loop invariant, 20

testing

of primality, 942–953, 956

of pseudoprimality, 944–945

text, 957

Theta-notation (Θ), 33, 51, 54 fig., 56

thread, 748

Threading Building Blocks, 750

thread parallelism, 748

3-CNF, 1076

3-CNF-SAT, 1076

3-CNF satisfiability, 1076–1079

approximation algorithm for, 1120–1121

and 2-CNF satisfiability, 1043

3-COLOR, 1100 pr.

3-conjunctive normal form, 1076

threshold constant, 77

tight bounds, 56

time, see running time

time domain, 877

time-memory trade-off, 367

timestamp, 564, 571 ex.

T[i :] (suffix of a text), 986

T[: k] (prefix of a text), 959

to, in pseudocode, 22

top-down method, for dynamic programming, 368

top of a stack, 254

topological sort, 573–576

in computing single-source shortest paths in a dag, 616

TOPOLOGICAL-SORT, 573

total order, 1160

total path length, 328 pr.

total preorder, 1160

total relation, 1160

tour

bitonic, 407 pr.

Euler, 583 pr., 1043

of a graph, 1090

trace, 754–756

series-parallel composition of, 762 fig.

track in a disk drive, 498

tractability, 1042

trailing pointer, 321

training data, 1003

training phase, 1003

transition function, 967, 973–974

transitive closure, 659–661

and boolean matrix multiplication, 838 ex.

of dynamic graphs, 667 pr., 669

TRANSITIVE-CLOSURE, 660

transitive relation, 1159

transitivity of asymptotic notation, 61

TRANSPLANT, 324, 346

transpose

conjugate, 838 ex.

of a directed graph, 553 ex.

of a matrix, 1214

transpose symmetry of asymptotic notation, 62

traveling-salesperson problem

approximation algorithm for, 1109–1115

bitonic euclidean, 407 pr.

bottleneck, 1115 ex.

NP-completeness of, 1090–1092

with the triangle inequality, 1110–1113

without the triangle inequality, 1113–1114

traversal of a tree, 314, 320 ex., 1112

treap, 358

tree, 1169–1176

AA-trees, 358

AVL, 357 pr., 358

binary, see binary tree

bisection of, 1177 pr.

breadth-first, 555, 561

B-trees, 497–519

decision, 206–207, 219 pr.

depth-first, 564

diameter of, 563 ex.

dynamic, 478

free, 1167, 1169–1171

full walk of, 1112

fusion, 226, 478

heap, 161–181

height-balanced, 357 pr.

height of, 1173

interval, 489–495

k-neighbor, 358

left-leaning red-black binary search trees, 358

minimum spanning, see minimum spanning tree

optimal binary search, 400–407

order-statistic, 480–486

parse, 1077

recursion, 42, 95–101

red-black, see red-black tree

rooted, 265–268, 1171

scapegoat, 358

search, see search tree

shortest-paths, 608–609, 635–638

spanning, see minimum spanning tree, spanning tree

splay, 359, 478

treap, 358

2-3, 358, 519

2-3-4, 502, 518 pr.

van Emde Boas, 478

walk of, 314, 320 ex., 1112

weight-balanced trees, 358

TREE-DELETE, 325, 326 ex., 346–347

tree edge, 561, 564, 569

TREE-INSERT, 321, 338

TREE-MAXIMUM, 318

TREE-MINIMUM, 318

TREE-PREDECESSOR, 319

TREE-SEARCH, 316

TREE-SUCCESSOR, 319

tree walk, 314, 320 ex., 1112

TRE-QUICKSORT, 202 pr.

trial division, 943

triangle inequality, 1110

for shortest paths, 611, 633

triangular matrix, 1216

trichotomy, interval, 490

trichotomy property of real numbers, 62

tridiagonal linear systems, 847 pr.

tridiagonal matrix, 1216

trie (radix tree), 327 pr.

TRIM, 1127

trimming a list, 1126

trivial divisor, 904

tropical semiring, 651 n.

truth assignment, 1066, 1073

truth table, 1065

TSP, 1091

tuple, 1157

twiddle factor, 891

2-CNF-SAT, 1080 ex.

2-CNF satisfiability, 1080 ex.

and 3-CNF satisfiability, 1043

two-pass method, 529

2-3-4 tree, 502, 518 pr.

2-3 tree, 358, 519

unary, 1050

unbounded competitive ratio, 804

unbounded linear program, 854

uncle, 340

unconditional branch instruction, 26

unconstrained gradient descent, 1023–1031

uncountable set, 1156

underdetermined system of linear equations, 820

underflow

of a queue, 256

of a stack, 255

undirected graph, 1164

articulation point of, 582 pr.

biconnected component of, 582 pr.

bridge of, 582 pr.

clique in, 1081

coloring of, 1100 pr., 1176 pr.

computing a minimum spanning tree in, 585–603

d-regular, 716 ex., 740 pr.

grid, 697 pr.

hamiltonian, 1056

independent set of, 1099 pr.

matching in, 693–697, 704–743

nonhamiltonian, 1056

vertex cover of, 1084, 1106

see also graph

undirected version of a directed graph, 1167

uniform family of hash functions, 287

uniform hash function, 278

uniform hashing, 295

uniform probability distribution, 1186–1187

uniform random permutation, 128, 136

union

of languages, 1052

of linked lists, 264 ex.

of sets (∪), 1154

UNION, 264 ex., 521

disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 530

linked-list implementation of, 524–526

union by rank, 528

unit (1), 905

unit lower-triangular matrix, 1216

unit upper-triangular matrix, 1216

unit vector, 1215

universal family of hash functions, 286–287

universal hash function, 278

universal hashing, 286–290, 309 pr.

universal sink, 553 ex.

universe, 273, 1155

unmatched vertex, 693, 705

unsorted linked list, 259

unstable matching, 717

unsupervised learning, 1004

until, in pseudocode, 22

unweighted longest simple paths, 385

unweighted shortest paths, 385

upper bound, 54

upper-bound property, 611, 633–634

upper median, 227

upper-triangular matrix, 1216

valid shift, 957

value

of a flow, 672

of a function, 1161

objective, 854

Vandermonde matrix, 881, 1223 pr.

van Emde Boas tree, 478

Var [ ], see variance

variable

decision, 851

in pseudocode, 22

random, 1191–1196

see also indicator random variable

variable-length code, 432

variable-length input

interpreted as a key, 290–291

to the wee hash function, 306

variance, 1194

of a binomial distribution, 1200

of a geometric distribution, 1198

vector, 1215, 1219–1221

convolution of, 880

interpreted as a key, 290–291

orthonormal, 849

Venn diagram, 1155

verification, 1056–1061

of spanning trees, 603

verification algorithm, 1058

vertex

articulation point, 582 pr.

attributes of, 552

capacity of, 676 ex.

in a graph, 1164

intermediate, 655

isolated, 1165

matched, 693, 705

selector, 1087

unmatched, 693, 705

vertex cover, 1084, 1106

VERTEX-COVER, 1084

vertex-cover problem

approximation algorithm for, 1106–1109, 1121–1124

NP-completeness of, 1084–1085

vertex labeling, 724, 742 pr.

vertex set, 1164

virtual memory, 27

Viterbi algorithm, 411 pr.

walk of a tree, 314, 320 ex., 1112

WAR (wins above replacement), 414 pr.

watershed function, 103

weak duality, 868–869, 874 pr.

weak Pareto optimality, 722 ex.

WEE, 307

wee hash function, 305–307

weight

of a cut, 1124 ex.

of an edge, 551

mean, 642 pr.

of a path, 407 pr., 604

of a shortest path (δ), 604

of a spanning tree, 585

weight-balanced tree, 358, 472 pr.

WEIGHTED-MAJORITY, 1018, 1022 ex.

weighted median, 244 pr.

weighted set-covering problem, 1132 pr.

weighted-union heuristic, 525

weighted vertex cover, 1121–1124

weight function, 551

well-defined recurrence, 77

while, in pseudocode, 22

white-path theorem, 568

white vertex, 554, 564

widest augmenting path, 700 pr.

wins above replacement (WAR), 414 pr.

wire, 1065

WITNESS, 946

witness to the compositeness of a number, 946

work, 757

work law, 757

work-stealing scheduling algorithm, 790

worst-case running time, 31

X10, 750

Yen’s improvement to the Bellman-Ford algorithm, 640 pr.

Young tableau, 179 pr.

ℤ (set of integers), 1153

ℤ_(n) (equivalence classes modulo n), 905

[art] (elements of multiplicative group modulo n), 919

[art] (nonzero elements of ℤ_(n)), 944

zero matrix, 1215

zero of a polynomial modulo a prime, 928 ex.

0-1 integer programming, 1098 ex., 1121

0-1 knapsack problem, 428, 430 ex., 1134 pr.

0-1 sorting lemma, 222 pr.

zombie apocalypse, 850
