[]

[]

Designing Data-Intensive Applications

by Martin Kleppmann and Chris Riccomini

Copyright © 2026 Martin Kleppmann and Chris Riccomini. All rights
reserved.

Printed in the United States of America.

Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North,
Sebastopol, CA 95472.

O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles
(http://oreilly.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.

  ------------------------------------ ----------------------------------
  Acquisitions Editor: Aaron Black     
  Development Editor: Melissa Potter   Interior Designer: David Futato
  Production Editor: Katherine Tozer   Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
  ------------------------------------ ----------------------------------

- March 2017: First Edition
- December 2025: Second Edition

Revision History for the Early Release

- 2024-08-27: First Release
- 2024-11-11: Second Release
- 2025-01-10: Third Release
- 2025-02-18: Fourth Release
- 2025-03-12: Fifth Release

See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781449373320 for release
details.

The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Designing Data-Intensive Applications, the cover image, and related
trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.

While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to
ensure that the information and instructions contained in this work are
accurate, the publisher and the authors disclaim all responsibility for
errors or omissions, including without limitation responsibility for
damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work. Use of the
information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk.
If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes
is subject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights
of others, it is your responsibility to ensure that your use thereof
complies with such licenses and/or rights.

978-1-098-11900-3

 

Dedication

To everyone using technology and data to address the world’s biggest
problems.

  Computing is pop culture. […] Pop culture holds a disdain for history.
  Pop culture is all about identity and feeling like you’re
  participating. It has nothing to do with cooperation, the past or the
  future—it’s living in the present. I think the same is true of most
  people who write code for money. They have no idea where [their
  culture came from].

  Alan Kay, in interview with Dr Dobb’s Journal (2012)

Brief Table of Contents (Not Yet Final)

Chapter 1: Tradeoffs in Data Systems Architecture (available)

Chapter 2: Defining NonFunctional Requirements (available)

Chapter 3: Data Models and Query Languages (available)

Chapter 4: Storage and Retrieval (available)

Chapter 5: Encoding and Evolution (available)

Chapter 6: Replication (available)

Chapter 7: Partitioning (available)

Chapter 8: Transactions (unavailable)

Chapter 9: The Trouble with Distributed Systems (unavailable)

Chapter 10: Consistency and Consensus (unavailable)

Chapter 11: Batch Processing (unavailable)

Chapter 12: Stream Processing (unavailable)

Chapter 13: Doing the Right Thing (unavailable)

...

Chapter 1. Trade-offs in Data Systems Architecture

  There are no solutions, there are only trade-offs. […] But you try to
  get the best trade-off you can get, and that’s all you can hope for.

  Thomas Sowell, Interview with Fred Barnes (2005)

A Note for Early Release Readers

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
advantage of these technologies long before the official release of
these titles.

This will be the 1st chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo for this
book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content and/or
examples in this book, or if you notice missing material within this
chapter, please reach out on GitHub.

Data is central to much application development today. With web and
mobile apps, software as a service (SaaS), and cloud services, it has
become normal to store data from many different users in a shared
server-based data infrastructure. Data from user activity, business
transactions, devices and sensors needs to be stored and made available
for analysis. As users interact with an application, they both read the
data that is stored, and also generate more data.

Small amounts of data, which can be stored and processed on a single
machine, are often fairly easy to deal with. However, as the data volume
or the rate of queries grows, it needs to be distributed across multiple
machines, which introduces many challenges. As the needs of the
application become more complex, it is no longer sufficient to store
everything in one system, but it might be necessary to combine multiple
storage or processing systems that provide different capabilities.

We call an application data-intensive if data management is one of the
primary challenges in developing the application [1]. While in
compute-intensive systems the challenge is parallelizing some very large
computation, in data-intensive applications we usually worry more about
things like storing and processing large data volumes, managing changes
to data, ensuring consistency in the face of failures and concurrency,
and making sure services are highly available.

Such applications are typically built from standard building blocks that
provide commonly needed functionality. For example, many applications
need to:

- Store data so that they, or another application, can find it again
  later (databases)

- Remember the result of an expensive operation, to speed up reads
  (caches)

- Allow users to search data by keyword or filter it in various ways
  (search indexes)

- Handle events and data changes as soon as they occur (stream
  processing)

- Periodically crunch a large amount of accumulated data (batch
  processing)

In building an application we typically take several software systems or
services, such as databases or APIs, and glue them together with some
application code. If you are doing exactly what the data systems were
designed for, then this process can be quite easy.

However, as your application becomes more ambitious, challenges arise.
There are many database systems with different characteristics, suitable
for different purposes—how do you choose which one to use? There are
various approaches to caching, several ways of building search indexes,
and so on—how do you reason about their trade-offs? You need to figure
out which tools and which approaches are the most appropriate for the
task at hand, and it can be difficult to combine tools when you need to
do something that a single tool cannot do alone.

This book is a guide to help you make decisions about which technologies
to use and how to combine them. As you will see, there is no one
approach that is fundamentally better than others; everything has pros
and cons. With this book, you will learn to ask the right questions to
evaluate and compare data systems, so that you can figure out which
approach will best serve the needs of your particular application.

We will start our journey by looking at some of the ways that data is
typically used in organizations today. Many of the ideas here have their
origin in enterprise software (i.e., the software needs and engineering
practices of large organizations, such as big corporations and
governments), since historically, only large organizations had the large
data volumes that required sophisticated technical solutions. If your
data volume is small enough, you can simply keep it in a spreadsheet!
However, more recently it has also become common for smaller companies
and startups to manage large data volumes and build data-intensive
systems.

One of the key challenges with data systems is that different people
need to do very different things with data. If you are working at a
company, you and your team will have one set of priorities, while
another team may have entirely different goals, even though you might be
working with the same dataset! Moreover, those goals might not be
explicitly articulated, which can lead to misunderstandings and
disagreement about the right approach.

To help you understand what choices you can make, this chapter compares
several contrasting concepts, and explores their trade-offs:

- the difference between operational and analytical systems (“Analytical
  versus Operational Systems”);

- pros and cons of cloud services and self-hosted systems (“Cloud versus
  Self-Hosting”);

- when to move from single-node systems to distributed systems
  (“Distributed versus Single-Node Systems”); and

- balancing the needs of the business and the rights of the user (“Data
  Systems, Law, and Society”).

Moreover, this chapter will provide you with terminology that we will
need for the rest of the book.

Terminology: Frontends and Backends

Much of what we will discuss in this book relates to backend
development. To explain that term: for web applications, the client-side
code (which runs in a web browser) is called the frontend, and the
server-side code that handles user requests is known as the backend.
Mobile apps are similar to frontends in that they provide user
interfaces, which often communicate over the Internet with a server-side
backend. Frontends sometimes manage data locally on the user’s device
[2], but the greatest data infrastructure challenges often lie in the
backend: a frontend only needs to handle one user’s data, whereas the
backend manages data on behalf of all of the users.

A backend service is often reachable via HTTP (sometimes WebSocket); it
usually consists of some application code that reads and writes data in
one or more databases, and sometimes interfaces with additional data
systems such as caches or message queues (which we might collectively
call data infrastructure). The application code is often stateless
(i.e., when it finishes handling one HTTP request, it forgets everything
about that request), and any information that needs to persist from one
request to another needs to be stored either on the client, or in the
server-side data infrastructure.

Analytical versus Operational Systems

If you are working on data systems in an enterprise, you are likely to
encounter several different types of people who work with data. The
first type are backend engineers who build services that handle requests
for reading and updating data; these services often serve external
users, either directly or indirectly via other services (see
“Microservices and Serverless”). Sometimes services are for internal use
by other parts of the organization.

In addition to the teams managing backend services, two other groups of
people typically require access to an organization’s data: business
analysts, who generate reports about the activities of the organization
in order to help the management make better decisions (business
intelligence or BI), and data scientists, who look for novel insights in
data or who create user-facing product features that are enabled by data
analysis and machine learning/AI (for example, “people who bought X also
bought Y” recommendations on an e-commerce website, predictive analytics
such as risk scoring or spam filtering, and ranking of search results).

Although business analysts and data scientists tend to use different
tools and operate in different ways, they have some things in common:
both perform analytics, which means they look at the data that the users
and backend services have generated, but they generally do not modify
this data (except perhaps for fixing mistakes). They might create
derived datasets in which the original data has been processed in some
way. This has led to a split between two types of systems—a distinction
that we will use throughout this book:

-  Operational systems consist of the backend services and data
  infrastructure where data is created, for example by serving external
  users. Here, the application code both reads and modifies the data in
  its databases, based on the actions performed by the users.

-  Analytical systems serve the needs of business analysts and data
  scientists. They contain a read-only copy of the data from the
  operational systems, and they are optimized for the types of data
  processing that are needed for analytics.

As we shall see in the next section, operational and analytical systems
are often kept separate, for good reasons. As these systems have
matured, two new specialized roles have emerged: data engineers and
analytics engineers. Data engineers are the people who know how to
integrate the operational and the analytical systems, and who take
responsibility for the organization’s data infrastructure more widely
[3]. Analytics engineers model and transform data to make it more useful
for the business analysts and data scientsts in an organization [4].

Many engineers specialize on either the operational or the analytical
side. However, this book covers both operational and analytical data
systems, since both play an important role in the lifecycle of data
within an organization. We will explore in-depth the data infrastructure
that is used to deliver services both to internal and external users, so
that you can work better with your colleagues on the other side of this
divide.

Characterizing Transaction Processing and Analytics

In the early days of business data processing, a write to the database
typically corresponded to a commercial transaction taking place: making
a sale, placing an order with a supplier, paying an employee’s salary,
etc. As databases expanded into areas that didn’t involve money changing
hands, the term transaction nevertheless stuck, referring to a group of
reads and writes that form a logical unit.

Note

[Link to Come] explores in detail what we mean with a transaction. This
chapter uses the term loosely to refer to low-latency reads and writes.

Even though databases started being used for many different kinds of
data—posts on social media, moves in a game, contacts in an address
book, and many others—the basic access pattern remained similar to
processing business transactions. An operational system typically looks
up a small number of records by some key (this is called a point query).
Records are inserted, updated, or deleted based on the user’s input.
Because these applications are interactive, this access pattern became
known as online transaction processing (OLTP).

However, databases also started being increasingly used for analytics,
which has very different access patterns compared to OLTP. Usually an
analytic query scans over a huge number of records, and calculates
aggregate statistics (such as count, sum, or average) rather than
returning the individual records to the user. For example, a business
analyst at a supermarket chain may want to answer analytic queries such
as:

- What was the total revenue of each of our stores in January?

- How many more bananas than usual did we sell during our latest
  promotion?

- Which brand of baby food is most often purchased together with brand X
  diapers?

The reports that result from these types of queries are important for
business intelligence, helping the management decide what to do next. In
order to differentiate this pattern of using databases from transaction
processing, it has been called online analytic processing (OLAP) [5].
The difference between OLTP and analytics is not always clear-cut, but
some typical characteristics are listed in Table 1-1.

  Property              Operational systems (OLTP)                        Analytical systems (OLAP)
  --------------------- ------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------
  Main read pattern     Point queries (fetch individual records by key)   Aggregate over large number of records
  Main write pattern    Create, update, and delete individual records     Bulk import (ETL) or event stream
  Human user example    End user of web/mobile application                Internal analyst, for decision support
  Machine use example   Checking if an action is authorized               Detecting fraud/abuse patterns
  Type of queries       Fixed set of queries, predefined by application   Analyst can make arbitrary queries
  Data represents       Latest state of data (current point in time)      History of events that happened over time
  Dataset size          Gigabytes to terabytes                            Terabytes to petabytes

  : Table 1-1. Comparing characteristics of operational and analytic
  systems {#tab_oltp_vs_olap style="width: 100%"}

Note

The meaning of online in OLAP is unclear; it probably refers to the fact
that queries are not just for predefined reports, but that analysts use
the OLAP system interactively for explorative queries.

With operational systems, users are generally not allowed to construct
custom SQL queries and run them on the database, since that would
potentially allow them to read or modify data that they do not have
permission to access. Moreover, they might write queries that are
expensive to execute, and hence affect the database performance for
other users. For these reasons, OLTP systems mostly run a fixed set of
queries that are baked into the application code, and use one-off custom
queries only occasionally for maintenance or troubleshooting. On the
other hand, analytic databases usually give their users the freedom to
write arbitrary SQL queries by hand, or to generate queries
automatically using a data visualization or dashboard tool such as
Tableau, Looker, or Microsoft Power BI.

There is also a type of systems that is designed for analytical
workloads (queries that aggregate over many records) but that are
embedded into user-facing products. This category is known as product
analytics or real-time analytics, and systems designed for this type of
use include Pinot, Druid, and ClickHouse [6].

Data Warehousing

At first, the same databases were used for both transaction processing
and analytic queries. SQL turned out to be quite flexible in this
regard: it works well for both types of queries. Nevertheless, in the
late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a trend for companies to stop
using their OLTP systems for analytics purposes, and to run the
analytics on a separate database system instead. This separate database
was called a data warehouse.

A large enterprise may have dozens, even hundreds, of online transaction
processing systems: systems powering the customer-facing website,
controlling point of sale (checkout) systems in physical stores,
tracking inventory in warehouses, planning routes for vehicles, managing
suppliers, administering employees, and performing many other tasks.
Each of these systems is complex and needs a team of people to maintain
it, so these systems end up operating mostly independently from each
other.

It is usually undesirable for business analysts and data scientists to
directly query these OLTP systems, for several reasons:

-  the data of interest may be spread across multiple operational
  systems, making it difficult to combine those datasets in a single
  query (a problem known as data silos);

- the kinds of schemas and data layouts that are good for OLTP are less
  well suited for analytics (see “Stars and Snowflakes: Schemas for
  Analytics”);

- analytic queries can be quite expensive, and running them on an OLTP
  database would impact the performance for other users; and

- the OLTP systems might reside in a separate network that users are not
  allowed direct access to for security or compliance reasons.

A data warehouse, by contrast, is a separate database that analysts can
query to their hearts’ content, without affecting OLTP operations [7].
As we shall see in Chapter 4, data warehouses often store data in a way
that is very different from OLTP databases, in order to optimize for the
types of queries that are common in analytics.

The data warehouse contains a read-only copy of the data in all the
various OLTP systems in the company. Data is extracted from OLTP
databases (using either a periodic data dump or a continuous stream of
updates), transformed into an analysis-friendly schema, cleaned up, and
then loaded into the data warehouse. This process of getting data into
the data warehouse is known as Extract–Transform–Load (ETL) and is
illustrated in Figure 1-1. Sometimes the order of the transform and load
steps is swapped (i.e., the transformation is done in the data
warehouse, after loading), resulting in ELT.

[ddia 0101]

Figure 1-1. Simplified outline of ETL into a data warehouse.

In some cases the data sources of the ETL processes are external SaaS
products such as customer relationship management (CRM), email
marketing, or credit card processing systems. In those cases, you do not
have direct access to the original database, since it is accessible only
via the software vendor’s API. Bringing the data from these external
systems into your own data warehouse can enable analyses that are not
possible via the SaaS API. ETL for SaaS APIs is often implemented by
specialist data connector services such as Fivetran, Singer, or AirByte.

Some database systems offer hybrid transactional/analytic processing
(HTAP), which aims to enable OLTP and analytics in a single system
without requiring ETL from one system into another [8, 9]. However, many
HTAP systems internally consist of an OLTP system coupled with a
separate analytical system, hidden behind a common interface—so the
distinction beween the two remains important for understanding how these
systems work.

Moreover, even though HTAP exists, it is common to have a separation
between transactional and analytic systems due to their different goals
and requirements. In particular, it is considered good practice for each
operational system to have its own database (see “Microservices and
Serverless”), leading to hundreds of separate operational databases; on
the other hand, an enterprise usually has a single data warehouse, so
that business analysts can combine data from several operational systems
in a single query.

HTAP therefore does not replace data warehouses. Rather, it is useful in
scenarios where the same application needs to both perform analytics
queries that scan a large number of rows, and also read and update
individual records with low latency. Fraud detection can involve such
workloads, for example [10].

The separation between operational and analytical systems is part of a
wider trend: as workloads have become more demanding, systems have
become more specialized and optimized for particular workloads.
General-purpose systems can handle small data volumes comfortably, but
the greater the scale, the more specialized systems tend to become [11].

From data warehouse to data lake

A data warehouse often uses a relational data model that is queried
through SQL (see Chapter 3), perhaps using specialized business
intelligence software. This model works well for the types of queries
that business analysts need to make, but it is less well suited to the
needs of data scientists, who might need to perform tasks such as:

-  Transform data into a form that is suitable for training a machine
  learning model; often this requires turning the rows and columns of a
  database table into a vector or matrix of numerical values called
  features. The process of performing this transformation in a way that
  maximizes the performance of the trained model is called feature
  engineering, and it often requires custom code that is difficult to
  express using SQL.

-  Take textual data (e.g., reviews of a product) and use natural
  language processing techniques to try to extract structured
  information from it (e.g., the sentiment of the author, or which
  topics they mention). Similarly, they might need to extract structured
  information from photos using computer vision techniques.

Although there have been efforts to add machine learning operators to a
SQL data model [12] and to build efficient machine learning systems on
top of a relational foundation [13], many data scientists prefer not to
work in a relational database such as a data warehouse. Instead, many
prefer to use Python data analysis libraries such as pandas and
scikit-learn, statistical analysis languages such as R, and distributed
analytics frameworks such as Spark [14]. We discuss these further in
“Dataframes, Matrices, and Arrays”.

Consequently, organizations face a need to make data available in a form
that is suitable for use by data scientists. The answer is a data lake:
a centralized data repository that holds a copy of any data that might
be useful for analysis, obtained from operational systems via ETL
processes. The difference from a data warehouse is that a data lake
simply contains files, without imposing any particular file format or
data model. Files in a data lake might be collections of database
records, encoded using a file format such as Avro or Parquet (see
Chapter 5), but they can equally well contain text, images, videos,
sensor readings, sparse matrices, feature vectors, genome sequences, or
any other kind of data [15]. Besides being more flexible, this is also
often cheaper than relational data storage, since the data lake can use
commoditized file storage such as object stores (see “Cloud-Native
System Architecture”).

ETL processes have been generalized to data pipelines, and in some cases
the data lake has become an intermediate stop on the path from the
operational systems to the data warehouse. The data lake contains data
in a “raw” form produced by the operational systems, without the
transformation into a relational data warehouse schema. This approach
has the advantage that each consumer of the data can transform the raw
data into a form that best suits their needs. It has been dubbed the
sushi principle: “raw data is better” [16].

Besides loading data from a data lake into a separate data warehouse, it
is also possible to run typical data warehousing workloads (SQL queries
and business analytics) directly on the files in the data lake,
alongside data science/machine learning workloads. This architecture is
known as a data lakehouse, and it requires a query execution engine and
a metadata (e.g., schema management) layer that extend the data lake’s
file storage [17]. Apache Hive, Spark SQL, Presto, and Trino are
examples of this approach.

Beyond the data lake

As analytics practices have matured, organizations have been
increasingly paying attention to the management and operations of
analytics systems and data pipelines, as captured for example in the
DataOps manifesto [18]. Part of this are issues of governance, privacy,
and compliance with regulation such as GDPR and CCPA, which we discuss
in “Data Systems, Law, and Society” and [Link to Come].

Moreover, analytical data is increasingly made available not only as
files and relational tables, but also as streams of events (see [Link to
Come]). With file-based data analysis you can re-run the analysis
periodically (e.g., daily) in order to respond to changes in the data,
but stream processing allows analytics systems to respond to events much
faster, on the order of seconds. Depending on the application and how
time-sensitive it is, a stream processing approach can be valuable, for
example to identify and block potentially fraudulent or abusive
activity.

In some cases the outputs of analytics systems are made available to
operational systems (a process sometimes known as reverse ETL [19]). For
example, a machine-learning model that was trained on data in an
analytics system may be deployed to production, so that it can generate
recommendations for end-users, such as “people who bought X also bought
Y”. Such deployed outputs of analytics systems are also known as data
products [20]. Machine learning models can be deployed to operational
systems using specialized tools such as TFX, Kubeflow, or MLflow.

Systems of Record and Derived Data

Related to the distinction between operational and analytical systems,
this book also distinguishes between systems of record and derived data
systems. These terms are useful because they can help you clarify the
flow of data through a system:

Systems of record

     A system of record, also known as source of truth, holds the
    authoritative or canonical version of some data. When new data comes
    in, e.g., as user input, it is first written here. Each fact is
    represented exactly once (the representation is typically
    normalized; see “Normalization, Denormalization, and Joins”). If
    there is any discrepancy between another system and the system of
    record, then the value in the system of record is (by definition)
    the correct one.

Derived data systems

     Data in a derived system is the result of taking some existing data
    from another system and transforming or processing it in some way.
    If you lose derived data, you can recreate it from the original
    source. A classic example is a cache: data can be served from the
    cache if present, but if the cache doesn’t contain what you need,
    you can fall back to the underlying database. Denormalized values,
    indexes, materialized views, transformed data representations, and
    models trained on a dataset also fall into this category.

Technically speaking, derived data is redundant, in the sense that it
duplicates existing information. However, it is often essential for
getting good performance on read queries. You can derive several
different datasets from a single source, enabling you to look at the
data from different “points of view.”

Analytical systems are usually derived data systems, because they are
consumers of data created elsewhere. Operational services may contain a
mixture of systems of record and derived data systems. The systems of
record are the primary databases to which data is first written, whereas
the derived data systems are the indexes and caches that speed up common
read operations, especially for queries that the system of record cannot
answer efficiently.

Most databases, storage engines, and query languages are not inherently
a system of record or a derived system. A database is just a tool: how
you use it is up to you. The distinction between system of record and
derived data system depends not on the tool, but on how you use it in
your application. By being clear about which data is derived from which
other data, you can bring clarity to an otherwise confusing system
architecture.

When the data in one system is derived from the data in another, you
need a process for updating the derived data when the original in the
system of record changes. Unfortunately, many databases are designed
based on the assumption that your application only ever needs to use
that one database, and they do not make it easy to integrate multiple
systems in order to propagate such updates. In [Link to Come] we will
discuss approaches to data integration, which allow us to compose
multiple data systems to achieve things that one system alone cannot do.

That brings us to the end of our comparison of analytics and transaction
processing. In the next section, we will examine another trade-off that
you might have already seen debated multiple times.

Cloud versus Self-Hosting

With anything that an organization needs to do, one of the first
questions is: should it be done in-house, or should it be outsourced?
Should you build or should you buy?

Ultimately, this is a question about business priorities. The received
management wisdom is that things that are a core competency or a
competitive advantage of your organization should be done in-house,
whereas things that are non-core, routine, or commonplace should be left
to a vendor [21]. To give an extreme example, most companies do not
generate their own electricity (unless they are an energy company, and
leaving aside emergency backup power), since it is cheaper to buy
electricity from the grid.

With software, two important decisions to be made are who builds the
software and who deploys it. There is a spectrum of possibilities that
outsource each decision to various degrees, as illustrated in
Figure 1-2. At one extreme is bespoke software that you write and run
in-house; at the other extreme are widely-used cloud services or
Software as a Service (SaaS) products that are implemented and operated
by an external vendor, and which you only access through a web interface
or API.

[ddia 0102]

Figure 1-2. A spectrum of types of software and its operations.

The middle ground is off-the-shelf software (open source or commercial)
that you self-host, i.e., deploy yourself—for example, if you download
MySQL and install it on a server you control. This could be on your own
hardware (often called on-premises, even if the server is actually in a
rented datacenter rack and not literally on your own premises), or on a
virtual machine in the cloud (Infrastructure as a Service or IaaS).
There are still more points along this spectrum, e.g., taking open
source software and running a modified version of it.

Seperately from this spectrum there is also the question of how you
deploy services, either in the cloud or on-premises—for example, whether
you use an orchestration framework such as Kubernetes. However, choice
of deployment tooling is out of scope of this book, since other factors
have a greater influence on the architecture of data systems.

Pros and Cons of Cloud Services

Using a cloud service, rather than running comparable software yourself,
essentially outsources the operation of that software to the cloud
provider. There are good arguments for and against cloud services. Cloud
providers claim that using their services saves you time and money, and
allows you to move faster compared to setting up your own
infrastructure.

Whether a cloud service is actually cheaper and easier than self-hosting
depends very much on your skills and the workload on your systems. If
you already have experience setting up and operating the systems you
need, and if your load is quite predictable (i.e., the number of
machines you need does not fluctuate wildly), then it’s often cheaper to
buy your own machines and run the software on them yourself [22, 23].

On the other hand, if you need a system that you don’t already know how
to deploy and operate, then adopting a cloud service is often easier and
quicker than learning to manage the system yourself. If you have to hire
and train staff specifically to maintain and operate the system, that
can get very expensive. You still need an operations team when you’re
using the cloud (see “Operations in the Cloud Era”), but outsourcing the
basic system administration can free up your team to focus on
higher-level concerns.

When you outsource the operation of a system to a company that
specializes in running that service, that can potentially result in a
better service, since the provider gains operational expertise from
providing the service to many customers. On the other hand, if you run
the service yourself, you can configure and tune it to perform well on
your particular workload; it is unlikely that a cloud service would be
willing to make such customizations on your behalf.

Cloud services are particularly valuable if the load on your systems
varies a lot over time. If you provision your machines to be able to
handle peak load, but those computing resources are idle most of the
time, the system becomes less cost-effective. In this situation, cloud
services have the advantage that they can make it easier to scale your
computing resources up or down in response to changes in demand.

For example, analytics systems often have extremely variable load:
running a large analytical query quickly requires a lot of computing
resources in parallel, but once the query completes, those resources sit
idle until the user makes the next query. Predefined queries (e.g., for
daily reports) can be enqueued and scheduled to smooth out the load, but
for interactive queries, the faster you want them to complete, the more
variable the workload becomes. If your dataset is so large that querying
it quickly requires significant computing resources, using the cloud can
save money, since you can return unused resources to the provider rather
than leaving them idle. For smaller datasets, this difference is less
significant.

The biggest downside of a cloud service is that you have no control over
it:

- If it is lacking a feature you need, all you can do is to politely ask
  the vendor whether they will add it; you generally cannot implement it
  yourself.

- If the service goes down, all you can do is to wait for it to recover.

- If you are using the service in a way that triggers a bug or causes
  performance problems, it will be difficult for you to diagnose the
  issue. With software that you run yourself, you can get performance
  metrics and debugging information from the operating system to help
  you understand its behavior, and you can look at the server logs, but
  with a service hosted by a vendor you usually do not have access to
  these internals.

- Moreover, if the service shuts down or becomes unacceptably expensive,
  or if the vendor decides to change their product in a way you don’t
  like, you are at their mercy—continuing to run an old version of the
  software is usually not an option, so you will be forced to migrate to
  an alternative service [24]. This risk is mitigated if there are
  alternative services that expose a compatible API, but for many cloud
  services there are no standard APIs, which raises the cost of
  switching, making vendor lock-in a problem.

- The cloud provider needs to be trusted to keep the data secure, which
  can complicate the process of complying with privacy and security
  regulations.

Despite all these risks, it has become more and more popular for
organizations to build new applications on top of cloud services, or
adopting a hybrid approach in which cloud services are used for some
aspects of a system. However, cloud services will not subsume all
in-house data systems: many older systems predate the cloud, and for any
services that have specialist requirements that existing cloud services
cannot meet, in-house systems remain necessary. For example, very
latency-sensitive applications such as high-frequency trading require
full control of the hardware.

Cloud-Native System Architecture

Besides having a different economic model (subscribing to a service
instead of buying hardware and licensing software to run on it), the
rise of the cloud has also had a profound effect on how data systems are
implemented on a technical level. The term cloud-native is used to
describe an architecture that is designed to take advantage of cloud
services.

In principle, almost any software that you can self-host could also be
provided as a cloud service, and indeed such managed services are now
available for many popular data systems. However, systems that have been
designed from the ground up to be cloud-native have been shown to have
several advantages: better performance on the same hardware, faster
recovery from failures, being able to quickly scale computing resources
to match the load, and supporting larger datasets [25, 26, 27].
Table 1-2 lists some examples of both types of systems.

  Category           Self-hosted systems           Cloud-native systems
  ------------------ ----------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Operational/OLTP   MySQL, PostgreSQL, MongoDB    AWS Aurora [25], Azure SQL DB Hyperscale [26], Google Cloud Spanner
  Analytical/OLAP    Teradata, ClickHouse, Spark   Snowflake [27], Google BigQuery, Azure Synapse Analytics

  : Table 1-2. Examples of self-hosted and cloud-native database systems
  {#tab_cloud_native_dbs style="width: 100%"}

Layering of cloud services

Many self-hosted data systems have very simple system requirements: they
run on a conventional operating system such as Linux or Windows, they
store their data as files on the filesystem, and they communicate via
standard network protocols such as TCP/IP. A few systems depend on
special hardware such as GPUs (for machine learning) or RDMA network
interfaces, but on the whole, self-hosted software tends to use very
generic computing resources: CPU, RAM, a filesystem, and an IP network.

In a cloud, this type of software can be run on an
Infrastructure-as-a-Service environment, using one or more virtual
machines (or instances) with a certain allocation of CPUs, memory, disk,
and network bandwidth. Compared to physical machines, cloud instances
can be provisioned faster and they come in a greater variety of sizes,
but otherwise they are similar to a traditional computer: you can run
any software you like on it, but you are responsible for administering
it yourself.

In contrast, the key idea of cloud-native services is to use not only
the computing resources managed by your operating system, but also to
build upon lower-level cloud services to create higher-level services.
For example:

-  Object storage services such as Amazon S3, Azure Blob Storage, and
  Cloudflare R2 store large files. They provide more limited APIs than a
  typical filesystem (basic file reads and writes), but they have the
  advantage that they hide the underlying physical machines: the service
  automatically distributes the data across many machines, so that you
  don’t have to worry about running out of disk space on any one
  machine. Even if some machines or their disks fail entirely, no data
  is lost.

-  Many other services are in turn built upon object storage and other
  cloud services: for example, Snowflake is a cloud-based analytic
  database (data warehouse) that relies on S3 for data storage [27], and
  some other services in turn build upon Snowflake.

As always with abstractions in computing, there is no one right answer
to what you should use. As a general rule, higher-level abstractions
tend to be more oriented towards particular use cases. If your needs
match the situations for which a higher-level system is designed, using
the existing higher-level system will probably provide what you need
with much less hassle than building it yourself from lower-level
systems. On the other hand, if there is no high-level system that meets
your needs, then building it yourself from lower-level components is the
only option.

Separation of storage and compute

In traditional computing, disk storage is regarded as durable (we assume
that once something is written to disk, it will not be lost); to
tolerate the failure of an individual hard disk, RAID is often used to
maintain copies of the data on several disks. In the cloud, compute
instances (virtual machines) may also have local disks attached, but
cloud-native systems typically treat these disks more like an ephemeral
cache, and less like long-term storage. This is because the local disk
becomes inaccessible if the associated instance fails, or if the
instance is replaced with a bigger or a smaller one (on a different
physical machine) in order to adapt to changes in load.

As an alternative to local disks, cloud services also offer virtual disk
storage that can be detached from one instance and attached to a
different one (Amazon EBS, Azure managed disks, and persistent disks in
Google Cloud). Such a virtual disk is not actually a physical disk, but
rather a cloud service provided by a separate set of machines, which
emulates the behavior of a disk (a block device, where each block is
typically 4 KiB in size). This technology makes it possible to run
traditional disk-based software in the cloud, but the block device
emulation introduces overheads that can be avoided in systems that are
designed from the ground up for the cloud [25]. It also makes the
application very sensitive to network glitches, since every I/O on the
virtual block device is actually a network call.

To address this problem, cloud-native services generally avoid using
virtual disks, and instead build on dedicated storage services that are
optimized for particular workloads. Object storage services such as S3
are designed for long-term storage of fairly large files, ranging from
hundreds of kilobytes to several gigabytes in size. The individual rows
or values stored in a database are typically much smaller than this;
cloud databases therefore typically manage smaller values in a separate
service, and store larger data blocks (containing many individual
values) in an object store [26, 28]. We will see ways of doing this in
Chapter 4.

In a traditional systems architecture, the same computer is responsible
for both storage (disk) and computation (CPU and RAM), but in
cloud-native systems, these two responsibilities have become somewhat
separated or disaggregated [9, 27, 29, 30]: for example, S3 only stores
files, and if you want to analyze that data, you will have to run the
analysis code somewhere outside of S3. This implies transferring the
data over the network, which we will discuss further in “Distributed
versus Single-Node Systems”.

Moreover, cloud-native systems are often multitenant, which means that
rather than having a separate machine for each customer, data and
computation from several different customers are handled on the same
shared hardware by the same service [31]. Multitenancy can enable better
hardware utilization, easier scalability, and easier management by the
cloud provider, but it also requires careful engineering to ensure that
one customer’s activity does not affect the performance or security of
the system for other customers [32].

Operations in the Cloud Era

Traditionally, the people managing an organization’s server-side data
infrastructure were known as database administrators (DBAs) or system
administrators (sysadmins). More recently, many organizations have tried
to integrate the roles of software development and operations into teams
with a shared responsibility for both backend services and data
infrastructure; the DevOps philosophy has guided this trend. Site
Reliability Engineers (SREs) are Google’s implementation of this idea
[33].

The role of operations is to ensure services are reliably delivered to
users (including configuring infrastructure and deploying applications),
and to ensure a stable production environment (including monitoring and
diagnosing any problems that may affect reliability). For self-hosted
systems, operations traditionally involves a significant amount of work
at the level of individual machines, such as capacity planning (e.g.,
monitoring available disk space and adding more disks before you run out
of space), provisioning new machines, moving services from one machine
to another, and installing operating system patches.

Many cloud services present an API that hides the individual machines
that actually implement the service. For example, cloud storage replaces
fixed-size disks with metered billing, where you can store data without
planning your capacity needs in advance, and you are then charged based
on the space actually used. Moreover, many cloud services remain highly
available, even when individual machines have failed (see “Reliability
and Fault Tolerance”).

This shift in emphasis from individual machines to services has been
accompanied by a change in the role of operations. The high-level goal
of providing a reliable service remains the same, but the processes and
tools have evolved. The DevOps/SRE philosophy places greater emphasis
on:

- automation—preferring repeatable processes over manual one-off jobs,

- preferring ephemeral virtual machines and services over long running
  servers,

- enabling frequent application updates,

- learning from incidents, and

- preserving the organization’s knowledge about the system, even as
  individual people come and go [34].

With the rise of cloud services, there has been a bifurcation of roles:
operations teams at infrastructure companies specialize in the details
of providing a reliable service to a large number of customers, while
the customers of the service spend as little time and effort as possible
on infrastructure [35].

Customers of cloud services still require operations, but they focus on
different aspects, such as choosing the most appropriate service for a
given task, integrating different services with each other, and
migrating from one service to another. Even though metered billing
removes the need for capacity planning in the traditional sense, it’s
still important to know what resources you are using for which purpose,
so that you don’t waste money on cloud resources that are not needed:
capacity planning becomes financial planning, and performance
optimization becomes cost optimization [36]. Moreover, cloud services do
have resource limits or quotas (such as the maximum number of processes
you can run concurrently), which you need to know about and plan for
before you run into them [37].

Adopting a cloud service can be easier and quicker than running your own
infrastructure, although even here there is a cost in learning how to
use it, and perhaps working around its limitations. Integration between
different services becomes a particular challenge as a growing number of
vendors offers an ever broader range of cloud services targeting
different use cases [38, 39]. ETL (see “Data Warehousing”) is only part
of the story; operational cloud services also need to be integrated with
each other. At present, there is a lack of standards that would
facilitate this sort of integration, so it often involves significant
manual effort.

Other operational aspects that cannot fully be outsourced to cloud
services include maintaining the security of an application and the
libraries it uses, managing the interactions between your own services,
monitoring the load on your services, and tracking down the cause of
problems such as performance degradations or outages. While the cloud is
changing the role of operations, the need for operations is as great as
ever.

Distributed versus Single-Node Systems

A system that involves several machines communicating via a network is
called a distributed system. Each of the processes participating in a
distributed system is called a node. There are various reasons why you
might want a system to be distributed:

Inherently distributed systems

    If an application involves two or more interacting users, each using
    their own device, then the system is unavoidably distributed: the
    communication between the devices will have to go via a network.

Requests between cloud services

    If data is stored in one service but processed in another, it must
    be transferred over the network from one service to the other.

Fault tolerance/high availability

    If your application needs to continue working even if one machine
    (or several machines, or the network, or an entire datacenter) goes
    down, you can use multiple machines to give you redundancy. When one
    fails, another one can take over. See “Reliability and Fault
    Tolerance” and Chapter 6 on replication.

Scalability

    If your data volume or computing requirements grow bigger than a
    single machine can handle, you can potentially spread the load
    across multiple machines. See “Scalability”.

Latency

     If you have users around the world, you might want to have servers
    in various regions worldwide so that each user can be served from a
    server that is geographically close to them. That avoids the users
    having to wait for network packets to travel halfway around the
    world to answer their requests. See “Describing Performance”.

Elasticity

     If your application is busy at some times and idle at other times,
    a cloud deployment can scale up or down to meet the demand, so that
    you pay only for resources you are actively using. This is more
    difficult on a single machine, which needs to be provisioned to
    handle the maximum load, even at times when it is barely used.

Using specialized hardware

     Different parts of the system can take advantage of different types
    of hardware to match their workload. For example, an object store
    may use machines with many disks but few CPUs, whereas a data
    analysis system may use machines with lots of CPU and memory but no
    disks, and a machine learning system may use machines with GPUs
    (which are much more efficient than CPUs for training deep neural
    networks and other machine learning tasks).

Legal compliance

     Some countries have data residency laws that require data about
    people in their jurisdiction to be stored and processed
    geographically within that country [40]. The scope of these rules
    varies—for example, in some cases it applies only to medical or
    financial data, while other cases are broader. A service with users
    in several such jurisdictions will therefore have to distribute
    their data across servers in several locations.

These reasons apply both to services that you write yourself
(application code) and services consisting of off-the-shelf software
(such as databases).

Problems with Distributed Systems

Distributed systems also have downsides. Every request and API call that
goes via the network needs to deal with the possibility of failure: the
network may be interrupted, or the service may be overloaded or crashed,
and therefore any request may time out without receiving a response. In
this case, we don’t know whether the service received the request, and
simply retrying it might not be safe. We will discuss these problems in
detail in [Link to Come].

Although datacenter networks are fast, making a call to another service
is still vastly slower than calling a function in the same process [41].
When operating on large volumes of data, rather than transferring the
data from storage to a separate machine that processes it, it can be
faster to bring the computation to the machine that already has the data
[42]. More nodes are not always faster: in some cases, a simple
single-threaded program on one computer can perform significantly better
than a cluster with over 100 CPU cores [43].

Troubleshooting a distributed system is often difficult: if the system
is slow to respond, how do you figure out where the problem lies?
Techniques for diagnosing problems in distributed systems are developed
under the heading of observability [44, 45], which involves collecting
data about the execution of a system, and allowing it to be queried in
ways that allows both high-level metrics and individual events to be
analyzed. Tracing tools such as OpenTelemetry, Zipkin, and Jaeger allow
you to track which client called which server for which operation, and
how long each call took [46].

Databases provide various mechanisms for ensuring data consistency, as
we shall see in Chapter 6 and [Link to Come]. However, when each service
has its own database, maintaining consistency of data across those
different services becomes the application’s problem. Distributed
transactions, which we explore in [Link to Come], are a possible
technique for ensuring consistency, but they are rarely used in a
microservices context because they run counter to the goal of making
services independent from each other, and many databases don’t support
them [47].

For all these reasons, if you can do something on a single machine, this
is often much simpler and cheaper compared to setting up a distributed
system [23, 43, 48]. CPUs, memory, and disks have grown larger, faster,
and more reliable. When combined with single-node databases such as
DuckDB, SQLite, and KùzuDB, many workloads can now run on a single node.
We will explore more on this topic in Chapter 4.

Microservices and Serverless

The most common way of distributing a system across multiple machines is
to divide them into clients and servers, and let the clients make
requests to the servers. Most commonly HTTP is used for this
communication, as we will discuss in “Dataflow Through Services: REST
and RPC”. The same process may be both a server (handling incoming
requests) and a client (making outbound requests to other services).

This way of building applications has traditionally been called a
service-oriented architecture (SOA); more recently the idea has been
refined into a microservices architecture [49, 50]. In this
architecture, a service has one well-defined purpose (for example, in
the case of S3, this would be file storage); each service exposes an API
that can be called by clients via the network, and each service has one
team that is responsible for its maintenance. A complex application can
thus be decomposed into multiple interacting services, each managed by a
separate team.

There are several advantages to breaking down a complex piece of
software into multiple services: each service can be updated
independently, reducing coordination effort among teams; each service
can be assigned the hardware resources it needs; and by hiding the
implementation details behind an API, the service owners are free to
change the implementation without affecting clients. In terms of data
storage, it is common for each service to have its own databases, and
not to share databases between services: sharing a database would
effectively make the entire database structure a part of the service’s
API, and then that structure would be difficult to change. Shared
databases could also cause one service’s queries to negatively impact
the performance of other services.

On the other hand, having many services can itself breed complexity:
each service requires infrastructure for deploying new releases,
adjusting the allocated hardware resources to match the load, collecting
logs, monitoring service health, and alerting an on-call engineer in the
case of a problem. Orchestration frameworks such as Kubernetes have
become a popular way of deploying services, since they provide a
foundation for this infrastructure. Testing a service during development
can be complicated, since you also need to run all the other services
that it depends on.

Microservice APIs can be challenging to evolve. Clients that call an API
expect the API to have certain fields. Developers might wish to add or
remove fields to an API as business needs change, but doing so can cause
clients to fail. Worse still, such failures are often not discovered
until late in the development cycle when the updated service API is
deployed to a staging or production environment. API description
standards such as OpenAPI and gRPC help manage the relationship between
client and server APIs; we discuss these further in Chapter 5.

Microservices are primarily a technical solution to a people problem:
allowing different teams to make progress independently without having
to coordinate with each other. This is valuable in a large company, but
in a small company where there are not many teams, using microservices
is likely to be unnecessary overhead, and it is preferable to implement
the application in the simplest way possible [49].

Serverless, or function-as-a-service (FaaS), is another approach to
deploying services, in which the management of the infrastructure is
outsourced to a cloud vendor [32]. When using virtual machines, you have
to explicitly choose when to start up or shut down an instance; in
contrast, with the serverless model, the cloud provider automatically
allocates and frees hardware resources as needed, based on the incoming
requests to your service [51]. Serverless deployment shifts more of the
operational burden to cloud providers and enables flexible billing by
usage rather than machine instances. To offer such benefits, many
serverless infrastructure providers impose a time limit on function
execution, limit runtime environments, and might suffer from slow start
times when a function is first invoked. The term “serverless” can also
be misleading: each serverless function execution still runs on a
server, but subsequent executions might run on a different one.
Moreover, infrastructure such as BigQuery and various Kafka offerings
have adopted “serverless” terminology to signal that their services
auto-scale and that they bill by usage rather than machine instances.

Just like cloud storage replaced capacity planning (deciding in advance
how many disks to buy) with a metered billing model, the serverless
approach is bringing metered billing to code execution: you only pay for
the time that your application code is actually running, rather than
having to provision resources in advance.

Cloud Computing versus Supercomputing

Cloud computing is not the only way of building large-scale computing
systems; an alternative is high-performance computing (HPC), also known
as supercomputing. Although there are overlaps, HPC often has different
priorities and uses different techniques compared to cloud computing and
enterprise datacenter systems. Some of those differences are:

-  Supercomputers are typically used for computationally intensive
  scientific computing tasks, such as weather forecasting, climate
  modeling, molecular dynamics (simulating the movement of atoms and
  molecules), complex optimization problems, and solving partial
  differential equations. On the other hand, cloud computing tends to be
  used for online services, business data systems, and similar systems
  that need to serve user requests with high availability.

-  A supercomputer typically runs large batch jobs that checkpoint the
  state of their computation to disk from time to time. If a node fails,
  a common solution is to simply stop the entire cluster workload,
  repair the faulty node, and then restart the computation from the last
  checkpoint [52, 53]. With cloud services, it is usually not desirable
  to stop the entire cluster, since the services need to continually
  serve users with minimal interruptions.

-  Supercomputer nodes typically communicate through shared memory and
  remote direct memory access (RDMA), which support high bandwidth and
  low latency, but assume a high level of trust among the users of the
  system [54]. In cloud computing, the network and the machines are
  often shared by mutually untrusting organizations, requiring stronger
  security mechanisms such as resource isolation (e.g., virtual
  machines), encryption and authentication.

-  Cloud datacenter networks are often based on IP and Ethernet,
  arranged in Clos topologies to provide high bisection bandwidth—a
  commonly used measure of a network’s overall performance [52, 55].
  Supercomputers often use specialized network topologies, such as
  multi-dimensional meshes and toruses [56], which yield better
  performance for HPC workloads with known communication patterns.

- Cloud computing allows nodes to be distributed across multiple
  geographic regions, whereas supercomputers generally assume that all
  of their nodes are close together.

Large-scale analytics systems sometimes share some characteristics with
supercomputing, which is why it can be worth knowing about these
techniques if you are working in this area. However, this book is mostly
concerned with services that need to be continually available, as
discussed in “Reliability and Fault Tolerance”.

Data Systems, Law, and Society

So far you’ve seen in this chapter that the architecture of data systems
is influenced not only by technical goals and requirements, but also by
the human needs of the organizations that they support. Increasingly,
data systems engineers are realizing that serving the needs of their own
business is not enough: we also have a responsibility towards society at
large.

One particular concern are systems that store data about people and
their behavior. Since 2018 the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
has given residents of many European countries greater control and legal
rights over their personal data, and similar privacy regulation has been
adopted in various other countries and states around the world,
including for example the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA).
Regulations around AI, such as the EU AI Act, place further restrictions
on how personal data can be used.

Moreover, even in areas that are not directly subject to regulation,
there is increasing recognition of the effects that computer systems
have on people and society. Social media has changed how individuals
consume news, which influences their political opinions and hence may
affect the outcome of elections. Automated systems increasingly make
decisions that have profound consequences for individuals, such as
deciding who should be given a loan or insurance coverage, who should be
invited to a job interview, or who should be suspected of a crime [57].

Everyone who works on such systems shares a responsibility for
considering the ethical impact and ensuring that they comply with
relevant law. It is not necessary for everybody to become an expert in
law and ethics, but a basic awareness of legal and ethical principles is
just as important as, say, some foundational knowledge in distributed
systems.

Legal considerations are influencing the very foundations of how data
systems are being designed [58]. For example, the GDPR grants
individuals the right to have their data erased on request (sometimes
known as the right to be forgotten). However, as we shall see in this
book, many data systems rely on immutable constructs such as append-only
logs as part of their design; how can we ensure deletion of some data in
the middle of a file that is supposed to be immutable? How do we handle
deletion of data that has been incorporated into derived datasets (see
“Systems of Record and Derived Data”), such as training data for machine
learning models? Answering these questions creates new engineering
challenges.

At present we don’t have clear guidelines on which particular
technologies or system architectures should be considered
“GDPR-compliant” or not. The regulation deliberately does not mandate
particular technologies, because these may quickly change as technology
progresses. Instead, the legal texts set out high-level principles that
are subject to interpretation. This means that there are no simple
answers to the question of how to comply with privacy regulation, but we
will look at some of the technologies in this book through this lens.

In general, we store data because we think that its value is greater
than the costs of storing it. However, it is worth remembering that the
costs of storage are not just the bill you pay for Amazon S3 or another
service: the cost-benefit calculation should also take into account the
risks of liability and reputational damage if the data were to be leaked
or compromised by adversaries, and the risk of legal costs and fines if
the storage and processing of the data is found not to be compliant with
the law [48].

Governments or police forces might also compel companies to hand over
data. When there is a risk that the data may reveal criminalized
behaviors (for example, homosexuality in several Middle Eastern and
African countries, or seeking an abortion in several US states), storing
that data creates real safety risks for users. Travel to an abortion
clinic, for example, could easily be revealed by location data, perhaps
even by a log of the user’s IP addresses over time (which indicate
approximate location).

Once all the risks are taken into account, it might be reasonable to
decide that some data is simply not worth storing, and that it should
therefore be deleted. This principle of data minimization (sometimes
known by the German term Datensparsamkeit) runs counter to the “big
data” philosophy of storing lots of data speculatively in case it turns
out to be useful in the future [59]. But it fits with the GDPR, which
mandates that personal data may only be collected for a specified,
explicit purpose, that this data may not later be used for any other
purpose, and that the data must not be kept for longer than necessary
for the purposes for which it was collected [60].

Businesses have also taken notice of privacy and safety concerns. Credit
card companies require payment processing businesses to adhere to strict
payment card industry (PCI) standards. Processors undergo frequent
evaluations from independent auditors to verify continued compliance.
Software vendors have also seen increased scrutiny. Many buyers now
require their vendors to comply with Service Organization Control (SOC)
Type 2 standards. As with PCI compliance, vendors undergo third party
audits to verify adherence.

Generally, it is important to balance the needs of your business against
the needs of the people whose data you are collecting and processing.
There is much more to this topic; in [Link to Come] we will go deeper
into the topics of ethics and legal compliance, including the problems
of bias and discrimination.

Summary

The theme of this chapter has been to understand trade-offs: that is, to
recognize that for many questions there is not one right answer, but
several different approaches that each have various pros and cons. We
explored some of the most important choices that affect the architecture
of data systems, and introduced terminology that will be needed
throughout the rest of this book.

We started by making a distinction between operational
(transaction-processing, OLTP) and analytical (OLAP) systems, and saw
their different characteristics: not only managing different types of
data with different access patterns, but also serving different
audiences. We encountered the concept of a data warehouse and data lake,
which receive data feeds from operational systems via ETL. In Chapter 4
we will see that operational and analytical systems often use very
different internal data layouts because of the different types of
queries they need to serve.

We then compared cloud services, a comparatively recent development, to
the traditional paradigm of self-hosted software that has previously
dominated data systems architecture. Which of these approaches is more
cost-effective depends a lot on your particular situation, but it’s
undeniable that cloud-native approaches are bringing big changes to the
way data systems are architected, for example in the way they separate
storage and compute.

Cloud systems are intrinsically distributed, and we briefly examined
some of the trade-offs of distributed systems compared to using a single
machine. There are situations in which you can’t avoid going
distributed, but it’s advisable not to rush into making a system
distributed if it’s possible to keep it on a single machine. In [Link to
Come] and [Link to Come] we will cover the challenges with distributed
systems in more detail.

Finally, we saw that data systems architecture is determined not only by
the needs of the business deploying the system, but also by privacy
regulation that protects the rights of the people whose data is being
processed—an aspect that many engineers are prone to ignoring. How we
translate legal requirements into technical implementations is not yet
well understood, but it’s important to keep this question in mind as we
move through the rest of this book.

Footnotes

References

[1] Richard T. Kouzes, Gordon A. Anderson, Stephen T. Elbert, Ian
Gorton, and Deborah K. Gracio. The Changing Paradigm of Data-Intensive
Computing. IEEE Computer, volume 42, issue 1, January 2009.
doi:10.1109/MC.2009.26

[2] Martin Kleppmann, Adam Wiggins, Peter van Hardenberg, and Mark
McGranaghan. Local-first software: you own your data, in spite of the
cloud. At 2019 ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on New Ideas, New
Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming and Software (Onward!),
October 2019. doi:10.1145/3359591.3359737

[3] Joe Reis and Matt Housley. Fundamentals of Data Engineering.
O’Reilly Media, 2022. ISBN: 9781098108304

[4] Rui Pedro Machado and Helder Russa. Analytics Engineering with SQL
and dbt. O’Reilly Media, 2023. ISBN: 9781098142384

[5] Edgar F. Codd, S. B. Codd, and C. T. Salley. Providing OLAP to
User-Analysts: An IT Mandate. E. F. Codd Associates, 1993. Archived at
perma.cc/RKX8-2GEE

[6] Chinmay Soman and Neha Pawar. Comparing Three Real-Time OLAP
Databases: Apache Pinot, Apache Druid, and ClickHouse. startree.ai,
April 2023. Archived at perma.cc/8BZP-VWPA

[7] Surajit Chaudhuri and Umeshwar Dayal. An Overview of Data
Warehousing and OLAP Technology. ACM SIGMOD Record, volume 26, issue 1,
pages 65–74, March 1997. doi:10.1145/248603.248616

[8] Fatma Özcan, Yuanyuan Tian, and Pinar Tözün. Hybrid
Transactional/Analytical Processing: A Survey. At ACM International
Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), May 2017.
doi:10.1145/3035918.3054784

[9] Adam Prout, Szu-Po Wang, Joseph Victor, Zhou Sun, Yongzhu Li, Jack
Chen, Evan Bergeron, Eric Hanson, Robert Walzer, Rodrigo Gomes, and
Nikita Shamgunov. Cloud-Native Transactions and Analytics in
SingleStore. At International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD),
June 2022. doi:10.1145/3514221.3526055

[10] Chao Zhang, Guoliang Li, Jintao Zhang, Xinning Zhang, and Jianhua
Feng. HTAP Databases: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, April 2024. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2024.3389693

[11] Michael Stonebraker and Uğur Çetintemel. ‘One Size Fits All’: An
Idea Whose Time Has Come and Gone. At 21st International Conference on
Data Engineering (ICDE), April 2005. doi:10.1109/ICDE.2005.1

[12] Jeffrey Cohen, Brian Dolan, Mark Dunlap, Joseph M Hellerstein, and
Caleb Welton. MAD Skills: New Analysis Practices for Big Data.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 2, issue 2, pages 1481–1492,
August 2009. doi:10.14778/1687553.1687576

[13] Dan Olteanu. The Relational Data Borg is Learning. Proceedings of
the VLDB Endowment, volume 13, issue 12, August 2020.
doi:10.14778/3415478.3415572

[14] Matt Bornstein, Martin Casado, and Jennifer Li. Emerging
Architectures for Modern Data Infrastructure: 2020. future.a16z.com,
October 2020. Archived at perma.cc/LF8W-KDCC

[15] Martin Fowler. DataLake. martinfowler.com, February 2015. Archived
at perma.cc/4WKN-CZUK

[16] Bobby Johnson and Joseph Adler. The Sushi Principle: Raw Data Is
Better. At Strata+Hadoop World, February 2015.

[17] Michael Armbrust, Ali Ghodsi, Reynold Xin, and Matei Zaharia.
Lakehouse: A New Generation of Open Platforms that Unify Data
Warehousing and Advanced Analytics. At 11th Annual Conference on
Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2021.

[18] DataKitchen, Inc. The DataOps Manifesto. dataopsmanifesto.org,
2017. Archived at perma.cc/3F5N-FUQ4

[19] Tejas Manohar. What is Reverse ETL: A Definition & Why It’s Taking
Off. hightouch.io, November 2021. Archived at perma.cc/A7TN-GLYJ

[20] Simon O’Regan. Designing Data Products. towardsdatascience.com,
August 2018. Archived at perma.cc/HU67-3RV8

[21] Camille Fournier. Why is it so hard to decide to buy?
skamille.medium.com, July 2021. Archived at perma.cc/6VSG-HQ5X

[22] David Heinemeier Hansson. Why we’re leaving the cloud.
world.hey.com, October 2022. Archived at perma.cc/82E6-UJ65

[23] Nima Badizadegan. Use One Big Server. specbranch.com, August 2022.
Archived at perma.cc/M8NB-95UK

[24] Steve Yegge. Dear Google Cloud: Your Deprecation Policy is Killing
You. steve-yegge.medium.com, August 2020. Archived at perma.cc/KQP9-SPGU

[25] Alexandre Verbitski, Anurag Gupta, Debanjan Saha, Murali
Brahmadesam, Kamal Gupta, Raman Mittal, Sailesh Krishnamurthy, Sandor
Maurice, Tengiz Kharatishvili, and Xiaofeng Bao. Amazon Aurora: Design
Considerations for High Throughput Cloud-Native Relational Databases. At
ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages
1041–1052, May 2017. doi:10.1145/3035918.3056101

[26] Panagiotis Antonopoulos, Alex Budovski, Cristian Diaconu, Alejandro
Hernandez Saenz, Jack Hu, Hanuma Kodavalla, Donald Kossmann, Sandeep
Lingam, Umar Farooq Minhas, Naveen Prakash, Vijendra Purohit, Hugh Qu,
Chaitanya Sreenivas Ravella, Krystyna Reisteter, Sheetal Shrotri, Dixin
Tang, and Vikram Wakade. Socrates: The New SQL Server in the Cloud. At
ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages
1743–1756, June 2019. doi:10.1145/3299869.3314047

[27] Midhul Vuppalapati, Justin Miron, Rachit Agarwal, Dan Truong,
Ashish Motivala, and Thierry Cruanes. Building An Elastic Query Engine
on Disaggregated Storage. At 17th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI), February 2020.

[28] Colin Breck. Predicting the Future of Distributed Systems.
blog.colinbreck.com, August 2024. Archived at perma.cc/K5FC-4XX2

[29] Gwen Shapira. Compute-Storage Separation Explained. thenile.dev,
January 2023. Archived at perma.cc/QCV3-XJNZ

[30] Ravi Murthy and Gurmeet Goindi. AlloyDB for PostgreSQL under the
hood: Intelligent, database-aware storage. cloud.google.com, May 2022.
Archived at archive.org

[31] Jack Vanlightly. The Architecture of Serverless Data Systems.
jack-vanlightly.com, November 2023. Archived at perma.cc/UDV4-TNJ5

[32] Eric Jonas, Johann Schleier-Smith, Vikram Sreekanti, Chia-Che Tsai,
Anurag Khandelwal, Qifan Pu, Vaishaal Shankar, Joao Carreira, Karl
Krauth, Neeraja Yadwadkar, Joseph E Gonzalez, Raluca Ada Popa, Ion
Stoica, David A Patterson. Cloud Programming Simplified: A Berkeley View
on Serverless Computing. arxiv.org, February 2019.

[33] Betsy Beyer, Jennifer Petoff, Chris Jones, and Niall Richard
Murphy. Site Reliability Engineering: How Google Runs Production
Systems. O’Reilly Media, 2016. ISBN: 9781491929124

[34] Thomas Limoncelli. The Time I Stole $10,000 from Bell Labs. ACM
Queue, volume 18, issue 5, November 2020. doi:10.1145/3434571.3434773

[35] Charity Majors. The Future of Ops Jobs. acloudguru.com, August
2020. Archived at perma.cc/GRU2-CZG3

[36] Boris Cherkasky. (Over)Pay As You Go for Your Datastore.
medium.com, September 2021. Archived at perma.cc/Q8TV-2AM2

[37] Shlomi Kushchi. Serverless Doesn’t Mean DevOpsLess or NoOps.
thenewstack.io, February 2023. Archived at perma.cc/3NJR-AYYU

[38] Erik Bernhardsson. Storm in the stratosphere: how the cloud will be
reshuffled. erikbern.com, November 2021. Archived at perma.cc/SYB2-99P3

[39] Benn Stancil. The data OS. benn.substack.com, September 2021.
Archived at perma.cc/WQ43-FHS6

[40] Maria Korolov. Data residency laws pushing companies toward
residency as a service. csoonline.com, January 2022. Archived at
perma.cc/CHE4-XZZ2

[41] Kousik Nath. These are the numbers every computer engineer should
know. freecodecamp.org, September 2019. Archived at perma.cc/RW73-36RL

[42] Joseph M Hellerstein, Jose Faleiro, Joseph E Gonzalez, Johann
Schleier-Smith, Vikram Sreekanti, Alexey Tumanov, and Chenggang Wu.
Serverless Computing: One Step Forward, Two Steps Back. At Conference on
Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2019.

[43] Frank McSherry, Michael Isard, and Derek G. Murray. Scalability!
But at What COST? At 15th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating
Systems (HotOS), May 2015.

[44] Cindy Sridharan. Distributed Systems Observability: A Guide to
Building Robust Systems. Report, O’Reilly Media, May 2018. Archived at
perma.cc/M6JL-XKCM

[45] Charity Majors. Observability — A 3-Year Retrospective.
thenewstack.io, August 2019. Archived at perma.cc/CG62-TJWL

[46] Benjamin H. Sigelman, Luiz André Barroso, Mike Burrows, Pat
Stephenson, Manoj Plakal, Donald Beaver, Saul Jaspan, and Chandan
Shanbhag. Dapper, a Large-Scale Distributed Systems Tracing
Infrastructure. Google Technical Report dapper-2010-1, April 2010.
Archived at perma.cc/K7KU-2TMH

[47] Rodrigo Laigner, Yongluan Zhou, Marcos Antonio Vaz Salles, Yijian
Liu, and Marcos Kalinowski. Data management in microservices: State of
the practice, challenges, and research directions. Proceedings of the
VLDB Endowment, volume 14, issue 13, pages 3348–3361, September 2021.
doi:10.14778/3484224.3484232

[48] Jordan Tigani. Big Data is Dead. motherduck.com, February 2023.
Archived at perma.cc/HT4Q-K77U

[49] Sam Newman. Building Microservices, second edition. O’Reilly Media,
2021. ISBN: 9781492034025

[50] Chris Richardson. Microservices: Decomposing Applications for
Deployability and Scalability. infoq.com, May 2014. Archived at
perma.cc/CKN4-YEQ2

[51] Mohammad Shahrad, Rodrigo Fonseca, Íñigo Goiri, Gohar Chaudhry,
Paul Batum, Jason Cooke, Eduardo Laureano, Colby Tresness, Mark
Russinovich, Ricardo Bianchini. Serverless in the Wild: Characterizing
and Optimizing the Serverless Workload at a Large Cloud Provider. At
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC), July 2020.

[52] Luiz André Barroso, Urs Hölzle, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan. The
Datacenter as a Computer: Designing Warehouse-Scale Machines, third
edition. Morgan & Claypool Synthesis Lectures on Computer Architecture,
October 2018. doi:10.2200/S00874ED3V01Y201809CAC046

[53] David Fiala, Frank Mueller, Christian Engelmann, Rolf Riesen, Kurt
Ferreira, and Ron Brightwell. Detection and Correction of Silent Data
Corruption for Large-Scale High-Performance Computing,” at International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis (SC), November 2012. doi:10.1109/SC.2012.49

[54] Anna Kornfeld Simpson, Adriana Szekeres, Jacob Nelson, and Irene
Zhang. Securing RDMA for High-Performance Datacenter Storage Systems. At
12th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing (HotCloud), July
2020.

[55] Arjun Singh, Joon Ong, Amit Agarwal, Glen Anderson, Ashby
Armistead, Roy Bannon, Seb Boving, Gaurav Desai, Bob Felderman, Paulie
Germano, Anand Kanagala, Jeff Provost, Jason Simmons, Eiichi Tanda, Jim
Wanderer, Urs Hölzle, Stephen Stuart, and Amin Vahdat. Jupiter Rising: A
Decade of Clos Topologies and Centralized Control in Google’s Datacenter
Network. At Annual Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data
Communication (SIGCOMM), August 2015. doi:10.1145/2785956.2787508

[56] Glenn K. Lockwood. Hadoop’s Uncomfortable Fit in HPC.
glennklockwood.blogspot.co.uk, May 2014. Archived at perma.cc/S8XX-Y67B

[57] Cathy O’Neil: Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases
Inequality and Threatens Democracy. Crown Publishing, 2016. ISBN:
9780553418811

[58] Supreeth Shastri, Vinay Banakar, Melissa Wasserman, Arun Kumar, and
Vijay Chidambaram. Understanding and Benchmarking the Impact of GDPR on
Database Systems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 13, issue 7,
pages 1064–1077, March 2020. doi:10.14778/3384345.3384354

[59] Martin Fowler. Datensparsamkeit. martinfowler.com, December 2013.
Archived at perma.cc/R9QX-CME6

[60] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 27 April 2016 (General Data Protection Regulation). Official
Journal of the European Union L 119/1, May 2016.

Chapter 2. Defining Nonfunctional Requirements

  The Internet was done so well that most people think of it as a
  natural resource like the Pacific Ocean, rather than something that
  was man-made. When was the last time a technology with a scale like
  that was so error-free?

  Alan Kay, in interview with Dr Dobb’s Journal (2012)

A Note for Early Release Readers

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
advantage of these technologies long before the official release of
these titles.

This will be the 2nd chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo for this
book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content and/or
examples in this book, or if you notice missing material within this
chapter, please reach out on GitHub.

If you are building an application, you will be driven by a list of
requirements. At the top of your list is most likely the functionality
that the application must offer: what screens and what buttons you need,
and what each operation is supposed to do in order to fulfill the
purpose of your software. These are your functional requirements.

In addition, you probably also have some nonfunctional requirements: for
example, the app should be fast, reliable, secure, legally compliant,
and easy to maintain. These requirements might not be explicitly written
down, because they may seem somewhat obvious, but they are just as
important as the app’s functionality: an app that is unbearably slow or
unreliable might as well not exist.

Many nonfunctional requirements, such as security, fall outside the
scope of this book. But there are a few nonfunctional requirements that
we will consider, and this chapter will help you articulate them for
your own systems:

- How to define and measure the performance of a system (see “Describing
  Performance”);

- What it means for a service to be reliable—namely, continuing to work
  correctly, even when things go wrong (see “Reliability and Fault
  Tolerance”);

- Allowing a system to be scalable by having efficient ways of adding
  computing capacity as the load on the system grows (see
  “Scalability”); and

- Making it easier to maintain a system in the long term (see
  “Maintainability”).

The terminology introduced in this chapter will also be useful in the
following chapters, when we go into the details of how data-intensive
systems are implemented. However, abstract definitions can be quite dry;
to make the ideas more concrete, we will start this chapter with a case
study of how a social networking service might work, which will provide
practical examples of performance and scalability.

Case Study: Social Network Home Timelines

Imagine you are given the task of implementing a social network in the
style of X (formerly Twitter), in which users can post messages and
follow other users. This will be a huge simplification of how such a
service actually works [1, 2, 3], but it will help illustrate some of
the issues that arise in large-scale systems.

Let’s assume that users make 500 million posts per day, or 5,700 posts
per second on average. Occasionally, the rate can spike as high as
150,000 posts/second [4]. Let’s also assume that the average user
follows 200 people and has 200 followers (although there is a very wide
range: most people have only a handful of followers, and a few
celebrities such as Barack Obama have over 100 million followers).

Representing Users, Posts, and Follows

Imagine we keep all of the data in a relational database as shown in
Figure 2-1. We have one table for users, one table for posts, and one
table for follow relationships.

[ddia 0201]

Figure 2-1. Simple relational schema for a social network in which users can follow each other.

Let’s say the main read operation that our social network must support
is the home timeline, which displays recent posts by people you are
following (for simplicity we will ignore ads, suggested posts from
people you are not following, and other extensions). We could write the
following SQL query to get the home timeline for a particular user:

    SELECT posts.*, users.* FROM posts
      JOIN follows ON posts.sender_id = follows.followee_id
      JOIN users   ON posts.sender_id = users.id
      WHERE follows.follower_id = current_user
      ORDER BY posts.timestamp DESC
      LIMIT 1000

To execute this query, the database will use the follows table to find
everybody who current_user is following, look up recent posts by those
users, and sort them by timestamp to get the most recent 1,000 posts by
any of the followed users.

Posts are supposed to be timely, so let’s assume that after somebody
makes a post, we want their followers to be able to see it within 5
seconds. One way of doing that would be for the user’s client to repeat
the query above every 5 seconds while the user is online (this is known
as polling). If we assume that 10 million users are online and logged in
at the same time, that would mean running the query 2 million times per
second. Even if you increase the polling interval, this is a lot.

Moreover, the query above is quite expensive: if you are following 200
people, it needs to fetch a list of recent posts by each of those 200
people, and merge those lists. 2 million timeline queries per second
then means that the database needs to look up the recent posts from some
sender 400 million times per second—a huge number. And that is the
average case. Some users follow tens of thousands of accounts; for them,
this query is very expensive to execute, and difficult to make fast.

Materializing and Updating Timelines

How can we do better? Firstly, instead of polling, it would be better if
the server actively pushed new posts to any followers who are currently
online. Secondly, we should precompute the results of the query above so
that a user’s request for their home timeline can be served from a
cache.

Imagine that for each user we store a data structure containing their
home timeline, i.e., the recent posts by people they are following.
Every time a user makes a post, we look up all of their followers, and
insert that post into the home timeline of each follower—like delivering
a message to a mailbox. Now when a user logs in, we can simply give them
this home timeline that we precomputed. Moreover, to receive a
notification about any new posts on their timeline, the user’s client
simply needs to subscribe to the stream of posts being added to their
home timeline.

The downside of this approach is that we now need to do more work every
time a user makes a post, because the home timelines are derived data
that needs to be updated. The process is illustrated in Figure 2-2. When
one initial request results in several downstream requests being carried
out, we use the term fan-out to describe the factor by which the number
of requests increases.

[ddia 0202]

Figure 2-2. Fan-out: delivering new posts to every follower of the user who made the post.

At a rate of 5,700 posts posted per second, if the average post reaches
200 followers (i.e., a fan-out factor of 200), we will need to do just
over 1 million home timeline writes per second. This is a lot, but it’s
still a significant saving compared to the 400 million per-sender post
lookups per second that we would otherwise have to do.

If the rate of posts spikes due to some special event, we don’t have to
do the timeline deliveries immediately—we can enqueue them and accept
that it will temporarily take a bit longer for posts to show up in
followers’ timelines. Even during such load spikes, timelines remain
fast to load, since we simply serve them from a cache.

This process of precomputing and updating the results of a query is
called materialization, and the timeline cache is an example of a
materialized view (a concept we will discuss further in [Link to Come]).
The downside of materialization is that every time a celebrity makes a
post, we now have to do a large amount of work to insert that post into
the home timelines of each of their millions of followers.

One way of solving this problem is to handle celebrity posts separately
from everyone else’s posts: we can save ourselves the effort of adding
them to millions of timelines by storing the celebrity posts separately
and merging them with the materialized timeline when it is read. Despite
such optimizations, handling celebrities on a social network can require
a lot of infrastructure [5].

Describing Performance

Most discussions of software performance consider two main types of
metric:

Response time

     The elapsed time from the moment when a user makes a request until
    they receive the requested answer. The unit of measurement is
    seconds (or milliseconds, or microseconds).

Throughput

     The number of requests per second, or the data volume per second,
    that the system is processing. For a given allocation of hardware
    resources, there is a maximum throughput that can be handled. The
    unit of measurement is “somethings per second”.

In the social network case study, “posts per second” and “timeline
writes per second” are throughput metrics, whereas the “time it takes to
load the home timeline” or the “time until a post is delivered to
followers” are response time metrics.

There is often a connection between throughput and response time; an
example of such a relationship for an online service is sketched in
Figure 2-3. The service has a low response time when request throughput
is low, but response time increases as load increases. This is because
of queueing: when a request arrives on a highly loaded system, it’s
likely that the CPU is already in the process of handling an earlier
request, and therefore the incoming request needs to wait until the
earlier request has been completed. As throughput approaches the maximum
that the hardware can handle, queueing delays increase sharply.

[ddia 0203]

Figure 2-3. As the throughput of a service approaches its capacity, the response time increases dramatically due to queueing.

When an overloaded system won’t recover

If a system is close to overload, with throughput pushed close to the
limit, it can sometimes enter a vicious cycle where it becomes less
efficient and hence even more overloaded. For example, if there is a
long queue of requests waiting to be handled, response times may
increase so much that clients time out and resend their request. This
causes the rate of requests to increase even further, making the problem
worse—a retry storm. Even when the load is reduced again, such a system
may remain in an overloaded state until it is rebooted or otherwise
reset. This phenomenon is called a metastable failure, and it can cause
serious outages in production systems [6, 7].

To avoid retries overloading a service, you can increase and randomize
the time between successive retries on the client side (exponential
backoff [8, 9]), and temporarily stop sending requests to a service that
has returned errors or timed out recently (using a circuit breaker [10]
or token bucket algorithm [11]). The server can also detect when it is
approaching overload and start proactively rejecting requests (load
shedding [12]), and send back responses asking clients to slow down
(backpressure [1, 13]). The choice of queueing and load-balancing
algorithms can also make a difference [14].

In terms of performance metrics, the response time is usually what users
care about the most, whereas the throughput determines the required
computing resources (e.g., how many servers you need), and hence the
cost of serving a particular workload. If throughput is likely to
increase beyond what the current hardware can handle, the capacity needs
to be expanded; a system is said to be scalable if its maximum
throughput can be significantly increased by adding computing resources.

In this section we will focus primarily on response times, and we will
return to throughput and scalability in “Scalability”.

Latency and Response Time

“Latency” and “response time” are sometimes used interchangeably, but in
this book we will use the terms in a specific way (illustrated in
Figure 2-4):

- The response time is what the client sees; it includes all delays
  incurred anywhere in the system.

-  The service time is the duration for which the service is actively
  processing the user request.

-  Queueing delays can occur at several points in the flow: for example,
  after a request is received, it might need to wait until a CPU is
  available before it can be processed; a response packet might need to
  be buffered before it is sent over the network if other tasks on the
  same machine are sending a lot of data via the outbound network
  interface.

- Latency is a catch-all term for time during which a request is not
  being actively processed, i.e., during which it is latent. In
  particular, network latency or network delay refers to the time that
  request and response spend traveling through the network.

[ddia 0204]

Figure 2-4. Response time, service time, network latency, and queueing delay.

In Figure 2-4, time flows from left to right, each communicating node is
shown as a horizontal line, and a request or response message is shown
as a thick diagonal arrow from one node to another. You will encounter
this style of diagram frequently over the course of this book.

The response time can vary significantly from one request to the next,
even if you keep making the same request over and over again. Many
factors can add random delays: for example, a context switch to a
background process, the loss of a network packet and TCP retransmission,
a garbage collection pause, a page fault forcing a read from disk,
mechanical vibrations in the server rack [15], or many other causes. We
will discuss this topic in more detail in [Link to Come].

Queueing delays often account for a large part of the variability in
response times. As a server can only process a small number of things in
parallel (limited, for example, by its number of CPU cores), it only
takes a small number of slow requests to hold up the processing of
subsequent requests—an effect known as head-of-line blocking. Even if
those subsequent requests have fast service times, the client will see a
slow overall response time due to the time waiting for the prior request
to complete. The queueing delay is not part of the service time, and for
this reason it is important to measure response times on the client
side.

Average, Median, and Percentiles

Because the response time varies from one request to the next, we need
to think of it not as a single number, but as a distribution of values
that you can measure. In Figure 2-5, each gray bar represents a request
to a service, and its height shows how long that request took. Most
requests are reasonably fast, but there are occasional outliers that
take much longer. Variation in network delay is also known as jitter.

[ddia 0205]

Figure 2-5. Illustrating mean and percentiles: response times for a sample of 100 requests to a service.

It’s common to report the average response time of a service
(technically, the arithmetic mean: that is, sum all the response times,
and divide by the number of requests). The mean response time is useful
for estimating throughput limits [16]. However, the mean is not a very
good metric if you want to know your “typical” response time, because it
doesn’t tell you how many users actually experienced that delay.

Usually it is better to use percentiles. If you take your list of
response times and sort it from fastest to slowest, then the median is
the halfway point: for example, if your median response time is 200 ms,
that means half your requests return in less than 200 ms, and half your
requests take longer than that. This makes the median a good metric if
you want to know how long users typically have to wait. The median is
also known as the 50th percentile, and sometimes abbreviated as p50.

In order to figure out how bad your outliers are, you can look at higher
percentiles: the 95th, 99th, and 99.9th percentiles are common
(abbreviated p95, p99, and p999). They are the response time thresholds
at which 95%, 99%, or 99.9% of requests are faster than that particular
threshold. For example, if the 95th percentile response time is 1.5
seconds, that means 95 out of 100 requests take less than 1.5 seconds,
and 5 out of 100 requests take 1.5 seconds or more. This is illustrated
in Figure 2-5.

High percentiles of response times, also known as tail latencies, are
important because they directly affect users’ experience of the service.
For example, Amazon describes response time requirements for internal
services in terms of the 99.9th percentile, even though it only affects
1 in 1,000 requests. This is because the customers with the slowest
requests are often those who have the most data on their accounts
because they have made many purchases—that is, they’re the most valuable
customers [17]. It’s important to keep those customers happy by ensuring
the website is fast for them.

On the other hand, optimizing the 99.99th percentile (the slowest 1 in
10,000 requests) was deemed too expensive and to not yield enough
benefit for Amazon’s purposes. Reducing response times at very high
percentiles is difficult because they are easily affected by random
events outside of your control, and the benefits are diminishing.

The user impact of response times

It seems intuitively obvious that a fast service is better for users
than a slow service [18]. However, it is surprisingly difficult to get
hold of reliable data to quantify the effect that latency has on user
behavior.

Some often-cited statistics are unreliable. In 2006 Google reported that
a slowdown in search results from 400 ms to 900 ms was associated with a
20% drop in traffic and revenue [19]. However, another Google study from
2009 reported that a 400 ms increase in latency resulted in only 0.6%
fewer searches per day [20], and in the same year Bing found that a
two-second increase in load time reduced ad revenue by 4.3% [21]. Newer
data from these companies appears not to be publicly available.

A more recent Akamai study [22] claims that a 100 ms increase in
response time reduced the conversion rate of e-commerce sites by up to
7%; however, on closer inspection, the same study reveals that very fast
page load times are also correlated with lower conversion rates! This
seemingly paradoxical result is explained by the fact that the pages
that load fastest are often those that have no useful content (e.g., 404
error pages). However, since the study makes no effort to separate the
effects of page content from the effects of load time, its results are
probably not meaningful.

A study by Yahoo [23] compares click-through rates on fast-loading
versus slow-loading search results, controlling for quality of search
results. It finds 20–30% more clicks on fast searches when the
difference between fast and slow responses is 1.25 seconds or more.

Use of Response Time Metrics

High percentiles are especially important in backend services that are
called multiple times as part of serving a single end-user request. Even
if you make the calls in parallel, the end-user request still needs to
wait for the slowest of the parallel calls to complete. It takes just
one slow call to make the entire end-user request slow, as illustrated
in Figure 2-6. Even if only a small percentage of backend calls are
slow, the chance of getting a slow call increases if an end-user request
requires multiple backend calls, and so a higher proportion of end-user
requests end up being slow (an effect known as tail latency
amplification [24]).

[ddia 0206]

Figure 2-6. When several backend calls are needed to serve a request, it takes just a single slow backend request to slow down the entire end-user request.

Percentiles are often used in service level objectives (SLOs) and
service level agreements (SLAs) as ways of defining the expected
performance and availability of a service [25]. For example, an SLO may
set a target for a service to have a median response time of less than
200 ms and a 99th percentile under 1 s, and a target that at least 99.9%
of valid requests result in non-error responses. An SLA is a contract
that specifies what happens if the SLO is not met (for example,
customers may be entitled to a refund). That is the basic idea, at
least; in practice, defining good availability metrics for SLOs and SLAs
is not straightforward [26, 27].

Computing percentiles

If you want to add response time percentiles to the monitoring
dashboards for your services, you need to efficiently calculate them on
an ongoing basis. For example, you may want to keep a rolling window of
response times of requests in the last 10 minutes. Every minute, you
calculate the median and various percentiles over the values in that
window and plot those metrics on a graph.

The simplest implementation is to keep a list of response times for all
requests within the time window and to sort that list every minute. If
that is too inefficient for you, there are algorithms that can calculate
a good approximation of percentiles at minimal CPU and memory cost. Open
source percentile estimation libraries include HdrHistogram, t-digest
[28, 29], OpenHistogram [30], and DDSketch [31].

Beware that averaging percentiles, e.g., to reduce the time resolution
or to combine data from several machines, is mathematically
meaningless—the right way of aggregating response time data is to add
the histograms [32].

Reliability and Fault Tolerance

Everybody has an intuitive idea of what it means for something to be
reliable or unreliable. For software, typical expectations include:

- The application performs the function that the user expected.

- It can tolerate the user making mistakes or using the software in
  unexpected ways.

- Its performance is good enough for the required use case, under the
  expected load and data volume.

- The system prevents any unauthorized access and abuse.

If all those things together mean “working correctly,” then we can
understand reliability as meaning, roughly, “continuing to work
correctly, even when things go wrong.” To be more precise about things
going wrong, we will distinguish between faults and failures [33, 34]:

Fault

    A fault is when a particular part of a system stops working
    correctly: for example, if a single hard drive malfunctions, or a
    single machine crashes, or an external service (that the system
    depends on) has an outage.

Failure

    A failure is when the system as a whole stops providing the required
    service to the user; in other words, when it does not meet the
    service level objective (SLO).

The distinction between fault and failure can be confusing because they
are the same thing, just at different levels. For example, if a hard
drive stops working, we say that the hard drive has failed: if the
system consists only of that one hard drive, it has stopped providing
the required service. However, if the system you’re talking about
contains many hard drives, then the failure of a single hard drive is
only a fault from the point of view of the bigger system, and the bigger
system might be able to tolerate that fault by having a copy of the data
on another hard drive.

Fault Tolerance

We call a system fault-tolerant if it continues providing the required
service to the user in spite of certain faults occurring. If a system
cannot tolerate a certain part becoming faulty, we call that part a
single point of failure (SPOF), because a fault in that part escalates
to cause the failure of the whole system.

For example, in the social network case study, a fault that might happen
is that during the fan-out process, a machine involved in updating the
materialized timelines crashes or become unavailable. To make this
process fault-tolerant, we would need to ensure that another machine can
take over this task without missing any posts that should have been
delivered, and without duplicating any posts. (This idea is known as
exactly-once semantics, and we will examine it in detail in [Link to
Come].)

Fault tolerance is always limited to a certain number of certain types
of faults. For example, a system might be able to tolerate a maximum of
two hard drives failing at the same time, or a maximum of one out of
three nodes crashing. It would not make sense to tolerate any number of
faults: if all nodes crash, there is nothing that can be done. If the
entire planet Earth (and all servers on it) were swallowed by a black
hole, tolerance of that fault would require web hosting in space—good
luck getting that budget item approved.

Counter-intuitively, in such fault-tolerant systems, it can make sense
to increase the rate of faults by triggering them deliberately—for
example, by randomly killing individual processes without warning. Many
critical bugs are actually due to poor error handling [35]; by
deliberately inducing faults, you ensure that the fault-tolerance
machinery is continually exercised and tested, which can increase your
confidence that faults will be handled correctly when they occur
naturally. Chaos engineering is a discipline that aims to improve
confidence in fault-tolerance mechanisms through experiments such as
deliberately injecting faults [36].

Although we generally prefer tolerating faults over preventing faults,
there are cases where prevention is better than cure (e.g., because no
cure exists). This is the case with security matters, for example: if an
attacker has compromised a system and gained access to sensitive data,
that event cannot be undone. However, this book mostly deals with the
kinds of faults that can be cured, as described in the following
sections.

Hardware and Software Faults

When we think of causes of system failure, hardware faults quickly come
to mind:

- Approximately 2–5% of magnetic hard drives fail per year [37, 38]; in
  a storage cluster with 10,000 disks, we should therefore expect on
  average one disk failure per day. Recent data suggests that disks are
  getting more reliable, but failure rates remain significant [39].

-  Approximately 0.5–1% of solid state drives (SSDs) fail per year [40].
  Small numbers of bit errors are corrected automatically [41], but
  uncorrectable errors occur approximately once per year per drive, even
  in drives that are fairly new (i.e., that have experienced little
  wear); this error rate is higher than that of magnetic hard drives
  [42, 43].

- Other hardware components such as power supplies, RAID controllers,
  and memory modules also fail, although less frequently than hard
  drives [44, 45].

-  Approximately one in 1,000 machines has a CPU core that occasionally
  computes the wrong result, likely due to manufacturing defects [46,
  47, 48]. In some cases, an erroneous computation leads to a crash, but
  in other cases it leads to a program simply returning the wrong
  result.

-  Data in RAM can also be corrupted, either due to random events such
  as cosmic rays, or due to permanent physical defects. Even when memory
  with error-correcting codes (ECC) is used, more than 1% of machines
  encounter an uncorrectable error in a given year, which typically
  leads to a crash of the machine and the affected memory module needing
  to be replaced [49]. Moreover, certain pathological memory access
  patterns can flip bits with high probability [50].

-  An entire datacenter might become unavailable (for example, due to
  power outage or network misconfiguration) or even be permanently
  destroyed (for example by fire or flood). Although such large-scale
  failures are rare, their impact can be catastrophic if a service
  cannot tolerate the loss of a datacenter [51].

These events are rare enough that you often don’t need to worry about
them when working on a small system, as long as you can easily replace
hardware that becomes faulty. However, in a large-scale system, hardware
faults happen often enough that they become part of the normal system
operation.

Tolerating hardware faults through redundancy

Our first response to unreliable hardware is usually to add redundancy
to the individual hardware components in order to reduce the failure
rate of the system. Disks may be set up in a RAID configuration
(spreading data across multiple disks in the same machine so that a
failed disk does not cause data loss), servers may have dual power
supplies and hot-swappable CPUs, and datacenters may have batteries and
diesel generators for backup power. Such redundancy can often keep a
machine running uninterrupted for years.

Redundancy is most effective when component faults are independent, that
is, the occurrence of one fault does not change how likely it is that
another fault will occur. However, experience has shown that there are
often significant correlations between component failures [38, 52, 53];
unavailability of an entire server rack or an entire datacenter still
happens more often than we would like.

Hardware redundancy increases the uptime of a single machine; however,
as discussed in “Distributed versus Single-Node Systems”, there are
advantages to using a distributed system, such as being able to tolerate
a complete outage of one datacenter. For this reason, cloud systems tend
to focus less on the reliability of individual machines, and instead aim
to make services highly available by tolerating faulty nodes at the
software level. Cloud providers use availability zones to identify which
resources are physically co-located; resources in the same place are
more likely to fail at the same time than geographically separated
resources.

The fault-tolerance techniques we discuss in this book are designed to
tolerate the loss of entire machines, racks, or availability zones. They
generally work by allowing a machine in one datacenter to take over when
a machine in another datacenter fails or becomes unreachable. We will
discuss such techniques for fault tolerance in Chapter 6, [Link to
Come], and at various other points in this book.

Systems that can tolerate the loss of entire machines also have
operational advantages: a single-server system requires planned downtime
if you need to reboot the machine (to apply operating system security
patches, for example), whereas a multi-node fault-tolerant system can be
patched by restarting one node at a time, without affecting the service
for users. This is called a rolling upgrade, and we will discuss it
further in Chapter 5.

Software faults

Although hardware failures can be weakly correlated, they are still
mostly independent: for example, if one disk fails, it’s likely that
other disks in the same machine will be fine for another while. On the
other hand, software faults are often very highly correlated, because it
is common for many nodes to run the same software and thus have the same
bugs [54, 55]. Such faults are harder to anticipate, and they tend to
cause many more system failures than uncorrelated hardware faults [44].
For example:

-  A software bug that causes every node to fail at the same time in
  particular circumstances. For example, on June 30, 2012, a leap second
  caused many Java applications to hang simultaneously due to a bug in
  the Linux kernel, bringing down many Internet services [56]. Due to a
  firmware bug, all SSDs of certain models suddenly fail after precisely
  32,768 hours of operation (less than 4 years), rendering the data on
  them unrecoverable [57].

- A runaway process that uses up some shared, limited resource, such as
  CPU time, memory, disk space, network bandwidth, or threads [58]. For
  example, a process that consumes too much memory while processing a
  large request may be killed by the operating system.

- A service that the system depends on slows down, becomes unresponsive,
  or starts returning corrupted responses.

- An interaction between different systems results in emergent behavior
  that does not occur when each system was tested in isolation [59].

-  Cascading failures, where a problem in one component causes another
  component to become overloaded and slow down, which in turn brings
  down another component [60, 61].

The bugs that cause these kinds of software faults often lie dormant for
a long time until they are triggered by an unusual set of circumstances.
In those circumstances, it is revealed that the software is making some
kind of assumption about its environment—and while that assumption is
usually true, it eventually stops being true for some reason [62, 63].

There is no quick solution to the problem of systematic faults in
software. Lots of small things can help: carefully thinking about
assumptions and interactions in the system; thorough testing; process
isolation; allowing processes to crash and restart; avoiding feedback
loops such as retry storms (see “When an overloaded system won’t
recover”); measuring, monitoring, and analyzing system behavior in
production.

Humans and Reliability

Humans design and build software systems, and the operators who keep the
systems running are also human. Unlike machines, humans don’t just
follow rules; their strength is being creative and adaptive in getting
their job done. However, this characteristic also leads to
unpredictability, and sometimes mistakes that can lead to failures,
despite best intentions. For example, one study of large internet
services found that configuration changes by operators were the leading
cause of outages, whereas hardware faults (servers or network) played a
role in only 10–25% of outages [64].

It is tempting to label such problems as “human error” and to wish that
they could be solved by better controlling human behavior through
tighter procedures and compliance with rules. However, blaming people
for mistakes is counterproductive. What we call “human error” is not
really the cause of an incident, but rather a symptom of a problem with
the sociotechnical system in which people are trying their best to do
their jobs [65]. Often complex systems have emergent behavior, in which
unexpected interactions between components may also lead to failures
[66].

Various technical measures can help minimize the impact of human
mistakes, including thorough testing (both hand-written tests and
property testing on lots of random inputs) [35], rollback mechanisms for
quickly reverting configuration changes, gradual roll-outs of new code,
detailed and clear monitoring, observability tools for diagnosing
production issues (see “Problems with Distributed Systems”), and
well-designed interfaces that encourage “the right thing” and discourage
“the wrong thing”.

However, these things require an investment of time and money, and in
the pragmatic reality of everyday business, organizations often
prioritize revenue-generating activities over measures that increase
their resilience against mistakes. If there is a choice between more
features and more testing, many organizations understandably choose
features. Given this choice, when a preventable mistake inevitably
occurs, it does not make sense to blame the person who made the
mistake—the problem is the organization’s priorities.

Increasingly, organizations are adopting a culture of blameless
postmortems: after an incident, the people involved are encouraged to
share full details about what happened, without fear of punishment,
since this allows others in the organization to learn how to prevent
similar problems in the future [67]. This process may uncover a need to
change business priorities, a need to invest in areas that have been
neglected, a need to change the incentives for the people involved, or
some other systemic issue that needs to be brought to the management’s
attention.

As a general principle, when investigating an incident, you should be
suspicious of simplistic answers. “Bob should have been more careful
when deploying that change” is not productive, but neither is “We must
rewrite the backend in Haskell.” Instead, management should take the
opportunity to learn the details of how the sociotechnical system works
from the point of view of the people who work with it every day, and
take steps to improve it based on this feedback [65].

How Important Is Reliability?

Reliability is not just for nuclear power stations and air traffic
control—more mundane applications are also expected to work reliably.
Bugs in business applications cause lost productivity (and legal risks
if figures are reported incorrectly), and outages of e-commerce sites
can have huge costs in terms of lost revenue and damage to reputation.

In many applications, a temporary outage of a few minutes or even a few
hours is tolerable [68], but permanent data loss or corruption would be
catastrophic. Consider a parent who stores all their pictures and videos
of their children in your photo application [69]. How would they feel if
that database was suddenly corrupted? Would they know how to restore it
from a backup?

As another example of how unreliable software can harm people, consider
the Post Office Horizon scandal. Between 1999 and 2019, hundreds of
people managing Post Office branches in Britain were convicted of theft
or fraud because the accounting software showed a shortfall in their
accounts. Eventually it became clear that many of these shortfalls were
due to bugs in the software, and many convictions have since been
overturned [70]. What led to this, probably the largest miscarriage of
justice in British history, is the fact that English law assumes that
computers operate correctly (and hence, evidence produced by computers
is reliable) unless there is evidence to the contrary [71]. Software
engineers may laugh at the idea that software could ever be bug-free,
but this is little solace to the people who were wrongfully imprisoned,
declared bankrupt, or even committed suicide as a result of a wrongful
conviction due to an unreliable computer system.

There are situations in which we may choose to sacrifice reliability in
order to reduce development cost (e.g., when developing a prototype
product for an unproven market)—but we should be very conscious of when
we are cutting corners and keep in mind the potential consequences.

Scalability

Even if a system is working reliably today, that doesn’t mean it will
necessarily work reliably in the future. One common reason for
degradation is increased load: perhaps the system has grown from 10,000
concurrent users to 100,000 concurrent users, or from 1 million to 10
million. Perhaps it is processing much larger volumes of data than it
did before.

Scalability is the term we use to describe a system’s ability to cope
with increased load. Sometimes, when discussing scalability, people make
comments along the lines of, “You’re not Google or Amazon. Stop worrying
about scale and just use a relational database.” Whether this maxim
applies to you depends on the type of application you are building.

If you are building a new product that currently only has a small number
of users, perhaps at a startup, the overriding engineering goal is
usually to keep the system as simple and flexible as possible, so that
you can easily modify and adapt the features of your product as you
learn more about customers’ needs [72]. In such an environment, it is
counterproductive to worry about hypothetical scale that might be needed
in the future: in the best case, investments in scalability are wasted
effort and premature optimization; in the worst case, they lock you into
an inflexible design and make it harder to evolve your application.

The reason is that scalability is not a one-dimensional label: it is
meaningless to say “X is scalable” or “Y doesn’t scale.” Rather,
discussing scalability means considering questions like:

- “If the system grows in a particular way, what are our options for
  coping with the growth?”

- “How can we add computing resources to handle the additional load?”

- “Based on current growth projections, when will we hit the limits of
  our current architecture?”

If you succeed in making your application popular, and therefore
handling a growing amount of load, you will learn where your performance
bottlenecks lie, and therefore you will know along which dimensions you
need to scale. At that point it’s time to start worrying about
techniques for scalability.

Describing Load

First, we need to succinctly describe the current load on the system;
only then can we discuss growth questions (what happens if our load
doubles?). Often this will be a measure of throughput: for example, the
number of requests per second to a service, how many gigabytes of new
data arrive per day, or the number of shopping cart checkouts per hour.
Sometimes you care about the peak of some variable quantity, such as the
number of simultaneously online users in “Case Study: Social Network
Home Timelines”.

Often there are other statistical characteristics of the load that also
affect the access patterns and hence the scalability requirements. For
example, you may need to know the ratio of reads to writes in a
database, the hit rate on a cache, or the number of data items per user
(for example, the number of followers in the social network case study).
Perhaps the average case is what matters for you, or perhaps your
bottleneck is dominated by a small number of extreme cases. It all
depends on the details of your particular application.

Once you have described the load on your system, you can investigate
what happens when the load increases. You can look at it in two ways:

- When you increase the load in a certain way and keep the system
  resources (CPUs, memory, network bandwidth, etc.) unchanged, how is
  the performance of your system affected?

- When you increase the load in a certain way, how much do you need to
  increase the resources if you want to keep performance unchanged?

Usually our goal is to keep the performance of the system within the
requirements of the SLA (see “Use of Response Time Metrics”) while also
minimizing the cost of running the system. The greater the required
computing resources, the higher the cost. It might be that some types of
hardware are more cost-effective than others, and these factors may
change over time as new types of hardware become available.

If you can double the resources in order to handle twice the load, while
keeping performance the same, we say that you have linear scalability,
and this is considered a good thing. Occasionally it is possible to
handle twice the load with less than double the resources, due to
economies of scale or a better distribution of peak load [73, 74]. Much
more likely is that the cost grows faster than linearly, and there may
be many reasons for the inefficiency. For example, if you have a lot of
data, then processing a single write request may involve more work than
if you have a small amount of data, even if the size of the request is
the same.

Shared-Memory, Shared-Disk, and Shared-Nothing Architecture

The simplest way of increasing the hardware resources of a service is to
move it to a more powerful machine. Individual CPU cores are no longer
getting significantly faster, but you can buy a machine (or rent a cloud
instance) with more CPU cores, more RAM, and more disk space. This
approach is called vertical scaling or scaling up.

You can get parallelism on a single machine by using multiple processes
or threads. All the threads belonging to the same process can access the
same RAM, and hence this approach is also called a shared-memory
architecture. The problem with a shared-memory approach is that the cost
grows faster than linearly: a high-end machine with twice the hardware
resources typically costs significantly more than twice as much. And due
to bottlenecks, a machine twice the size can often handle less than
twice the load.

Another approach is the shared-disk architecture, which uses several
machines with independent CPUs and RAM, but which stores data on an
array of disks that is shared between the machines, which are connected
via a fast network: Network-Attached Storage (NAS) or Storage Area
Network (SAN). This architecture has traditionally been used for
on-premises data warehousing workloads, but contention and the overhead
of locking limit the scalability of the shared-disk approach [75].

By contrast, the shared-nothing architecture [76] (also called
horizontal scaling or scaling out) has gained a lot of popularity. In
this approach, we use a distributed system with multiple nodes, each of
which has its own CPUs, RAM, and disks. Any coordination between nodes
is done at the software level, via a conventional network.

The advantages of shared-nothing are that it has the potential to scale
linearly, it can use whatever hardware offers the best price/performance
ratio (especially in the cloud), it can more easily adjust its hardware
resources as load increases or decreases, and it can achieve greater
fault tolerance by distributing the system across multiple data centers
and regions. The downsides are that it requires explicit sharding (see
Chapter 7), and it incurs all the complexity of distributed systems
([Link to Come]).

Some cloud-native database systems use separate services for storage and
transaction execution (see “Separation of storage and compute”), with
multiple compute nodes sharing access to the same storage service. This
model has some similarity to a shared-disk architecture, but it avoids
the scalability problems of older systems: instead of providing a
filesystem (NAS) or block device (SAN) abstraction, the storage service
offers a specialized API that is designed for the specific needs of the
database [77].

Principles for Scalability

The architecture of systems that operate at large scale is usually
highly specific to the application—there is no such thing as a generic,
one-size-fits-all scalable architecture (informally known as magic
scaling sauce). For example, a system that is designed to handle 100,000
requests per second, each 1 kB in size, looks very different from a
system that is designed for 3 requests per minute, each 2 GB in
size—even though the two systems have the same data throughput
(100 MB/sec).

Moreover, an architecture that is appropriate for one level of load is
unlikely to cope with 10 times that load. If you are working on a
fast-growing service, it is therefore likely that you will need to
rethink your architecture on every order of magnitude load increase. As
the needs of the application are likely to evolve, it is usually not
worth planning future scaling needs more than one order of magnitude in
advance.

A good general principle for scalability is to break a system down into
smaller components that can operate largely independently from each
other. This is the underlying principle behind microservices (see
“Microservices and Serverless”), sharding (Chapter 7), stream processing
([Link to Come]), and shared-nothing architectures. However, the
challenge is in knowing where to draw the line between things that
should be together, and things that should be apart. Design guidelines
for microservices can be found in other books [78], and we discuss
sharding of shared-nothing systems in Chapter 7.

Another good principle is not to make things more complicated than
necessary. If a single-machine database will do the job, it’s probably
preferable to a complicated distributed setup. Auto-scaling systems
(which automatically add or remove resources in response to demand) are
cool, but if your load is fairly predictable, a manually scaled system
may have fewer operational surprises (see “Operations: Automatic or
Manual Rebalancing”). A system with five services is simpler than one
with fifty. Good architectures usually involve a pragmatic mixture of
approaches.

Maintainability

Software does not wear out or suffer material fatigue, so it does not
break in the same ways as mechanical objects do. But the requirements
for an application frequently change, the environment that the software
runs in changes (such as its dependencies and the underlying platform),
and it has bugs that need fixing.

It is widely recognized that the majority of the cost of software is not
in its initial development, but in its ongoing maintenance—fixing bugs,
keeping its systems operational, investigating failures, adapting it to
new platforms, modifying it for new use cases, repaying technical debt,
and adding new features [79, 80].

However, maintenance is also difficult. If a system has been
successfully running for a long time, it may well use outdated
technologies that not many engineers understand today (such as
mainframes and COBOL code); institutional knowledge of how and why a
system was designed in a certain way may have been lost as people have
left the organization; it might be necessary to fix other people’s
mistakes. Moreover, the computer system is often intertwined with the
human organization that it supports, which means that maintenance of
such legacy systems is as much a people problem as a technical one [81].

Every system we create today will one day become a legacy system if it
is valuable enough to survive for a long time. In order to minimize the
pain for future generations who need to maintain our software, we should
design it with maintenance concerns in mind. Although we cannot always
predict which decisions might create maintenance headaches in the
future, in this book we will pay attention to several principles that
are widely applicable:

Operability

    Make it easy for the organization to keep the system running
    smoothly.

Simplicity

    Make it easy for new engineers to understand the system, by
    implementing it using well-understood, consistent patterns and
    structures, and avoiding unnecessary complexity.

Evolvability

    Make it easy for engineers to make changes to the system in the
    future, adapting it and extending it for unanticipated use cases as
    requirements change.

Operability: Making Life Easy for Operations

We previously discussed the role of operations in “Operations in the
Cloud Era”, and we saw that human processes are at least as important
for reliable operations as software tools. In fact, it has been
suggested that “good operations can often work around the limitations of
bad (or incomplete) software, but good software cannot run reliably with
bad operations” [55].

In large-scale systems consisting of many thousands of machines, manual
maintenance would be unreasonably expensive, and automation is
essential. However, automation can be a two-edged sword: there will
always be edge cases (such as rare failure scenarios) that require
manual intervention from the operations team. Since the cases that
cannot be handled automatically are the most complex issues, greater
automation requires a more skilled operations team that can resolve
those issues [82].

Moreover, if an automated system goes wrong, it is often harder to
troubleshoot than a system that relies on an operator to perform some
actions manually. For that reason, it is not the case that more
automation is always better for operability. However, some amount of
automation is important, and the sweet spot will depend on the specifics
of your particular application and organization.

Good operability means making routine tasks easy, allowing the
operations team to focus their efforts on high-value activities. Data
systems can do various things to make routine tasks easy, including
[83]:

-  Allowing monitoring tools to check the system’s key metrics, and
  supporting observability tools (see “Problems with Distributed
  Systems”) to give insights into the system’s runtime behavior. A
  variety of commercial and open source tools can help here [84].

- Avoiding dependency on individual machines (allowing machines to be
  taken down for maintenance while the system as a whole continues
  running uninterrupted)

- Providing good documentation and an easy-to-understand operational
  model (“If I do X, Y will happen”)

- Providing good default behavior, but also giving administrators the
  freedom to override defaults when needed

- Self-healing where appropriate, but also giving administrators manual
  control over the system state when needed

- Exhibiting predictable behavior, minimizing surprises

Simplicity: Managing Complexity

Small software projects can have delightfully simple and expressive
code, but as projects get larger, they often become very complex and
difficult to understand. This complexity slows down everyone who needs
to work on the system, further increasing the cost of maintenance. A
software project mired in complexity is sometimes described as a big
ball of mud [85].

When complexity makes maintenance hard, budgets and schedules are often
overrun. In complex software, there is also a greater risk of
introducing bugs when making a change: when the system is harder for
developers to understand and reason about, hidden assumptions,
unintended consequences, and unexpected interactions are more easily
overlooked [63]. Conversely, reducing complexity greatly improves the
maintainability of software, and thus simplicity should be a key goal
for the systems we build.

Simple systems are easier to understand, and therefore we should try to
solve a given problem in the simplest way possible. Unfortunately, this
is easier said than done. Whether something is simple or not is often a
subjective matter of taste, as there is no objective standard of
simplicity [86]. For example, one system may hide a complex
implementation behind a simple interface, whereas another may have a
simple implementation that exposes more internal detail to its
users—which one is simpler?

One attempt at reasoning about complexity has been to break it down into
two categories, essential and accidental complexity [87]. The idea is
that essential complexity is inherent in the problem domain of the
application, while accidental complexity arises only because of
limitations of our tooling. Unfortunately, this distinction is also
flawed, because boundaries between the essential and the accidental
shift as our tooling evolves [88].

One of the best tools we have for managing complexity is abstraction. A
good abstraction can hide a great deal of implementation detail behind a
clean, simple-to-understand façade. A good abstraction can also be used
for a wide range of different applications. Not only is this reuse more
efficient than reimplementing a similar thing multiple times, but it
also leads to higher-quality software, as quality improvements in the
abstracted component benefit all applications that use it.

For example, high-level programming languages are abstractions that hide
machine code, CPU registers, and syscalls. SQL is an abstraction that
hides complex on-disk and in-memory data structures, concurrent requests
from other clients, and inconsistencies after crashes. Of course, when
programming in a high-level language, we are still using machine code;
we are just not using it directly, because the programming language
abstraction saves us from having to think about it.

Abstractions for application code, which aim to reduce its complexity,
can be created using methodologies such as design patterns [89] and
domain-driven design (DDD) [90]. This book is not about such
application-specific abstractions, but rather about general-purpose
abstractions on top of which you can build your applications, such as
database transactions, indexes, and event logs. If you want to use
techniques such as DDD, you can implement them on top of the foundations
described in this book.

Evolvability: Making Change Easy

It’s extremely unlikely that your system’s requirements will remain
unchanged forever. They are much more likely to be in constant flux: you
learn new facts, previously unanticipated use cases emerge, business
priorities change, users request new features, new platforms replace old
platforms, legal or regulatory requirements change, growth of the system
forces architectural changes, etc.

In terms of organizational processes, Agile working patterns provide a
framework for adapting to change. The Agile community has also developed
technical tools and processes that are helpful when developing software
in a frequently changing environment, such as test-driven development
(TDD) and refactoring. In this book, we search for ways of increasing
agility at the level of a system consisting of several different
applications or services with different characteristics.

The ease with which you can modify a data system, and adapt it to
changing requirements, is closely linked to its simplicity and its
abstractions: loosely-coupled, simple systems are usually easier to
modify than tightly-coupled, complex ones. Since this is such an
important idea, we will use a different word to refer to agility on a
data system level: evolvability [91].

One major factor that makes change difficult in large systems is when
some action is irreversible, and therefore that action needs to be taken
very carefully [92]. For example, say you are migrating from one
database to another: if you cannot switch back to the old system in case
of problems with the new one, the stakes are much higher than if you can
easily go back. Minimizing irreversibility improves flexibility.

Summary

In this chapter we examined several examples of nonfunctional
requirements: performance, reliability, scalability, and
maintainability. Through these topics we have also encountered
principles and terminology that we will need throughout the rest of the
book. We started with a case study of how one might implement home
timelines in a social network, which illustrated some of the challenges
that arise at scale.

We discussed how to measure performance (e.g., using response time
percentiles), the load on a system (e.g., using throughput metrics), and
how they are used in SLAs. Scalability is a closely related concept:
that is, ensuring performance stays the same when the load grows. We saw
some general principles for scalability, such as breaking a task down
into smaller parts that can operate independently, and we will dive into
deep technical detail on scalability techniques in the following
chapters.

To achieve reliability, you can use fault tolerance techniques, which
allow a system to continue providing its service even if some component
(e.g., a disk, a machine, or another service) is faulty. We saw examples
of hardware faults that can occur, and distinguished them from software
faults, which can be harder to deal with because they are often strongly
correlated. Another aspect of achieving reliability is to build
resilience against humans making mistakes, and we saw blameless
postmortems as a technique for learning from incidents.

Finally, we examined several facets of maintainability, including
supporting the work of operations teams, managing complexity, and making
it easy to evolve an application’s functionality over time. There are no
easy answers on how to achieve these things, but one thing that can help
is to build applications using well-understood building blocks that
provide useful abstractions. The rest of this book will cover a
selection of building blocks that have proved to be valuable in
practice.

Footnotes

References

[1] Mike Cvet. How We Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Fan-In at
Twitter. At QCon San Francisco, December 2016.

[2] Raffi Krikorian. Timelines at Scale. At QCon San Francisco, November
2012. Archived at perma.cc/V9G5-KLYK

[3] Twitter. Twitter’s Recommendation Algorithm. blog.twitter.com, March
2023. Archived at perma.cc/L5GT-229T

[4] Raffi Krikorian. New Tweets per second record, and how!
blog.twitter.com, August 2013. Archived at perma.cc/6JZN-XJYN

[5] Samuel Axon. 3% of Twitter’s Servers Dedicated to Justin Bieber.
mashable.com, September 2010. Archived at perma.cc/F35N-CGVX

[6] Nathan Bronson, Abutalib Aghayev, Aleksey Charapko, and Timothy Zhu.
Metastable Failures in Distributed Systems. At Workshop on Hot Topics in
Operating Systems (HotOS), May 2021. doi:10.1145/3458336.3465286

[7] Marc Brooker. Metastability and Distributed Systems. brooker.co.za,
May 2021. Archived at perma.cc/7FGJ-7XRK

[8] Marc Brooker. Exponential Backoff And Jitter. aws.amazon.com, March
2015. Archived at perma.cc/R6MS-AZKH

[9] Marc Brooker. What is Backoff For? brooker.co.za, August 2022.
Archived at perma.cc/PW9N-55Q5

[10] Michael T. Nygard. Release It!, 2nd Edition. Pragmatic Bookshelf,
January 2018. ISBN: 9781680502398

[11] Marc Brooker. Fixing retries with token buckets and circuit
breakers. brooker.co.za, February 2022. Archived at perma.cc/MD6N-GW26

[12] David Yanacek. Using load shedding to avoid overload. Amazon
Builders’ Library, aws.amazon.com. Archived at perma.cc/9SAW-68MP

[13] Matthew Sackman. Pushing Back. wellquite.org, May 2016. Archived at
perma.cc/3KCZ-RUFY

[14] Dmitry Kopytkov and Patrick Lee. Meet Bandaid, the Dropbox service
proxy. dropbox.tech, March 2018. Archived at perma.cc/KUU6-YG4S

[15] Haryadi S. Gunawi, Riza O. Suminto, Russell Sears, Casey Golliher,
Swaminathan Sundararaman, Xing Lin, Tim Emami, Weiguang Sheng,
Nematollah Bidokhti, Caitie McCaffrey, Gary Grider, Parks M. Fields,
Kevin Harms, Robert B. Ross, Andree Jacobson, Robert Ricci, Kirk Webb,
Peter Alvaro, H. Birali Runesha, Mingzhe Hao, and Huaicheng Li.
Fail-Slow at Scale: Evidence of Hardware Performance Faults in Large
Production Systems. At 16th USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies, February 2018.

[16] Marc Brooker. Is the Mean Really Useless? brooker.co.za, December
2017. Archived at perma.cc/U5AE-CVEM

[17] Giuseppe DeCandia, Deniz Hastorun, Madan Jampani, Gunavardhan
Kakulapati, Avinash Lakshman, Alex Pilchin, Swaminathan Sivasubramanian,
Peter Vosshall, and Werner Vogels. Dynamo: Amazon’s Highly Available
Key-Value Store. At 21st ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles
(SOSP), October 2007. doi:10.1145/1294261.1294281

[18] Kathryn Whitenton. The Need for Speed, 23 Years Later. nngroup.com,
May 2020. Archived at perma.cc/C4ER-LZYA

[19] Greg Linden. Marissa Mayer at Web 2.0. glinden.blogspot.com,
November 2005. Archived at perma.cc/V7EA-3VXB

[20] Jake Brutlag. Speed Matters for Google Web Search.
services.google.com, June 2009. Archived at perma.cc/BK7R-X7M2

[21] Eric Schurman and Jake Brutlag. Performance Related Changes and
their User Impact. Talk at Velocity 2009.

[22] Akamai Technologies, Inc. The State of Online Retail Performance.
akamai.com, April 2017. Archived at perma.cc/UEK2-HYCS

[23] Xiao Bai, Ioannis Arapakis, B. Barla Cambazoglu, and Ana Freire.
Understanding and Leveraging the Impact of Response Latency on User
Behaviour in Web Search. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, volume
36, issue 2, article 21, April 2018. doi:10.1145/3106372

[24] Jeffrey Dean and Luiz André Barroso. The Tail at Scale.
Communications of the ACM, volume 56, issue 2, pages 74–80, February
2013. doi:10.1145/2408776.2408794

[25] Alex Hidalgo. Implementing Service Level Objectives: A Practical
Guide to SLIs, SLOs, and Error Budgets. O’Reilly Media, September 2020.
ISBN: 1492076813

[26] Jeffrey C. Mogul and John Wilkes. Nines are Not Enough: Meaningful
Metrics for Clouds. At 17th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems
(HotOS), May 2019. doi:10.1145/3317550.3321432

[27] Tamás Hauer, Philipp Hoffmann, John Lunney, Dan Ardelean, and Amer
Diwan. Meaningful Availability. At 17th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), February 2020.

[28] Ted Dunning. The t-digest: Efficient estimates of distributions.
Software Impacts, volume 7, article 100049, February 2021.
doi:10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100049

[29] David Kohn. How percentile approximation works (and why it’s more
useful than averages). timescale.com, September 2021. Archived at
perma.cc/3PDP-NR8B

[30] Heinrich Hartmann and Theo Schlossnagle. Circllhist — A Log-Linear
Histogram Data Structure for IT Infrastructure Monitoring. arxiv.org,
January 2020.

[31] Charles Masson, Jee E. Rim, and Homin K. Lee. DDSketch: A Fast and
Fully-Mergeable Quantile Sketch with Relative-Error Guarantees.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 12, issue 12, pages 2195–2205,
August 2019. doi:10.14778/3352063.3352135

[32] Baron Schwartz. Why Percentiles Don’t Work the Way You Think.
solarwinds.com, November 2016. Archived at perma.cc/469T-6UGB

[33] Walter L. Heimerdinger and Charles B. Weinstock. A Conceptual
Framework for System Fault Tolerance. Technical Report
CMU/SEI-92-TR-033, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon
University, October 1992. Archived at perma.cc/GD2V-DMJW

[34] Felix C. Gärtner. Fundamentals of fault-tolerant distributed
computing in asynchronous environments. ACM Computing Surveys, volume
31, issue 1, pages 1–26, March 1999. doi:10.1145/311531.311532

[35] Ding Yuan, Yu Luo, Xin Zhuang, Guilherme Renna Rodrigues, Xu Zhao,
Yongle Zhang, Pranay U. Jain, and Michael Stumm. Simple Testing Can
Prevent Most Critical Failures: An Analysis of Production Failures in
Distributed Data-Intensive Systems. At 11th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), October 2014.

[36] Casey Rosenthal and Nora Jones. Chaos Engineering. O’Reilly Media,
April 2020. ISBN: 9781492043867

[37] Eduardo Pinheiro, Wolf-Dietrich Weber, and Luiz Andre Barroso.
Failure Trends in a Large Disk Drive Population. At 5th USENIX
Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), February 2007.

[38] Bianca Schroeder and Garth A. Gibson. Disk failures in the real
world: What does an MTTF of 1,000,000 hours mean to you? At 5th USENIX
Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), February 2007.

[39] Andy Klein. Backblaze Drive Stats for Q2 2021. backblaze.com,
August 2021. Archived at perma.cc/2943-UD5E

[40] Iyswarya Narayanan, Di Wang, Myeongjae Jeon, Bikash Sharma, Laura
Caulfield, Anand Sivasubramaniam, Ben Cutler, Jie Liu, Badriddine
Khessib, and Kushagra Vaid. SSD Failures in Datacenters: What? When? and
Why? At 9th ACM International on Systems and Storage Conference
(SYSTOR), June 2016. doi:10.1145/2928275.2928278

[41] Alibaba Cloud Storage Team. Storage System Design Analysis: Factors
Affecting NVMe SSD Performance (1). alibabacloud.com, January 2019.
Archived at archive.org

[42] Bianca Schroeder, Raghav Lagisetty, and Arif Merchant. Flash
Reliability in Production: The Expected and the Unexpected. At 14th
USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), February
2016.

[43] Jacob Alter, Ji Xue, Alma Dimnaku, and Evgenia Smirni. SSD failures
in the field: symptoms, causes, and prediction models. At International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis (SC), November 2019. doi:10.1145/3295500.3356172

[44] Daniel Ford, François Labelle, Florentina I. Popovici, Murray
Stokely, Van-Anh Truong, Luiz Barroso, Carrie Grimes, and Sean Quinlan.
Availability in Globally Distributed Storage Systems. At 9th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), October
2010.

[45] Kashi Venkatesh Vishwanath and Nachiappan Nagappan. Characterizing
Cloud Computing Hardware Reliability. At 1st ACM Symposium on Cloud
Computing (SoCC), June 2010. doi:10.1145/1807128.1807161

[46] Peter H. Hochschild, Paul Turner, Jeffrey C. Mogul, Rama
Govindaraju, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, David E. Culler, and Amin
Vahdat. Cores that don’t count. At Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating
Systems (HotOS), June 2021. doi:10.1145/3458336.3465297

[47] Harish Dattatraya Dixit, Sneha Pendharkar, Matt Beadon, Chris
Mason, Tejasvi Chakravarthy, Bharath Muthiah, and Sriram Sankar. Silent
Data Corruptions at Scale. arXiv:2102.11245, February 2021.

[48] Diogo Behrens, Marco Serafini, Sergei Arnautov, Flavio P.
Junqueira, and Christof Fetzer. Scalable Error Isolation for Distributed
Systems. At 12th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI), May 2015.

[49] Bianca Schroeder, Eduardo Pinheiro, and Wolf-Dietrich Weber. DRAM
Errors in the Wild: A Large-Scale Field Study. At 11th International
Joint Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems
(SIGMETRICS), June 2009. doi:10.1145/1555349.1555372

[50] Yoongu Kim, Ross Daly, Jeremie Kim, Chris Fallin, Ji Hye Lee,
Donghyuk Lee, Chris Wilkerson, Konrad Lai, and Onur Mutlu. Flipping Bits
in Memory Without Accessing Them: An Experimental Study of DRAM
Disturbance Errors. At 41st Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (ISCA), June 2014. doi:10.5555/2665671.2665726

[51] Adrian Cockcroft. Failure Modes and Continuous Resilience.
adrianco.medium.com, November 2019. Archived at perma.cc/7SYS-BVJP

[52] Shujie Han, Patrick P. C. Lee, Fan Xu, Yi Liu, Cheng He, and
Jiongzhou Liu. An In-Depth Study of Correlated Failures in Production
SSD-Based Data Centers. At 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies (FAST), February 2021.

[53] Edmund B. Nightingale, John R. Douceur, and Vince Orgovan. Cycles,
Cells and Platters: An Empirical Analysis of Hardware Failures on a
Million Consumer PCs. At 6th European Conference on Computer Systems
(EuroSys), April 2011. doi:10.1145/1966445.1966477

[54] Haryadi S. Gunawi, Mingzhe Hao, Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa, Tiratat
Patana-anake, Thanh Do, Jeffry Adityatama, Kurnia J. Eliazar, Agung
Laksono, Jeffrey F. Lukman, Vincentius Martin, and Anang D. Satria. What
Bugs Live in the Cloud? At 5th ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC),
November 2014. doi:10.1145/2670979.2670986

[55] Jay Kreps. Getting Real About Distributed System Reliability.
blog.empathybox.com, March 2012. Archived at perma.cc/9B5Q-AEBW

[56] Nelson Minar. Leap Second Crashes Half the Internet. somebits.com,
July 2012. Archived at perma.cc/2WB8-D6EU

[57] Hewlett Packard Enterprise. Support Alerts – Customer Bulletin
a00092491en_us. support.hpe.com, November 2019. Archived at
perma.cc/S5F6-7ZAC

[58] Lorin Hochstein. awesome limits. github.com, November 2020.
Archived at perma.cc/3R5M-E5Q4

[59] Lilia Tang, Chaitanya Bhandari, Yongle Zhang, Anna Karanika,
Shuyang Ji, Indranil Gupta, and Tianyin Xu. Fail through the Cracks:
Cross-System Interaction Failures in Modern Cloud Systems. At 18th
European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys), May 2023.
doi:10.1145/3552326.3587448

[60] Mike Ulrich. Addressing Cascading Failures. In Betsy Beyer,
Jennifer Petoff, Chris Jones, and Niall Richard Murphy (ed). Site
Reliability Engineering: How Google Runs Production Systems. O’Reilly
Media, 2016. ISBN: 9781491929124

[61] Harri Faßbender. Cascading failures in large-scale distributed
systems. blog.mi.hdm-stuttgart.de, March 2022. Archived at
perma.cc/K7VY-YJRX

[62] Richard I. Cook. How Complex Systems Fail. Cognitive Technologies
Laboratory, April 2000. Archived at perma.cc/RDS6-2YVA

[63] David D Woods. STELLA: Report from the SNAFUcatchers Workshop on
Coping With Complexity. snafucatchers.github.io, March 2017. Archived at
archive.org

[64] David Oppenheimer, Archana Ganapathi, and David A. Patterson. Why
Do Internet Services Fail, and What Can Be Done About It? At 4th USENIX
Symposium on Internet Technologies and Systems (USITS), March 2003.

[65] Sidney Dekker. The Field Guide to Understanding ‘Human Error’, 3rd
Edition. CRC Press, November 2017. ISBN: 9781472439055

[66] Sidney Dekker. Drift into Failure: From Hunting Broken Components
to Understanding Complex Systems. CRC Press, 2011. ISBN: 9781315257396

[67] John Allspaw. Blameless PostMortems and a Just Culture. etsy.com,
May 2012. Archived at perma.cc/YMJ7-NTAP

[68] Itzy Sabo. Uptime Guarantees — A Pragmatic Perspective.
world.hey.com, March 2023. Archived at perma.cc/F7TU-78JB

[69] Michael Jurewitz. The Human Impact of Bugs. jury.me, March 2013.
Archived at perma.cc/5KQ4-VDYL

[70] Mark Halper. How Software Bugs led to ‘One of the Greatest
Miscarriages of Justice’ in British History. Communications of the ACM,
January 2025. doi:10.1145/3703779

[71] Nicholas Bohm, James Christie, Peter Bernard Ladkin, Bev
Littlewood, Paul Marshall, Stephen Mason, Martin Newby, Steven J.
Murdoch, Harold Thimbleby, and Martyn Thomas. The legal rule that
computers are presumed to be operating correctly – unforeseen and unjust
consequences. Briefing note, benthamsgaze.org, June 2022. Archived at
perma.cc/WQ6X-TMW4

[72] Dan McKinley. Choose Boring Technology. mcfunley.com, March 2015.
Archived at perma.cc/7QW7-J4YP

[73] Andy Warfield. Building and operating a pretty big storage system
called S3. allthingsdistributed.com, July 2023. Archived at
perma.cc/7LPK-TP7V

[74] Marc Brooker. Surprising Scalability of Multitenancy.
brooker.co.za, March 2023. Archived at perma.cc/ZZD9-VV8T

[75] Ben Stopford. Shared Nothing vs. Shared Disk Architectures: An
Independent View. benstopford.com, November 2009. Archived at
perma.cc/7BXH-EDUR

[76] Michael Stonebraker. The Case for Shared Nothing. IEEE Database
Engineering Bulletin, volume 9, issue 1, pages 4–9, March 1986.

[77] Panagiotis Antonopoulos, Alex Budovski, Cristian Diaconu, Alejandro
Hernandez Saenz, Jack Hu, Hanuma Kodavalla, Donald Kossmann, Sandeep
Lingam, Umar Farooq Minhas, Naveen Prakash, Vijendra Purohit, Hugh Qu,
Chaitanya Sreenivas Ravella, Krystyna Reisteter, Sheetal Shrotri, Dixin
Tang, and Vikram Wakade. Socrates: The New SQL Server in the Cloud. At
ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages
1743–1756, June 2019. doi:10.1145/3299869.3314047

[78] Sam Newman. Building Microservices, second edition. O’Reilly Media,
2021. ISBN: 9781492034025

[79] Nathan Ensmenger. When Good Software Goes Bad: The Surprising
Durability of an Ephemeral Technology. At The Maintainers Conference,
April 2016. Archived at perma.cc/ZXT4-HGZB

[80] Robert L. Glass. Facts and Fallacies of Software Engineering.
Addison-Wesley Professional, October 2002. ISBN: 9780321117427

[81] Marianne Bellotti. Kill It with Fire. No Starch Press, April 2021.
ISBN: 9781718501188

[82] Lisanne Bainbridge. Ironies of automation. Automatica, volume 19,
issue 6, pages 775–779, November 1983. doi:10.1016/0005-1098(83)90046-8

[83] James Hamilton. On Designing and Deploying Internet-Scale Services.
At 21st Large Installation System Administration Conference (LISA),
November 2007.

[84] Dotan Horovits. Open Source for Better Observability.
horovits.medium.com, October 2021. Archived at perma.cc/R2HD-U2ZT

[85] Brian Foote and Joseph Yoder. Big Ball of Mud. At 4th Conference on
Pattern Languages of Programs (PLoP), September 1997. Archived at
perma.cc/4GUP-2PBV

[86] Marc Brooker. What is a simple system? brooker.co.za, May 2022.
Archived at perma.cc/U72T-BFVE

[87] Frederick P Brooks. No Silver Bullet – Essence and Accident in
Software Engineering. In The Mythical Man-Month, Anniversary edition,
Addison-Wesley, 1995. ISBN: 9780201835953

[88] Dan Luu. Against essential and accidental complexity. danluu.com,
December 2020. Archived at perma.cc/H5ES-69KC

[89] Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides.
Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software.
Addison-Wesley Professional, October 1994. ISBN: 9780201633610

[90] Eric Evans. Domain-Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart
of Software. Addison-Wesley Professional, August 2003. ISBN:
9780321125217

[91] Hongyu Pei Breivold, Ivica Crnkovic, and Peter J. Eriksson.
Analyzing Software Evolvability. at 32nd Annual IEEE International
Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), July 2008.
doi:10.1109/COMPSAC.2008.50

[92] Enrico Zaninotto. From X programming to the X organisation. At XP
Conference, May 2002. Archived at perma.cc/R9AR-QCKZ

Chapter 3. Data Models and Query Languages

  The limits of my language mean the limits of my world.

  Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1922)

A Note for Early Release Readers

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
advantage of these technologies long before the official release of
these titles.

This will be the 3rd chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo for this
book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content and/or
examples in this book, or if you notice missing material within this
chapter, please reach out on GitHub.

Data models are perhaps the most important part of developing software,
because they have such a profound effect: not only on how the software
is written, but also on how we think about the problem that we are
solving.

Most applications are built by layering one data model on top of
another. For each layer, the key question is: how is it represented in
terms of the next-lower layer? For example:

1.   As an application developer, you look at the real world (in which
    there are people, organizations, goods, actions, money flows,
    sensors, etc.) and model it in terms of objects or data structures,
    and APIs that manipulate those data structures. Those structures are
    often specific to your application.

2.  When you want to store those data structures, you express them in
    terms of a general-purpose data model, such as JSON or XML
    documents, tables in a relational database, or vertices and edges in
    a graph. Those data models are the topic of this chapter.

3.  The engineers who built your database software decided on a way of
    representing that document/relational/graph data in terms of bytes
    in memory, on disk, or on a network. The representation may allow
    the data to be queried, searched, manipulated, and processed in
    various ways. We will discuss these storage engine designs in
    Chapter 4.

4.  On yet lower levels, hardware engineers have figured out how to
    represent bytes in terms of electrical currents, pulses of light,
    magnetic fields, and more.

In a complex application there may be more intermediary levels, such as
APIs built upon APIs, but the basic idea is still the same: each layer
hides the complexity of the layers below it by providing a clean data
model. These abstractions allow different groups of people—for example,
the engineers at the database vendor and the application developers
using their database—to work together effectively.

Several different data models are widely used in practice, often for
different purposes. Some types of data and some queries are easy to
express in one model, and awkward in another. In this chapter we will
explore those trade-offs by comparing the relational model, the document
model, graph-based data models, event sourcing, and dataframes. We will
also briefly look at query languages that allow you to work with these
models. This comparison will help you decide when to use which model.

Terminology: Declarative Query Languages

Many of the query languages in this chapter (such as SQL, Cypher,
SPARQL, or Datalog) are declarative, which means that you specify the
pattern of the data you want—what conditions the results must meet, and
how you want the data to be transformed (e.g., sorted, grouped, and
aggregated)—but not how to achieve that goal. The database system’s
query optimizer can decide which indexes and which join algorithms to
use, and in which order to execute various parts of the query.

In contrast, with most programming languages you would have to write an
algorithm—i.e., telling the computer which operations to perform in
which order. A declarative query language is attractive because it is
typically more concise and easier to write than an explicit algorithm.
But more importantly, it also hides implementation details of the query
engine, which makes it possible for the database system to introduce
performance improvements without requiring any changes to queries. [1].

For example, a database might be able to execute a declarative query in
parallel across multiple CPU cores and machines, without you having to
worry about how to implement that parallelism [2]. In a hand-coded
algorithm it would be a lot of work to implement such parallel execution
yourself.

Relational Model versus Document Model

The best-known data model today is probably that of SQL, based on the
relational model proposed by Edgar Codd in 1970 [3]: data is organized
into relations (called tables in SQL), where each relation is an
unordered collection of tuples (rows in SQL).

The relational model was originally a theoretical proposal, and many
people at the time doubted whether it could be implemented efficiently.
However, by the mid-1980s, relational database management systems
(RDBMS) and SQL had become the tools of choice for most people who
needed to store and query data with some kind of regular structure. Many
data management use cases are still dominated by relational data decades
later—for example, business analytics (see “Stars and Snowflakes:
Schemas for Analytics”).

Over the years, there have been many competing approaches to data
storage and querying. In the 1970s and early 1980s, the network model
and the hierarchical model were the main alternatives, but the
relational model came to dominate them. Object databases came and went
again in the late 1980s and early 1990s. XML databases appeared in the
early 2000s, but have only seen niche adoption. Each competitor to the
relational model generated a lot of hype in its time, but it never
lasted [4]. Instead, SQL has grown to incorporate other data types
besides its relational core—for example, adding support for XML, JSON,
and graph data [5].

In the 2010s, NoSQL was the latest buzzword that tried to overthrow the
dominance of relational databases. NoSQL refers not to a single
technology, but a loose set of ideas around new data models, schema
flexibility, scalability, and a move towards open source licensing
models. Some databases branded themselves as NewSQL, as they aim to
provide the scalability of NoSQL systems along with the data model and
transactional guarantees of traditional relational databases. The NoSQL
and NewSQL ideas have been very influential in the design of data
systems, but as the principles have become widely adopted, use of those
terms has faded.

One lasting effect of the NoSQL movement is the popularity of the
document model, which usually represents data as JSON. This model was
originally popularized by specialized document databases such as MongoDB
and Couchbase, although most relational databases have now also added
JSON support. Compared to relational tables, which are often seen as
having a rigid and inflexible schema, JSON documents are thought to be
more flexible.

The pros and cons of document and relational data have been debated
extensively; let’s examine some of the key points of that debate.

The Object-Relational Mismatch

Much application development today is done in object-oriented
programming languages, which leads to a common criticism of the SQL data
model: if data is stored in relational tables, an awkward translation
layer is required between the objects in the application code and the
database model of tables, rows, and columns. The disconnect between the
models is sometimes called an impedance mismatch.

Note

The term impedance mismatch is borrowed from electronics. Every electric
circuit has a certain impedance (resistance to alternating current) on
its inputs and outputs. When you connect one circuit’s output to another
one’s input, the power transfer across the connection is maximized if
the output and input impedances of the two circuits match. An impedance
mismatch can lead to signal reflections and other troubles.

Object-relational mapping (ORM)

Object-relational mapping (ORM) frameworks like ActiveRecord and
Hibernate reduce the amount of boilerplate code required for this
translation layer, but they are often criticized [6]. Some commonly
cited problems are:

- ORMs are complex and can’t completely hide the differences between the
  two models, so developers still end up having to think about both the
  relational and the object representations of the data.

- ORMs are generally only used for OLTP app development (see
  “Characterizing Transaction Processing and Analytics”); data engineers
  making the data available for analytics purposes still need to work
  with the underlying relational representation, so the design of the
  relational schema still matters when using an ORM.

- Many ORMs work only with relational OLTP databases. Organizations with
  diverse data systems such as search engines, graph databases, and
  NoSQL systems might find ORM support lacking.

-  Some ORMs generate relational schemas automatically, but these might
  be awkward for the users who are accessing the relational data
  directly, and they might be inefficient on the underlying database.
  Customizing the ORM’s schema and query generation can be complex and
  negate the benefit of using the ORM in the first place.

-  ORMs make it easy to accidentally write inefficient queries, such as
  the N+1 query problem [7]. For example, say you want to display a list
  of user comments on a page, so you perform one query that returns N
  comments, each containing the ID of its author. To show the name of
  the comment author you need to look up the ID in the users table. In
  hand-written SQL you would probably perform this join in the query and
  return the author name along with each comment, but with an ORM you
  might end up making a separate query on the users table for each of
  the N comments to look up its author, resulting in N+1 database
  queries in total, which is slower than performing the join in the
  database. To avoid this problem, you may need to tell the ORM to fetch
  the author information at the same time as fetching the comments.

Nevertheless, ORMs also have advantages:

- For data that is well suited to a relational model, some kind of
  translation between the persistent relational and the in-memory object
  representation is inevitable, and ORMs reduce the amount of
  boilerplate code required for this translation. Complicated queries
  may still need to be handled outside of the ORM, but the ORM can help
  with the simple and repetitive cases.

- Some ORMs help with caching the results of database queries, which can
  help reduce the load on the database.

- ORMs can also help with managing schema migrations and other
  administrative activities.

The document data model for one-to-many relationships

Not all data lends itself well to a relational representation; let’s
look at an example to explore a limitation of the relational model.
Figure 3-1 illustrates how a résumé (a LinkedIn profile) could be
expressed in a relational schema. The profile as a whole can be
identified by a unique identifier, user_id. Fields like first_name and
last_name appear exactly once per user, so they can be modeled as
columns on the users table.

Most people have had more than one job in their career (positions), and
people may have varying numbers of periods of education and any number
of pieces of contact information. One way of representing such
one-to-many relationships is to put positions, education, and contact
information in separate tables, with a foreign key reference to the
users table, as in Figure 3-1.

[ddia 0301]

Figure 3-1. Representing a LinkedIn profile using a relational schema.

Another way of representing the same information, which is perhaps more
natural and maps more closely to an object structure in application
code, is as a JSON document as shown in Example 3-1.

Example 3-1. Representing a LinkedIn profile as a JSON document

    {
      "user_id":     251,
      "first_name":  "Barack",
      "last_name":   "Obama",
      "headline":    "Former President of the United States of America",
      "region_id":   "us:91",
      "photo_url":   "/p/7/000/253/05b/308dd6e.jpg",
      "positions": [
        {"job_title": "President", "organization": "United States of America"},
        {"job_title": "US Senator (D-IL)", "organization": "United States Senate"}
      ],
      "education": [
        {"school_name": "Harvard University",  "start": 1988, "end": 1991},
        {"school_name": "Columbia University", "start": 1981, "end": 1983}
      ],
      "contact_info": {
        "website": "https://barackobama.com",
        "twitter": "https://twitter.com/barackobama"
      }
    }

Some developers feel that the JSON model reduces the impedance mismatch
between the application code and the storage layer. However, as we shall
see in Chapter 5, there are also problems with JSON as a data encoding
format. The lack of a schema is often cited as an advantage; we will
discuss this in “Schema flexibility in the document model”.

The JSON representation has better locality than the multi-table schema
in Figure 3-1 (see “Data locality for reads and writes”). If you want to
fetch a profile in the relational example, you need to either perform
multiple queries (query each table by user_id) or perform a messy
multi-way join between the users table and its subordinate tables [8].
In the JSON representation, all the relevant information is in one
place, making the query both faster and simpler.

The one-to-many relationships from the user profile to the user’s
positions, educational history, and contact information imply a tree
structure in the data, and the JSON representation makes this tree
structure explicit (see Figure 3-2).

[ddia 0302]

Figure 3-2. One-to-many relationships forming a tree structure.

Note

This type of relationship is sometimes called one-to-few rather than
one-to-many, since a résumé typically has a small number of positions
[9, 10]. In sitations where there may be a genuinely large number of
related items—say, comments on a celebrity’s social media post, of which
there could be many thousands—embedding them all in the same document
may be too unwieldy, so the relational approach in Figure 3-1 is
preferable.

Normalization, Denormalization, and Joins

In Example 3-1 in the preceding section, region_id is given as an ID,
not as the plain-text string "Washington, DC, United States". Why?

If the user interface has a free-text field for entering the region, it
makes sense to store it as a plain-text string. But there are advantages
to having standardized lists of geographic regions, and letting users
choose from a drop-down list or autocompleter:

- Consistent style and spelling across profiles

- Avoiding ambiguity if there are several places with the same name (if
  the string were just “Washington”, would it refer to DC or to the
  state?)

- Ease of updating—the name is stored in only one place, so it is easy
  to update across the board if it ever needs to be changed (e.g.,
  change of a city name due to political events)

- Localization support—when the site is translated into other languages,
  the standardized lists can be localized, so the region can be
  displayed in the viewer’s language

- Better search—e.g., a search for people on the US East Coast can match
  this profile, because the list of regions can encode the fact that
  Washington is located on the East Coast (which is not apparent from
  the string "Washington, DC")

Whether you store an ID or a text string is a question of normalization.
When you use an ID, your data is more normalized: the information that
is meaningful to humans (such as the text Washington, DC) is stored in
only one place, and everything that refers to it uses an ID (which only
has meaning within the database). When you store the text directly, you
are duplicating the human-meaningful information in every record that
uses it; this representation is denormalized.

The advantage of using an ID is that because it has no meaning to
humans, it never needs to change: the ID can remain the same, even if
the information it identifies changes. Anything that is meaningful to
humans may need to change sometime in the future—and if that information
is duplicated, all the redundant copies need to be updated. That
requires more code, more write operations, more disk space, and risks
inconsistencies (where some copies of the information are updated but
others aren’t).

The downside of a normalized representation is that every time you want
to display a record containing an ID, you have to do an additional
lookup to resolve the ID into something human-readable. In a relational
data model, this is done using a join, for example:

    SELECT users.*, regions.region_name
    FROM users
    JOIN regions ON users.region_id = regions.id
    WHERE users.id = 251;

Document databases can store both normalized and denormalized data, but
they are often associated with denormalization—partly because the JSON
data model makes it easy to store additional, denormalized fields, and
partly because the weak support for joins in many document databases
makes normalization inconvenient. Some document databases don’t support
joins at all, so you have to perform them in application code—that is,
you first fetch a document containing an ID, and then perform a second
query to resolve that ID into another document. In MongoDB, it is also
possible to perform a join using the $lookup operator in an aggregation
pipeline:

    db.users.aggregate([
      { $match: { _id: 251 } },
      { $lookup: {
          from: "regions",
          localField: "region_id",
          foreignField: "_id",
          as: "region"
      } }
    ])

Trade-offs of normalization

In the résumé example, while the region_id field is a reference into a
standardized set of regions, the name of the organization (the company
or government where the person worked) and school_name (where they
studied) are just strings. This representation is denormalized: many
people may have worked at the same company, but there is no ID linking
them.

Perhaps the organization and school should be entities instead, and the
profile should reference their IDs instead of their names? The same
arguments for referencing the ID of a region also apply here. For
example, say we wanted to include the logo of the school or company in
addition to their name:

- In a denormalized representation, we would include the image URL of
  the logo on every individual person’s profile; this makes the JSON
  document self-contained, but it creates a headache if we ever need to
  change the logo, because we now need to find all of the occurrences of
  the old URL and update them [9].

- In a normalized representation, we would create an entity representing
  an organization or school, and store its name, logo URL, and perhaps
  other attributes (description, news feed, etc.) once on that entity.
  Every résumé that mentions the organization would then simply
  reference its ID, and updating the logo is easy.

As a general principle, normalized data is usually faster to write
(since there is only one copy), but slower to query (since it requires
joins); denormalized data is usually faster to read (fewer joins), but
more expensive to write (more copies to update, more disk space used).
You might find it helpful to view denormalization as a form of derived
data (“Systems of Record and Derived Data”), since you need to set up a
process for updating the redundant copies of the data.

Besides the cost of performing all these updates, you also need to
consider the consistency of the database if a process crashes halfway
through making its updates. Databases that offer atomic transactions
(see [Link to Come]) make it easier to remain consistent, but not all
databases offer atomicity across multiple documents. It is also possible
to ensure consistency through stream processing, which we discuss in
[Link to Come].

Normalization tends to be better for OLTP systems, where both reads and
updates need to be fast; analytics systems often fare better with
denormalized data, since they perform updates in bulk, and the
performance of read-only queries is the dominant concern. Moreover, in
systems of small to moderate scale, a normalized data model is often
best, because you don’t have to worry about keeping multiple copies of
the data consistent with each other, and the cost of performing joins is
acceptable. However, in very large-scale systems, the cost of joins can
become problematic.

Denormalization in the social networking case study

In “Case Study: Social Network Home Timelines” we compared a normalized
representation (Figure 2-1) and a denormalized one (precomputed,
materialized timelines): here, the join between posts and follows was
too expensive, and the materialized timeline is a cache of the result of
that join. The fan-out process that inserts a new post into followers’
timelines was our way of keeping the denormalized representation
consistent.

However, the implementation of materialized timelines at X (formerly
Twitter) does not store the actual text of each post: each entry
actually only stores the post ID, the ID of the user who posted it, and
a little bit of extra information to identify reposts and replies [11].
In other words, it is a precomputed result of (approximately) the
following query:

    SELECT posts.id, posts.sender_id FROM posts
      JOIN follows ON posts.sender_id = follows.followee_id
      WHERE follows.follower_id = current_user
      ORDER BY posts.timestamp DESC
      LIMIT 1000

This means that whenever the timeline is read, the service still needs
to perform two joins: look up the post ID to fetch the actual post
content (as well as statistics such as the number of likes and replies),
and look up the sender’s profile by ID (to get their username, profile
picture, and other details). This process of looking up the
human-readable information by ID is called hydrating the IDs, and it is
essentially a join performed in application code [11].

The reason for storing only IDs in the precomputed timeline is that the
data they refer to is fast-changing: the number of likes and replies may
change multiple times per second on a popular post, and some users
regularly change their username or profile photo. Since the timeline
should show the latest like count and profile picture when it is viewed,
it would not make sense to denormalize this information into the
materialized timeline. Moreover, the storage cost would be increased
significantly by such denormalization.

This example shows that having to perform joins when reading data is
not, as sometimes claimed, an impediment to creating high-performance,
scalable services. Hydrating post ID and user ID is actually a fairly
easy operation to scale, since it parallelizes well, and the cost
doesn’t depend on the number of accounts you are following or the number
of followers you have.

If you need to decide whether to denormalize something in your
application, the social network case study shows that the choice is not
immediately obvious: the most scalable approach may involve
denormalizing some things and leaving other things normalized. You will
have to carefully consider how often the information changes, and the
cost of reads and writes (which might be dominated by outliers, such as
users with many follows/followers in the case of a typical social
network). Normalization and denormalization are not inherently good or
bad—they are just a trade-off in terms of performance of reads and
writes, as well as the amount of effort to implement.

Many-to-One and Many-to-Many Relationships

While positions and education in Figure 3-1 are examples of one-to-many
or one-to-few relationships (one résumé has several positions, but each
position belongs only to one résumé), the region_id field is an example
of a many-to-one relationship (many people live in the same region, but
we assume that each person lives in only one region at any one time).

If we introduce entities for organizations and schools, and reference
them by ID from the résumé, then we also have many-to-many relationships
(one person has worked for several organizations, and an organization
has several past or present employees). In a relational model, such a
relationship is usually represented as an associative table or join
table, as shown in Figure 3-3: each position associates one user ID with
one organization ID.

[ddia 0303]

Figure 3-3. Many-to-many relationships in the relational model.

Many-to-one and many-to-many relationships do not easily fit within one
self-contained JSON document; they lend themselves more to a normalized
representation. In a document model, one possible representation is
given in Example 3-2 and illustrated in Figure 3-4: the data within each
dotted rectangle can be grouped into one document, but the links to
organizations and schools are best represented as references to other
documents.

Example 3-2. A résumé that references organizations by ID.

    {
      "user_id":    251,
      "first_name": "Barack",
      "last_name":  "Obama",
      "positions": [
        {"start": 2009, "end": 2017, "job_title": "President",         "org_id": 513},
        {"start": 2005, "end": 2008, "job_title": "US Senator (D-IL)", "org_id": 514}
      ],
      ...
    }

[ddia 0304]

Figure 3-4. Many-to-many relationships in the document model: the data within each dotted box can be grouped into one document.

Many-to-many relationships often need to be queried in “both
directions”: for example, finding all of the organizations that a
particular person has worked for, and finding all of the people who have
worked at a particular organization. One way of enabling such queries is
to store ID references on both sides, i.e., a résumé includes the ID of
each organization where the person has worked, and the organization
document includes the IDs of the résumés that mention that organization.
This representation is denormalized, since the relationship is stored in
two places, which could become inconsistent with each other.

A normalized representation stores the relationship in only one place,
and relies on secondary indexes (which we discuss in Chapter 4) to allow
the relationship to be efficiently queried in both directions. In the
relational schema of Figure 3-3, we would tell the database to create
indexes on both the user_id and the org_id columns of the positions
table.

In the document model of Example 3-2, the database needs to index the
org_id field of objects inside the positions array. Many document
databases and relational databases with JSON support are able to create
such indexes on values inside a document.

Stars and Snowflakes: Schemas for Analytics

Data warehouses (see “Data Warehousing”) are usually relational, and
there are a few widely-used conventions for the structure of tables in a
data warehouse: a star schema, snowflake schema, dimensional modeling
[12], and one big table (OBT). These structures are optimized for the
needs of business analysts. ETL processes translate data from
operational systems into this schema.

Figure 3-5 shows an example of a star schema that might be found in the
data warehouse of a grocery retailer. At the center of the schema is a
so-called fact table (in this example, it is called fact_sales). Each
row of the fact table represents an event that occurred at a particular
time (here, each row represents a customer’s purchase of a product). If
we were analyzing website traffic rather than retail sales, each row
might represent a page view or a click by a user.

[ddia 0305]

Figure 3-5. Example of a star schema for use in a data warehouse.

Usually, facts are captured as individual events, because this allows
maximum flexibility of analysis later. However, this means that the fact
table can become extremely large. A big enterprise may have many
petabytes of transaction history in its data warehouse, mostly
represented as fact tables.

Some of the columns in the fact table are attributes, such as the price
at which the product was sold and the cost of buying it from the
supplier (allowing the profit margin to be calculated). Other columns in
the fact table are foreign key references to other tables, called
dimension tables. As each row in the fact table represents an event, the
dimensions represent the who, what, where, when, how, and why of the
event.

For example, in Figure 3-5, one of the dimensions is the product that
was sold. Each row in the dim_product table represents one type of
product that is for sale, including its stock-keeping unit (SKU),
description, brand name, category, fat content, package size, etc. Each
row in the fact_sales table uses a foreign key to indicate which product
was sold in that particular transaction. Queries often involve multiple
joins to multiple dimension tables.

Even date and time are often represented using dimension tables, because
this allows additional information about dates (such as public holidays)
to be encoded, allowing queries to differentiate between sales on
holidays and non-holidays.

Figure 3-5 is an example of a star schema. The name comes from the fact
that when the table relationships are visualized, the fact table is in
the middle, surrounded by its dimension tables; the connections to these
tables are like the rays of a star.

A variation of this template is known as the snowflake schema, where
dimensions are further broken down into subdimensions. For example,
there could be separate tables for brands and product categories, and
each row in the dim_product table could reference the brand and category
as foreign keys, rather than storing them as strings in the dim_product
table. Snowflake schemas are more normalized than star schemas, but star
schemas are often preferred because they are simpler for analysts to
work with [12].

In a typical data warehouse, tables are often quite wide: fact tables
often have over 100 columns, sometimes several hundred. Dimension tables
can also be wide, as they include all the metadata that may be relevant
for analysis—for example, the dim_store table may include details of
which services are offered at each store, whether it has an in-store
bakery, the square footage, the date when the store was first opened,
when it was last remodeled, how far it is from the nearest highway, etc.

A star or snowflake schema consists mostly of many-to-one relationships
(e.g., many sales occur for one particular product, in one particular
store), represented as the fact table having foreign keys into dimension
tables, or dimensions into sub-dimensions. In principle, other types of
relationship could exist, but they are often denormalized in order to
simplify queries. For example, if a customer buys several different
products at once, that multi-item transaction is not represented
explicitly; instead, there is a separate row in the fact table for each
product purchased, and those facts all just happen to have the same
customer ID, store ID, and timestamp.

Some data warehouse schemas take denormalization even further and leave
out the dimension tables entirely, folding the information in the
dimensions into denormalized columns on the fact table instead
(essentially, precomputing the join between the fact table and the
dimension tables). This approach is known as one big table (OBT), and
while it requires more storage space, it sometimes enables faster
queries [13].

In the context of analytics, such denormalization is unproblematic,
since the data typically represents a log of historical data that is not
going to change (except maybe for occasionally correcting an error). The
issues of data consistency and write overheads that occur with
denormalization in OLTP systems are not as pressing in analytics.

When to Use Which Model

The main arguments in favor of the document data model are schema
flexibility, better performance due to locality, and that for some
applications it is closer to the object model used by the application.
The relational model counters by providing better support for joins,
many-to-one, and many-to-many relationships. Let’s examine these
arguments in more detail.

If the data in your application has a document-like structure (i.e., a
tree of one-to-many relationships, where typically the entire tree is
loaded at once), then it’s probably a good idea to use a document model.
The relational technique of shredding—splitting a document-like
structure into multiple tables (like positions, education, and
contact_info in Figure 3-1)—can lead to cumbersome schemas and
unnecessarily complicated application code.

The document model has limitations: for example, you cannot refer
directly to a nested item within a document, but instead you need to say
something like “the second item in the list of positions for user 251”.
If you do need to reference nested items, a relational approach works
better, since you can refer to any item directly by its ID.

Some applications allow the user to choose the order of items: for
example, imagine a to-do list or issue tracker where the user can drag
and drop tasks to reorder them. The document model supports such
applications well, because the items (or their IDs) can simply be stored
in a JSON array to determine their order. In relational databases there
isn’t a standard way of representing such reorderable lists, and various
tricks are used: sorting by an integer column (requiring renumbering
when you insert into the middle), a linked list of IDs, or fractional
indexing [14, 15, 16].

Schema flexibility in the document model

Most document databases, and the JSON support in relational databases,
do not enforce any schema on the data in documents. XML support in
relational databases usually comes with optional schema validation. No
schema means that arbitrary keys and values can be added to a document,
and when reading, clients have no guarantees as to what fields the
documents may contain.

Document databases are sometimes called schemaless, but that’s
misleading, as the code that reads the data usually assumes some kind of
structure—i.e., there is an implicit schema, but it is not enforced by
the database [17]. A more accurate term is schema-on-read (the structure
of the data is implicit, and only interpreted when the data is read), in
contrast with schema-on-write (the traditional approach of relational
databases, where the schema is explicit and the database ensures all
data conforms to it when the data is written) [18].

Schema-on-read is similar to dynamic (runtime) type checking in
programming languages, whereas schema-on-write is similar to static
(compile-time) type checking. Just as the advocates of static and
dynamic type checking have big debates about their relative merits [19],
enforcement of schemas in database is a contentious topic, and in
general there’s no right or wrong answer.

The difference between the approaches is particularly noticeable in
situations where an application wants to change the format of its data.
For example, say you are currently storing each user’s full name in one
field, and you instead want to store the first name and last name
separately [20]. In a document database, you would just start writing
new documents with the new fields and have code in the application that
handles the case when old documents are read. For example:

    if (user && user.name && !user.first_name) {
        // Documents written before Dec 8, 2023 don't have first_name
        user.first_name = user.name.split(" ")[0];
    }

The downside of this approach is that every part of your application
that reads from the database now needs to deal with documents in old
formats that may have been written a long time in the past. On the other
hand, in a schema-on-write database, you would typically perform a
migration along the lines of:

    ALTER TABLE users ADD COLUMN first_name text DEFAULT NULL;
    UPDATE users SET first_name = split_part(name, ' ', 1);      -- PostgreSQL
    UPDATE users SET first_name = substring_index(name, ' ', 1);      -- MySQL

In most relational databases, adding a column with a default value is
fast and unproblematic, even on large tables. However, running the
UPDATE statement is likely to be slow on a large table, since every row
needs to be rewritten, and other schema operations (such as changing the
data type of a column) also typically require the entire table to be
copied.

Various tools exist to allow this type of schema changes to be performed
in the background without downtime [21, 22, 23, 24], but performing such
migrations on large databases remains operationally challenging.
Complicated migrations can be avoided by only adding the first_name
column with a default value of NULL (which is fast), and filling it in
at read time, like you would with a document database.

The schema-on-read approach is advantageous if the items in the
collection don’t all have the same structure for some reason (i.e., the
data is heterogeneous)—for example, because:

- There are many different types of objects, and it is not practicable
  to put each type of object in its own table.

- The structure of the data is determined by external systems over which
  you have no control and which may change at any time.

In situations like these, a schema may hurt more than it helps, and
schemaless documents can be a much more natural data model. But in cases
where all records are expected to have the same structure, schemas are a
useful mechanism for documenting and enforcing that structure. We will
discuss schemas and schema evolution in more detail in Chapter 5.

Data locality for reads and writes

A document is usually stored as a single continuous string, encoded as
JSON, XML, or a binary variant thereof (such as MongoDB’s BSON). If your
application often needs to access the entire document (for example, to
render it on a web page), there is a performance advantage to this
storage locality. If data is split across multiple tables, like in
Figure 3-1, multiple index lookups are required to retrieve it all,
which may require more disk seeks and take more time.

The locality advantage only applies if you need large parts of the
document at the same time. The database typically needs to load the
entire document, which can be wasteful if you only need to access a
small part of a large document. On updates to a document, the entire
document usually needs to be rewritten. For these reasons, it is
generally recommended that you keep documents fairly small and avoid
frequent small updates to a document.

However, the idea of storing related data together for locality is not
limited to the document model. For example, Google’s Spanner database
offers the same locality properties in a relational data model, by
allowing the schema to declare that a table’s rows should be interleaved
(nested) within a parent table [25]. Oracle allows the same, using a
feature called multi-table index cluster tables [26]. The wide-column
data model popularized by Google’s Bigtable, and used e.g. in HBase and
Accumulo, has a concept of column families, which have a similar purpose
of managing locality [27].

Query languages for documents

Another difference between a relational and a document database is the
language or API that you use to query it. Most relational databases are
queried using SQL, but document databases are more varied. Some allow
only key-value access by primary key, while others also offer secondary
indexes to query for values inside documents, and some provide rich
query languages.

XML databases are often queried using XQuery and XPath, which are
designed to allow complex queries, including joins across multiple
documents, and also format their results as XML [28]. JSON Pointer [29]
and JSONPath [30] provide an equivalent to XPath for JSON. MongoDB’s
aggregation pipeline, whose $lookup operator for joins we saw in
“Normalization, Denormalization, and Joins”, is an example of a query
language for collections of JSON documents.

Let’s look at another example to get a feel for this language—this time
an aggregation, which is especially needed for analytics. Imagine you
are a marine biologist, and you add an observation record to your
database every time you see animals in the ocean. Now you want to
generate a report saying how many sharks you have sighted per month. In
PostgreSQL you might express that query like this:

    SELECT date_trunc('month', observation_timestamp) AS observation_month, 
           sum(num_animals) AS total_animals
    FROM observations
    WHERE family = 'Sharks'
    GROUP BY observation_month;

[1]

    The date_trunc('month', timestamp) function determines the calendar
    month containing timestamp, and returns another timestamp
    representing the beginning of that month. In other words, it rounds
    a timestamp down to the nearest month.

This query first filters the observations to only show species in the
Sharks family, then groups the observations by the calendar month in
which they occurred, and finally adds up the number of animals seen in
all observations in that month. The same query can be expressed using
MongoDB’s aggregation pipeline as follows:

    db.observations.aggregate([
        { $match: { family: "Sharks" } },
        { $group: {
            _id: {
                year:  { $year:  "$observationTimestamp" },
                month: { $month: "$observationTimestamp" }
            },
            totalAnimals: { $sum: "$numAnimals" }
        } }
    ]);

The aggregation pipeline language is similar in expressiveness to a
subset of SQL, but it uses a JSON-based syntax rather than SQL’s
English-sentence-style syntax; the difference is perhaps a matter of
taste.

Convergence of document and relational databases

Document databases and relational databases started out as very
different approaches to data management, but they have grown more
similar over time [31]. Relational databases added support for JSON
types and query operators, and the ability to index properties inside
documents. Some document databases (such as MongoDB, Couchbase, and
RethinkDB) added support for joins, secondary indexes, and declarative
query languages.

This convergence of the models is good news for application developers,
because the relational model and the document model work best when you
can combine both in the same database. Many document databases need
relational-style references to other documents, and many relational
databases have sections where schema flexibility is beneficial.
Relational-document hybrids are a powerful combination.

Note

Codd’s original description of the relational model [3] actually allowed
something similar to JSON within a relational schema. He called it
nonsimple domains. The idea was that a value in a row doesn’t have to
just be a primitive datatype like a number or a string, but it could
also be a nested relation (table)—so you can have an arbitrarily nested
tree structure as a value, much like the JSON or XML support that was
added to SQL over 30 years later.

Graph-Like Data Models

We saw earlier that the type of relationships is an important
distinguishing feature between different data models. If your
application has mostly one-to-many relationships (tree-structured data)
and few other relationships between records, the document model is
appropriate.

But what if many-to-many relationships are very common in your data? The
relational model can handle simple cases of many-to-many relationships,
but as the connections within your data become more complex, it becomes
more natural to start modeling your data as a graph.

A graph consists of two kinds of objects: vertices (also known as nodes
or entities) and edges (also known as relationships or arcs). Many kinds
of data can be modeled as a graph. Typical examples include:

Social graphs

    Vertices are people, and edges indicate which people know each
    other.

The web graph

    Vertices are web pages, and edges indicate HTML links to other
    pages.

Road or rail networks

    Vertices are junctions, and edges represent the roads or railway
    lines between them.

Well-known algorithms can operate on these graphs: for example, map
navigation apps search for the shortest path between two points in a
road network, and PageRank can be used on the web graph to determine the
popularity of a web page and thus its ranking in search results [32].

Graphs can be represented in several different ways. In the adjacency
list model, each vertex stores the IDs of its neighbor vertices that are
one edge away. Alternatively, you can use an adjacency matrix, a
two-dimensional array where each row and each column corresponds to a
vertex, where the value is zero when there is no edge between the row
vertex and the column vertex, and where the value is one if there is an
edge. The adjacency list is good for graph traversals, and the matrix is
good for machine learning (see “Dataframes, Matrices, and Arrays”).

In the examples just given, all the vertices in a graph represent the
same kind of thing (people, web pages, or road junctions, respectively).
However, graphs are not limited to such homogeneous data: an equally
powerful use of graphs is to provide a consistent way of storing
completely different types of objects in a single database. For example:

- Facebook maintains a single graph with many different types of
  vertices and edges: vertices represent people, locations, events,
  checkins, and comments made by users; edges indicate which people are
  friends with each other, which checkin happened in which location, who
  commented on which post, who attended which event, and so on [33].

- Knowledge graphs are used by search engines to record facts about
  entities that often occur in search queries, such as organizations,
  people, and places [34]. This information is obtained by crawling and
  analyzing the text on websites; some websites, such as Wikidata, also
  publish graph data in a structured form.

There are several different, but related, ways of structuring and
querying data in graphs. In this section we will discuss the property
graph model (implemented by Neo4j, Memgraph, KùzuDB [35], and others
[36]) and the triple-store model (implemented by Datomic, AllegroGraph,
Blazegraph, and others). These models are fairly similar in what they
can express, and some graph databases (such as Amazon Neptune) support
both models.

We will also look at four query languages for graphs (Cypher, SPARQL,
Datalog, and GraphQL), as well as SQL support for querying graphs. Other
graph query languages exist, such as Gremlin [37], but these will give
us a representative overview.

To illustrate these different languages and models, this section uses
the graph shown in Figure 3-6 as running example. It could be taken from
a social network or a genealogical database: it shows two people, Lucy
from Idaho and Alain from Saint-Lô, France. They are married and living
in London. Each person and each location is represented as a vertex, and
the relationships between them as edges. This example will help
demonstrate some queries that are easy in graph databases, but difficult
in other models.

[ddia 0306]

Figure 3-6. Example of graph-structured data (boxes represent vertices, arrows represent edges).

Property Graphs

In the property graph (also known as labeled property graph) model, each
vertex consists of:

- A unique identifier

- A label (string) to describe what type of object this vertex
  represents

- A set of outgoing edges

- A set of incoming edges

- A collection of properties (key-value pairs)

Each edge consists of:

- A unique identifier

- The vertex at which the edge starts (the tail vertex)

- The vertex at which the edge ends (the head vertex)

- A label to describe the kind of relationship between the two vertices

- A collection of properties (key-value pairs)

You can think of a graph store as consisting of two relational tables,
one for vertices and one for edges, as shown in Example 3-3 (this schema
uses the PostgreSQL jsonb datatype to store the properties of each
vertex or edge). The head and tail vertex are stored for each edge; if
you want the set of incoming or outgoing edges for a vertex, you can
query the edges table by head_vertex or tail_vertex, respectively.

Example 3-3. Representing a property graph using a relational schema

    CREATE TABLE vertices (
        vertex_id   integer PRIMARY KEY,
        label       text,
        properties  jsonb
    );

    CREATE TABLE edges (
        edge_id     integer PRIMARY KEY,
        tail_vertex integer REFERENCES vertices (vertex_id),
        head_vertex integer REFERENCES vertices (vertex_id),
        label       text,
        properties  jsonb
    );

    CREATE INDEX edges_tails ON edges (tail_vertex);
    CREATE INDEX edges_heads ON edges (head_vertex);

Some important aspects of this model are:

1.  Any vertex can have an edge connecting it with any other vertex.
    There is no schema that restricts which kinds of things can or
    cannot be associated.

2.   Given any vertex, you can efficiently find both its incoming and
    its outgoing edges, and thus traverse the graph—i.e., follow a path
    through a chain of vertices—both forward and backward. (That’s why
    Example 3-3 has indexes on both the tail_vertex and head_vertex
    columns.)

3.  By using different labels for different kinds of vertices and
    relationships, you can store several different kinds of information
    in a single graph, while still maintaining a clean data model.

The edges table is like the many-to-many associative table/join table we
saw in “Many-to-One and Many-to-Many Relationships”, generalized to
allow many different types of relationship to be stored in the same
table. There may also be indexes on the labels and the properties,
allowing vertices or edges with certain properties to be found
efficiently.

Note

A limitation of graph models is that an edge can only associate two
vertices with each other, whereas a relational join table can represent
three-way or even higher-degree relationships by having multiple foreign
key references on a single row. Such relationships can be represented in
a graph by creating an additional vertex corresponding to each row of
the join table, and edges to/from that vertex, or by using a hypergraph.

Those features give graphs a great deal of flexibility for data
modeling, as illustrated in Figure 3-6. The figure shows a few things
that would be difficult to express in a traditional relational schema,
such as different kinds of regional structures in different countries
(France has départements and régions, whereas the US has counties and
states), quirks of history such as a country within a country (ignoring
for now the intricacies of sovereign states and nations), and varying
granularity of data (Lucy’s current residence is specified as a city,
whereas her place of birth is specified only at the level of a state).

You could imagine extending the graph to also include many other facts
about Lucy and Alain, or other people. For instance, you could use it to
indicate any food allergies they have (by introducing a vertex for each
allergen, and an edge between a person and an allergen to indicate an
allergy), and link the allergens with a set of vertices that show which
foods contain which substances. Then you could write a query to find out
what is safe for each person to eat. Graphs are good for evolvability:
as you add features to your application, a graph can easily be extended
to accommodate changes in your application’s data structures.

The Cypher Query Language

Cypher is a query language for property graphs, originally created for
the Neo4j graph database, and later developed into an open standard as
openCypher [38]. Besides Neo4j, Cypher is supported by Memgraph, KùzuDB
[35], Amazon Neptune, Apache AGE (with storage in PostgreSQL), and
others. It is named after a character in the movie The Matrix and is not
related to ciphers in cryptography [39].

Example 3-4 shows the Cypher query to insert the lefthand portion of
Figure 3-6 into a graph database. The rest of the graph can be added
similarly. Each vertex is given a symbolic name like usa or idaho. That
name is not stored in the database, but only used internally within the
query to create edges between the vertices, using an arrow notation:
(idaho) -[:WITHIN]-> (usa) creates an edge labeled WITHIN, with idaho as
the tail node and usa as the head node.

Example 3-4. A subset of the data in Figure 3-6, represented as a Cypher query

    CREATE
      (namerica :Location {name:'North America',  type:'continent'}),
      (usa      :Location {name:'United States',  type:'country'  }),
      (idaho    :Location {name:'Idaho',          type:'state'    }),
      (lucy     :Person   {name:'Lucy' }),
      (idaho) -[:WITHIN ]-> (usa)  -[:WITHIN]-> (namerica),
      (lucy)  -[:BORN_IN]-> (idaho)

When all the vertices and edges of Figure 3-6 are added to the database,
we can start asking interesting questions: for example, find the names
of all the people who emigrated from the United States to Europe. That
is, find all the vertices that have a BORN_IN edge to a location within
the US, and also a LIVING_IN edge to a location within Europe, and
return the name property of each of those vertices.

Example 3-5 shows how to express that query in Cypher. The same arrow
notation is used in a MATCH clause to find patterns in the graph:
(person) -[:BORN_IN]-> () matches any two vertices that are related by
an edge labeled BORN_IN. The tail vertex of that edge is bound to the
variable person, and the head vertex is left unnamed.

Example 3-5. Cypher query to find people who emigrated from the US to Europe

    MATCH
      (person) -[:BORN_IN]->  () -[:WITHIN*0..]-> (:Location {name:'United States'}),
      (person) -[:LIVES_IN]-> () -[:WITHIN*0..]-> (:Location {name:'Europe'})
    RETURN person.name

The query can be read as follows:

  Find any vertex (call it person) that meets both of the following
  conditions:

  1.  person has an outgoing BORN_IN edge to some vertex. From that
      vertex, you can follow a chain of outgoing WITHIN edges until
      eventually you reach a vertex of type Location, whose name
      property is equal to "United States".

  2.  That same person vertex also has an outgoing LIVES_IN edge.
      Following that edge, and then a chain of outgoing WITHIN edges,
      you eventually reach a vertex of type Location, whose name
      property is equal to "Europe".

  For each such person vertex, return the name property.

There are several possible ways of executing the query. The description
given here suggests that you start by scanning all the people in the
database, examine each person’s birthplace and residence, and return
only those people who meet the criteria.

But equivalently, you could start with the two Location vertices and
work backward. If there is an index on the name property, you can
efficiently find the two vertices representing the US and Europe. Then
you can proceed to find all locations (states, regions, cities, etc.) in
the US and Europe respectively by following all incoming WITHIN edges.
Finally, you can look for people who can be found through an incoming
BORN_IN or LIVES_IN edge at one of the location vertices.

Graph Queries in SQL

Example 3-3 suggested that graph data can be represented in a relational
database. But if we put graph data in a relational structure, can we
also query it using SQL?

The answer is yes, but with some difficulty. Every edge that you
traverse in a graph query is effectively a join with the edges table. In
a relational database, you usually know in advance which joins you need
in your query. On the other hand, in a graph query, you may need to
traverse a variable number of edges before you find the vertex you’re
looking for—that is, the number of joins is not fixed in advance.

In our example, that happens in the () -[:WITHIN*0..]-> () pattern in
the Cypher query. A person’s LIVES_IN edge may point at any kind of
location: a street, a city, a district, a region, a state, etc. A city
may be WITHIN a region, a region WITHIN a state, a state WITHIN a
country, etc. The LIVES_IN edge may point directly at the location
vertex you’re looking for, or it may be several levels away in the
location hierarchy.

In Cypher, :WITHIN*0.. expresses that fact very concisely: it means
“follow a WITHIN edge, zero or more times.” It is like the * operator in
a regular expression.

Since SQL:1999, this idea of variable-length traversal paths in a query
can be expressed using something called recursive common table
expressions (the WITH RECURSIVE syntax). Example 3-6 shows the same
query—finding the names of people who emigrated from the US to
Europe—expressed in SQL using this technique. However, the syntax is
very clumsy in comparison to Cypher.

Example 3-6. The same query as Example 3-5, written in SQL using recursive common table expressions

    WITH RECURSIVE

      -- in_usa is the set of vertex IDs of all locations within the United States
      in_usa(vertex_id) AS (
          SELECT vertex_id FROM vertices
            WHERE label = 'Location' AND properties->>'name' = 'United States' 
        UNION
          SELECT edges.tail_vertex FROM edges 
            JOIN in_usa ON edges.head_vertex = in_usa.vertex_id
            WHERE edges.label = 'within'
      ),

      -- in_europe is the set of vertex IDs of all locations within Europe
      in_europe(vertex_id) AS (
          SELECT vertex_id FROM vertices
            WHERE label = 'location' AND properties->>'name' = 'Europe' 
        UNION
          SELECT edges.tail_vertex FROM edges
            JOIN in_europe ON edges.head_vertex = in_europe.vertex_id
            WHERE edges.label = 'within'
      ),

      -- born_in_usa is the set of vertex IDs of all people born in the US
      born_in_usa(vertex_id) AS ( 
        SELECT edges.tail_vertex FROM edges
          JOIN in_usa ON edges.head_vertex = in_usa.vertex_id
          WHERE edges.label = 'born_in'
      ),

      -- lives_in_europe is the set of vertex IDs of all people living in Europe
      lives_in_europe(vertex_id) AS ( 
        SELECT edges.tail_vertex FROM edges
          JOIN in_europe ON edges.head_vertex = in_europe.vertex_id
          WHERE edges.label = 'lives_in'
      )

    SELECT vertices.properties->>'name'
    FROM vertices
    -- join to find those people who were both born in the US *and* live in Europe
    JOIN born_in_usa     ON vertices.vertex_id = born_in_usa.vertex_id 
    JOIN lives_in_europe ON vertices.vertex_id = lives_in_europe.vertex_id;

[1]

    First find the vertex whose name property has the value
    "United States", and make it the first element of the set of
    vertices in_usa.

[2]

    Follow all incoming within edges from vertices in the set in_usa,
    and add them to the same set, until all incoming within edges have
    been visited.

[3]

    Do the same starting with the vertex whose name property has the
    value "Europe", and build up the set of vertices in_europe.

[4]

    For each of the vertices in the set in_usa, follow incoming born_in
    edges to find people who were born in some place within the United
    States.

[5]

    Similarly, for each of the vertices in the set in_europe, follow
    incoming lives_in edges to find people who live in Europe.

[6]

    Finally, intersect the set of people born in the USA with the set of
    people living in Europe, by joining them.

The fact that a 4-line Cypher query requires 31 lines in SQL shows how
much of a difference the right choice of data model and query language
can make. And this is just the beginning; there are more details to
consider, e.g., around handling cycles, and choosing between
breadth-first or depth-first traversal [40]. Oracle has a different SQL
extension for recursive queries, which it calls hierarchical [41].

However, the situation may be improving: at the time of writing, there
are plans to add a graph query language called GQL to the SQL standard
[42, 43], which will provide a syntax inspired by Cypher, GSQL [44], and
PGQL [45].

Triple-Stores and SPARQL

The triple-store model is mostly equivalent to the property graph model,
using different words to describe the same ideas. It is nevertheless
worth discussing, because there are various tools and languages for
triple-stores that can be valuable additions to your toolbox for
building applications.

In a triple-store, all information is stored in the form of very simple
three-part statements: (subject, predicate, object). For example, in the
triple (Jim, likes, bananas), Jim is the subject, likes is the predicate
(verb), and bananas is the object.

The subject of a triple is equivalent to a vertex in a graph. The object
is one of two things:

1.  A value of a primitive datatype, such as a string or a number. In
    that case, the predicate and object of the triple are equivalent to
    the key and value of a property on the subject vertex. Using the
    example from Figure 3-6, (lucy, birthYear, 1989) is like a vertex
    lucy with properties {"birthYear": 1989}.

2.  Another vertex in the graph. In that case, the predicate is an edge
    in the graph, the subject is the tail vertex, and the object is the
    head vertex. For example, in (lucy, marriedTo, alain) the subject
    and object lucy and alain are both vertices, and the predicate
    marriedTo is the label of the edge that connects them.

Note

To be precise, databases that offer a triple-like data model often need
to store some additional metadata on each tuple. For example, AWS
Neptune uses quads (4-tuples) by adding a graph ID to each triple [46];
Datomic uses 5-tuples, extending each triple with a transaction ID and a
boolean to indicate deletion [47]. Since these databases retain the
basic subject-predicate-object structure explained above, this book
nevertheless calls them triple-stores.

Example 3-7 shows the same data as in Example 3-4, written as triples in
a format called Turtle, a subset of Notation3 (N3) [48].

Example 3-7. A subset of the data in Figure 3-6, represented as Turtle triples

    @prefix : <urn:example:>.
    _:lucy     a       :Person.
    _:lucy     :name   "Lucy".
    _:lucy     :bornIn _:idaho.
    _:idaho    a       :Location.
    _:idaho    :name   "Idaho".
    _:idaho    :type   "state".
    _:idaho    :within _:usa.
    _:usa      a       :Location.
    _:usa      :name   "United States".
    _:usa      :type   "country".
    _:usa      :within _:namerica.
    _:namerica a       :Location.
    _:namerica :name   "North America".
    _:namerica :type   "continent".

In this example, vertices of the graph are written as _:someName. The
name doesn’t mean anything outside of this file; it exists only because
we otherwise wouldn’t know which triples refer to the same vertex. When
the predicate represents an edge, the object is a vertex, as in
_:idaho :within _:usa. When the predicate is a property, the object is a
string literal, as in _:usa :name "United States".

It’s quite repetitive to repeat the same subject over and over again,
but fortunately you can use semicolons to say multiple things about the
same subject. This makes the Turtle format quite readable: see
Example 3-8.

Example 3-8. A more concise way of writing the data in Example 3-7

    @prefix : <urn:example:>.
    _:lucy     a :Person;   :name "Lucy";          :bornIn _:idaho.
    _:idaho    a :Location; :name "Idaho";         :type "state";   :within _:usa.
    _:usa      a :Location; :name "United States"; :type "country"; :within _:namerica.
    _:namerica a :Location; :name "North America"; :type "continent".

The Semantic Web

Some of the research and development effort on triple stores was
motivated by the Semantic Web, an early-2000s effort to facilitate
internet-wide data exchange by publishing data not only as
human-readable web pages, but also in a standardized, machine-readable
format. Although the Semantic Web as originally envisioned did not
succeed [49, 50], the legacy of the Semantic Web project lives on in a
couple of specific technologies: linked data standards such as JSON-LD
[51], ontologies used in biomedical science [52], Facebook’s Open Graph
protocol [53] (which is used for link unfurling [54]), knowledge graphs
such as Wikidata, and standardized vocabularies for structured data
maintained by schema.org.

Triple-stores are another Semantic Web technology that has found use
outside of its original use case: even if you have no interest in the
Semantic Web, triples can be a good internal data model for
applications.

The RDF data model

The Turtle language we used in Example 3-8 is actually a way of encoding
data in the Resource Description Framework (RDF) [55], a data model that
was designed for the Semantic Web. RDF data can also be encoded in other
ways, for example (more verbosely) in XML, as shown in Example 3-9.
Tools like Apache Jena can automatically convert between different RDF
encodings.

Example 3-9. The data of Example 3-8, expressed using RDF/XML syntax

    <rdf:RDF xmlns="urn:example:"
        xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#">

      <Location rdf:nodeID="idaho">
        <name>Idaho</name>
        <type>state</type>
        <within>
          <Location rdf:nodeID="usa">
            <name>United States</name>
            <type>country</type>
            <within>
              <Location rdf:nodeID="namerica">
                <name>North America</name>
                <type>continent</type>
              </Location>
            </within>
          </Location>
        </within>
      </Location>

      <Person rdf:nodeID="lucy">
        <name>Lucy</name>
        <bornIn rdf:nodeID="idaho"/>
      </Person>
    </rdf:RDF>

RDF has a few quirks due to the fact that it is designed for
internet-wide data exchange. The subject, predicate, and object of a
triple are often URIs. For example, a predicate might be an URI such as
<http://my-company.com/namespace#within> or
<http://my-company.com/namespace#lives_in>, rather than just WITHIN or
LIVES_IN. The reasoning behind this design is that you should be able to
combine your data with someone else’s data, and if they attach a
different meaning to the word within or lives_in, you won’t get a
conflict because their predicates are actually
<http://other.org/foo#within> and <http://other.org/foo#lives_in>.

The URL <http://my-company.com/namespace> doesn’t necessarily need to
resolve to anything—from RDF’s point of view, it is simply a namespace.
To avoid potential confusion with http:// URLs, the examples in this
section use non-resolvable URIs such as urn:example:within. Fortunately,
you can just specify this prefix once at the top of the file, and then
forget about it.

The SPARQL query language

SPARQL is a query language for triple-stores using the RDF data model
[56]. (It is an acronym for SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language,
pronounced “sparkle.”) It predates Cypher, and since Cypher’s pattern
matching is borrowed from SPARQL, they look quite similar.

The same query as before—finding people who have moved from the US to
Europe—is similarly concise in SPARQL as it is in Cypher (see
Example 3-10).

Example 3-10. The same query as Example 3-5, expressed in SPARQL

    PREFIX : <urn:example:>

    SELECT ?personName WHERE {
      ?person :name ?personName.
      ?person :bornIn  / :within* / :name "United States".
      ?person :livesIn / :within* / :name "Europe".
    }

The structure is very similar. The following two expressions are
equivalent (variables start with a question mark in SPARQL):

    (person) -[:BORN_IN]-> () -[:WITHIN*0..]-> (location)   # Cypher

    ?person :bornIn / :within* ?location.                   # SPARQL

Because RDF doesn’t distinguish between properties and edges but just
uses predicates for both, you can use the same syntax for matching
properties. In the following expression, the variable usa is bound to
any vertex that has a name property whose value is the string
"United States":

    (usa {name:'United States'})   # Cypher

    ?usa :name "United States".    # SPARQL

SPARQL is supported by Amazon Neptune, AllegroGraph, Blazegraph,
OpenLink Virtuoso, Apache Jena, and various other triple stores [36].

Datalog: Recursive Relational Queries

Datalog is a much older language than SPARQL or Cypher: it arose from
academic research in the 1980s [57, 58, 59]. It is less well known among
software engineers and not widely supported in mainstream databases, but
it ought to be better-known since it is a very expressive language that
is particularly powerful for complex queries. Several niche databases,
including Datomic, LogicBlox, CozoDB, and LinkedIn’s LIquid [60] use
Datalog as their query language.

Datalog is actually based on a relational data model, not a graph, but
it appears in the graph databases section of this book because recursive
queries on graphs are a particular strength of Datalog.

The contents of a Datalog database consists of facts, and each fact
corresponds to a row in a relational table. For example, say we have a
table location containing locations, and it has three columns: ID, name,
and type. The fact that the US is a country could then be written as
location(2, "United States", "country"), where 2 is the ID of the US. In
general, the statement table(val1, val2, …​) means that table contains a
row where the first column contains val1, the second column contains
val2, and so on.

Example 3-11 shows how to write the data from the left-hand side of
Figure 3-6 in Datalog. The edges of the graph (within, born_in, and
lives_in) are represented as two-column join tables. For example, Lucy
has the ID 100 and Idaho has the ID 3, so the relationship “Lucy was
born in Idaho” is represented as born_in(100, 3).

Example 3-11. A subset of the data in Figure 3-6, represented as Datalog facts

    location(1, "North America", "continent").
    location(2, "United States", "country").
    location(3, "Idaho", "state").

    within(2, 1).    /* US is in North America */
    within(3, 2).    /* Idaho is in the US     */

    person(100, "Lucy").
    born_in(100, 3). /* Lucy was born in Idaho */

Now that we have defined the data, we can write the same query as
before, as shown in Example 3-12. It looks a bit different from the
equivalent in Cypher or SPARQL, but don’t let that put you off. Datalog
is a subset of Prolog, a programming language that you might have seen
before if you’ve studied computer science.

Example 3-12. The same query as Example 3-5, expressed in Datalog

    within_recursive(LocID, PlaceName) :- location(LocID, PlaceName, _). /* Rule 1 */

    within_recursive(LocID, PlaceName) :- within(LocID, ViaID),          /* Rule 2 */
                                          within_recursive(ViaID, PlaceName).

    migrated(PName, BornIn, LivingIn)  :- person(PersonID, PName),       /* Rule 3 */
                                          born_in(PersonID, BornID),
                                          within_recursive(BornID, BornIn),
                                          lives_in(PersonID, LivingID),
                                          within_recursive(LivingID, LivingIn).

    us_to_europe(Person) :- migrated(Person, "United States", "Europe"). /* Rule 4 */
    /* us_to_europe contains the row "Lucy". */

Cypher and SPARQL jump in right away with SELECT, but Datalog takes a
small step at a time. We define rules that derive new virtual tables
from the underlying facts. These derived tables are like (virtual) SQL
views: they are not stored in the database, but you can query them in
the same way as a table containing stored facts.

In Example 3-12 we define three derived tables: within_recursive,
migrated, and us_to_europe. The name and columns of the virtual tables
are defined by what appears before the :- symbol of each rule. For
example, migrated(PName, BornIn, LivingIn) is a virtual table with three
columns: the name of a person, the name of the place where they were
born, and the name of the place where they are living.

The content of a virtual table is defined by the part of the rule after
the :- symbol, where we try to find rows that match a certain pattern in
the tables. For example, person(PersonID, PName) matches the row
person(100, "Lucy"), with the variable PersonID bound to the value 100
and the variable PName bound to the value "Lucy". A rule applies if the
system can find a match for all patterns on the righthand side of the :-
operator. When the rule applies, it’s as though the lefthand side of the
:- was added to the database (with variables replaced by the values they
matched).

One possible way of applying the rules is thus (and as illustrated in
Figure 3-7):

1.  location(1, "North America", "continent") exists in the database, so
    rule 1 applies. It generates within_recursive(1, "North America").

2.  within(2, 1) exists in the database and the previous step generated
    within_recursive(1, "North America"), so rule 2 applies. It
    generates within_recursive(2, "North America").

3.  within(3, 2) exists in the database and the previous step generated
    within_recursive(2, "North America"), so rule 2 applies. It
    generates within_recursive(3, "North America").

By repeated application of rules 1 and 2, the within_recursive virtual
table can tell us all the locations in North America (or any other
location) contained in our database.

[ddia 0307]

Figure 3-7. Determining that Idaho is in North America, using the Datalog rules from Example 3-12.

Now rule 3 can find people who were born in some location BornIn and
live in some location LivingIn. Rule 4 invokes rule 3 with
BornIn = 'United States' and LivingIn = 'Europe', and returns only the
names of the people who match the search. By querying the contents of
the virtual us_to_europe table, the Datalog system finally gets the same
answer as in the earlier Cypher and SPARQL queries.

The Datalog approach requires a different kind of thinking compared to
the other query languages discussed in this chapter. It allows complex
queries to be built up rule by rule, with one rule referring to other
rules, similarly to the way that you break down code into functions that
call each other. Just like functions can be recursive, Datalog rules can
also invoke themselves, like rule 2 in Example 3-12, which enables graph
traversals in Datalog queries.

GraphQL

GraphQL is a query language that, by design, is much more restrictive
than the other query languages we have seen in this chapter. The purpose
of GraphQL is to allow client software running on a user’s device (such
as a mobile app or a JavaScript web app frontend) to request a JSON
document with a particular structure, containing the fields necessary
for rendering its user interface. GraphQL interfaces allow developers to
rapidly change queries in client code without changing server-side APIs.

GraphQL’s flexibility comes at a cost. Organizations that adopt GraphQL
often need tooling to convert GraphQL queries into requests to internal
services, which often use REST or gRPC (see Chapter 5). Authorization,
rate limiting, and performance challenges are additional concerns [61].
GraphQL’s query language is also limited since GraphQL come from an
untrusted source. The language does not allow anything that could be
expensive to execute, since otherwise users could perform
denial-of-service attacks on a server by running lots of expensive
queries. In particular, GraphQL does not allow recursive queries (unlike
Cypher, SPARQL, SQL, or Datalog), and it does not allow arbitrary search
conditions such as “find people who were born in the US and are now
living in Europe” (unless the service owners specifically choose to
offer such search functionality).

Nevertheless, GraphQL is useful. Example 3-13 shows how you might
implement a group chat application such as Discord or Slack using
GraphQL. The query requests all the channels that the user has access
to, including the channel name and the 50 most recent messages in each
channel. For each message it requests the timestamp, the message
content, and the name and profile picture URL for the sender of the
message. Moreover, if a message is a reply to another message, the query
also requests the sender name and the content of the message it is
replying to (which might be rendered in a smaller font above the reply,
in order to provide some context).

Example 3-13. Example GraphQL query for a group chat application

    query ChatApp {
      channels {
        name
        recentMessages(latest: 50) {
          timestamp
          content
          sender {
            fullName
            imageUrl
          }
          replyTo {
            content
            sender {
              fullName
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }

Example 3-14 shows what a response to the query in Example 3-13 might
look like. The response is a JSON document that mirrors the structure of
the query: it contains exactly those attributes that were requested, no
more and no less. This approach has the advantage that the server does
not need to know which attributes the client requires in order to render
the user interface; instead, the client can simply request what it
needs. For example, this query does not request a profile picture URL
for the sender of the replyTo message, but if the user interface were
changed to add that profile picture, it would be easy for the client to
add the required imageUrl attribute to the query without changing the
server.

Example 3-14. A possible response to the query in Example 3-13

    {
      "data": {
        "channels": [
          {
            "name": "#general",
            "recentMessages": [
              {
                "timestamp": 1693143014,
                "content": "Hey! How are y'all doing?",
                "sender": {"fullName": "Aaliyah", "imageUrl": "https://..."},
                "replyTo": null
              },
              {
                "timestamp": 1693143024,
                "content": "Great! And you?",
                "sender": {"fullName": "Caleb", "imageUrl": "https://..."},
                "replyTo": {
                  "content": "Hey! How are y'all doing?",
                  "sender": {"fullName": "Aaliyah"}
                }
              },
              ...

In Example 3-14 the name and image URL of a message sender is embedded
directly in the message object. If the same user sends multiple
messages, this information is repeated on each message. In principle, it
would be possible to reduce this duplication, but GraphQL makes the
design choice to accept a larger response size in order to make it
simpler to render the user interface based on the data.

The replyTo field is similar: in Example 3-14, the second message is a
reply to the first, and the content (“Hey!…”) and sender Aaliyah are
duplicated under replyTo. It would be possible to instead return the ID
of the message being replied to, but then the client would have to make
an additional request to the server if that ID is not among the 50 most
recent messages returned. Duplicating the content makes it much simpler
to work with the data.

The server’s database can store the data in a more normalized form, and
perform the necessary joins to process a query. For example, the server
might store a message along with the user ID of the sender and the ID of
the message it is replying to; when it receives a query like the one
above, the server would then resolve those IDs to find the records they
refer to. However, the client can only ask the server to perform joins
that are explicitly offered in the GraphQL schema.

Even though the response to a GraphQL query looks similar to a response
from a document database, and even though it has “graph” in the name,
GraphQL can be implemented on top of any type of database—relational,
document, or graph.

Event Sourcing and CQRS

In all the data models we have discussed so far, the data is queried in
the same form as it is written—be it JSON documents, rows in tables, or
vertices and edges in a graph. However, in complex applications it can
sometimes be difficult to find a single data representation that is able
to satisfy all the different ways that the data needs to be queried and
presented. In such situations, it can be beneficial to write data in one
form, and then to derive from it several representations that are
optimized for different types of reads.

We previously saw this idea in “Systems of Record and Derived Data”, and
ETL (see “Data Warehousing”) is one example of such a derivation
process. Now we will take the idea further. If we are going to derive
one data representation from another anyway, we can choose different
representations that are optimized for writing and for reading,
respectively. How would you model your data if you only wanted to
optimize it for writing, and if efficient queries were of no concern?

Perhaps the simplest, fastest, and most expressive way of writing data
is an event log: every time you want to write some data, you encode it
as a self-contained string (perhaps as JSON), including a timestamp, and
then append it to a sequence of events. Events in this log are
immutable: you never change or delete them, you only ever append more
events to the log (which may supersede earlier events). An event can
contain arbitrary properties.

Figure 3-8 shows an example that could be taken from a conference
management system. A conference can be a complex business domain: not
only can individual attendees register and pay by card, but companies
can also order seats in bulk, pay by invoice, and then later assign the
seats to individual people. Some number of seats may be reserved for
speakers, sponsors, volunteer helpers, and so on. Reservations may also
be cancelled, and meanwhile, the conference organizer might change the
capacity of the event by moving it to a different room. With all of this
going on, simply calculating the number of available seats becomes a
challenging query.

[ddia 0308]

Figure 3-8. Using a log of immutable events as source of truth, and deriving materialized views from it.

In Figure 3-8, every change to the state of the conference (such as the
organizer opening registrations, or attendees making and cancelling
registrations) is first stored as an event. Whenever an event is
appended to the log, several materialized views (also known as
projections or read models) are also updated to reflect the effect of
that event. In the conference example, there might be one materialized
view that collects all information related to the status of each
booking, another that computes charts for the conference organizer’s
dashboard, and a third that generates files for the printer that
produces the attendees’ badges.

The idea of using events as the source of truth, and expressing every
state change as an event, is known as event sourcing [62, 63]. The
principle of maintaining separate read-optimized representations and
deriving them from the write-optimized representation is called command
query responsibility segregation (CQRS) [64]. These terms originated in
the domain-driven design (DDD) community, although similar ideas have
been around for a long time, for example in state machine replication
(see [Link to Come]).

When a request from a user comes in, it is called a command, and it
first needs to be validated. Only once the command has been executed and
it has been determined to be valid (e.g., there were enough available
seats for a requested reservation), it becomes a fact, and the
corresponding event is added to the log. Consequently, the event log
should contain only valid events, and a consumer of the event log that
builds a materialized view is not allowed to reject an event.

When modelling your data in an event sourcing style, it is recommended
that you name your events in the past tense (e.g., “the seats were
booked”), because an event is a record of the fact that something has
happened in the past. Even if the user later decides to change or
cancel, the fact remains true that they formerly held a booking, and the
change or cancellation is a separate event that is added later.

A similarity between event sourcing and a star schema fact table, as
discussed in “Stars and Snowflakes: Schemas for Analytics”, is that both
are collections of events that happened in the past. However, rows in a
fact table all have the same set of columns, wheras in event sourcing
there may be many different event types, each with different properties.
Moreover, a fact table is an unordered collection, while in event
sourcing the order of events is important: if a booking is first made
and then cancelled, processing those events in the wrong order would not
make sense.

Event sourcing and CQRS have several advantages:

- For the people developing the system, events better communicate the
  intent of why something happened. For example, it’s easier to
  understand the event “the booking was cancelled” than “the active
  column on row 4001 of the bookings table was set to false, three rows
  associated with that booking were deleted from the seat_assignments
  table, and a row representing the refund was inserted into the
  payments table”. Those row modifications may still happen when a
  materialized view processes the cancellation event, but when they are
  driven by an event, the reason for the updates becomes much clearer.

- A key principle of event sourcing is that the materialized views are
  derived from the event log in a reproducible way: you should always be
  able to delete the materialized views and recompute them by processing
  the same events in the same order, using the same code. If there was a
  bug in the view maintenance code, you can just delete the view and
  recompute it with the new code. It’s also easier to find the bug
  because you can re-run the view maintenance code as often as you like
  and inspect its behavior.

-  You can have multiple materialized views that are optimized for the
  particular queries that your application requires. They can be stored
  either in the same database as the events or a different one,
  depending on your needs. They can use any data model, and they can be
  denormalized for fast reads. You can even keep a view only in memory
  and avoid persisting it, as long as it’s okay to recompute the view
  from the event log whenever the service restarts.

-  If you decide you want to present the existing information in a new
  way, it is easy to build a new materialized view from the existing
  event log. You can also evolve the system to support new features by
  adding new types of events, or new properties to existing event types
  (any older events remain unmodified). You can also chain new behaviors
  off existing events (for example, when a conference attendee cancels,
  their seat could be offered to the next person on the waiting list).

- If an event was written in error you can delete it again, and then you
  can rebuild the views without the deleted event. On the other hand, in
  a database where you update and delete data directly, a committed
  transaction is often difficult to reverse. Event sourcing can
  therefore reduce the number of irreversible actions in the system,
  making it easier to change (see “Evolvability: Making Change Easy”).

- The event log can also serve as an audit log of everything that
  happened in the system, which is valuable in regulated industries that
  require such auditability.

However, event sourcing and CQRS also have downsides:

-  You need to be careful if external information is involved. For
  example, say an event contains a price given in one currency, and for
  one of the views it needs to be converted into another currency. Since
  the exchange rate may fluctuate, it would be problematic to fetch the
  exchange rate from an external source when processing the event, since
  you would get a different result if you recompute the materialized
  view on another date. To make the event processing logic
  deterministic, you either need to include the exchange rate in the
  event itself, or have a way of querying the historical exchange rate
  at the timestamp indicated in the event, ensuring that this query
  always returns the same result for the same timestamp.

- The requirement that events are immutable creates problems if events
  contain personal data from users, since users may exercise their right
  (e.g., under the GDPR) to request deletion of their data. If the event
  log is on a per-user basis, you can just delete the whole log for that
  user, but that doesn’t work if your event log contains events relating
  to multiple users. You can try storing the personal data outside of
  the actual event, or encrypting it with a key that you can later
  choose to delete, but that also makes it harder to recompute derived
  state when needed.

- Reprocessing events requires care if there are externally visible
  side-effects—for example, you probably don’t want to resend
  confirmation emails every time you rebuild a materialized view.

You can implement event sourcing on top of any database, but there are
also some systems that are specifically designed to support this
pattern, such as EventStoreDB, MartenDB (based on PostgreSQL), and Axon
Framework. You can also use message brokers such as Apache Kafka to
store the event log, and stream processors can keep the materialized
views up-to-date; we will return to these topics in [Link to Come].

The only important requirement is that the event storage system must
guarantee that all materialized views process the events in exactly the
same order as they appear in the log; as we shall see in [Link to Come],
this is not always easy to achieve in a distributed system.

Dataframes, Matrices, and Arrays

The data models we have seen so far in this chapter are generally used
for both transaction processing and analytics purposes (see “Analytical
versus Operational Systems”). There are also some data models that you
are likely to encounter in an analytical or scientific context, but that
rarely feature in OLTP systems: dataframes and multidimensional arrays
of numbers such as matrices.

Dataframes are a data model supported by the R language, the Pandas
library for Python, Apache Spark, ArcticDB, Dask, and other systems.
They are a popular tool for data scientists preparing data for training
machine learning models, but they are also widely used for data
exploration, statistical data analysis, data visualization, and similar
purposes.

At first glance, a dataframe is similar to a table in a relational
database or a spreadsheet. It supports relational-like operators that
perform bulk operations on the contents of the dataframe: for example,
applying a function to all of the rows, filtering the rows based on some
condition, grouping rows by some columns and aggregating other columns,
and joining the rows in one dataframe with another dataframe based on
some key (what a relational database calls join is typically called
merge on dataframes).

Instead of a declarative query such as SQL, a dataframe is typically
manipulated through a series of commands that modify its structure and
content. This matches the typical workflow of data scientists, who
incrementally “wrangle” the data into a form that allows them to find
answers to the questions they are asking. These manipulations usually
take place on the data scientist’s private copy of the dataset, often on
their local machine, although the end result may be shared with other
users.

Dataframe APIs also offer a wide variety of operations that go far
beyond what relational databases offer, and the data model is often used
in ways that are very different from typical relational data modelling
[65]. For example, a common use of dataframes is to transform data from
a relational-like representation into a matrix or multidimensional array
representation, which is the form that many machine learning algorithms
expect of their input.

A simple example of such a transformation is shown in Figure 3-9. On the
left we have a relational table of how different users have rated
various movies (on a scale of 1 to 5), and on the right the data has
been transformed into a matrix where each column is a movie and each row
is a user (similarly to a pivot table in a spreadsheet). The matrix is
sparse, which means there is no data for many user-movie combinations,
but this is fine. This matrix may have many thousands of columns and
would therefore not fit well in a relational database, but dataframes
and libraries that offer sparse arrays (such as NumPy for Python) can
handle such data easily.

[ddia 0309]

Figure 3-9. Transforming a relational database of movie ratings into a matrix representation.

A matrix can only contain numbers, and various techniques are used to
transform non-numerical data into numbers in the matrix. For example:

- Dates (which are omitted from the example matrix in Figure 3-9) could
  be scaled to be floating-point numbers within some suitable range.

-  For columns that can only take one of a small, fixed set of values
  (for example, the genre of a movie in a database of movies), a one-hot
  encoding is often used: we create a column for each possible value
  (one for “comedy”, one for “drama”, one for “horror”, etc.), and for
  each row representing a movie, we put a 1 in the column corresponding
  to the genre of that movie, and a 0 in all the other columns. This
  representation also easily generalizes to movies that fit within
  several genres.

Once the data is in the form of a matrix of numbers, it is amenable to
linear algebra operations, which form the basis of many machine learning
algorithms. For example, the data in Figure 3-9 could be a part of a
system for recommending movies that the user may like. Dataframes are
flexible enough to allow data to be gradually evolved from a relational
form into a matrix representation, while giving the data scientist
control over the representation that is most suitable for achieving the
goals of the data analysis or model training process.

There are also databases such as TileDB [66] that specialize in storing
large multidimensional arrays of numbers; they are called array
databases and are most commonly used for scientific datasets such as
geospatial measurements (raster data on a regularly spaced grid),
medical imaging, or observations from astronomical telescopes [67].
Dataframes are also used in the financial industry for representing time
series data, such as the prices of assets and trades over time [68].

Summary

Data models are a huge subject, and in this chapter we have taken a
quick look at a broad variety of different models. We didn’t have space
to go into all the details of each model, but hopefully the overview has
been enough to whet your appetite to find out more about the model that
best fits your application’s requirements.

The relational model, despite being more than half a century old,
remains an important data model for many applications—especially in data
warehousing and business analytics, where relational star or snowflake
schemas and SQL queries are ubiquitous. However, several alternatives to
relational data have also become popular in other domains:

- The document model targets use cases where data comes in
  self-contained JSON documents, and where relationships between one
  document and another are rare.

- Graph data models go in the opposite direction, targeting use cases
  where anything is potentially related to everything, and where queries
  potentially need to traverse multiple hops to find the data of
  interest (which can be expressed using recursive queries in Cypher,
  SPARQL, or Datalog).

- Dataframes generalize relational data to large numbers of columns, and
  thereby provide a bridge between databases and the multidimensional
  arrays that form the basis of much machine learning, statistical data
  analysis, and scientific computing.

To some degree, one model can be emulated in terms of another model—for
example, graph data can be represented in a relational database—but the
result can be awkward, as we saw with the support for recursive queries
in SQL.

Various specialist databases have therefore been developed for each data
model, providing query languages and storage engines that are optimized
for a particular model. However, there is also a trend for databases to
expand into neighboring niches by adding support for other data models:
for example, relational databases have added support for document data
in the form of JSON columns, document databases have added
relational-like joins, and support for graph data within SQL is
gradually improving.

Another model we discussed is event sourcing, which represents data as
an append-only log of immutable events, and which can be advantageous
for modeling activities in complex business domains. An append-only log
is good for writing data (as we shall see in Chapter 4); in order to
support efficient queries, the event log is translated into
read-optimized materialized views through CQRS.

One thing that non-relational data models have in common is that they
typically don’t enforce a schema for the data they store, which can make
it easier to adapt applications to changing requirements. However, your
application most likely still assumes that data has a certain structure;
it’s just a question of whether the schema is explicit (enforced on
write) or implicit (assumed on read).

Although we have covered a lot of ground, there are still data models
left unmentioned. To give just a few brief examples:

-  Researchers working with genome data often need to perform
  sequence-similarity searches, which means taking one very long string
  (representing a DNA molecule) and matching it against a large database
  of strings that are similar, but not identical. None of the databases
  described here can handle this kind of usage, which is why researchers
  have written specialized genome database software like GenBank [69].

-  Many financial systems use ledgers with double-entry accounting as
  their data model. This type of data can be represented in relational
  databases, but there are also databases such as TigerBeetle that
  specialize in this data model. Cryptocurrencies and blockchains are
  typically based on distributed ledgers, which also have value transfer
  built into their data model.

- Full-text search is arguably a kind of data model that is frequently
  used alongside databases. Information retrieval is a large specialist
  subject that we won’t cover in great detail in this book, but we’ll
  touch on search indexes and vector search in “Full-Text Search”.

We have to leave it there for now. In the next chapter we will discuss
some of the trade-offs that come into play when implementing the data
models described in this chapter.

Footnotes

References

[1] Jamie Brandon. Unexplanations: query optimization works because sql
is declarative. scattered-thoughts.net, February 2024. Archived at
perma.cc/P6W2-WMFZ

[2] Joseph M. Hellerstein. The Declarative Imperative: Experiences and
Conjectures in Distributed Logic. Tech report UCB/EECS-2010-90,
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California
at Berkeley, June 2010. Archived at perma.cc/K56R-VVQM

[3] Edgar F. Codd. A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data
Banks. Communications of the ACM, volume 13, issue 6, pages 377–387,
June 1970. doi:10.1145/362384.362685

[4] Michael Stonebraker and Joseph M. Hellerstein. What Goes Around
Comes Around. In Readings in Database Systems, 4th edition, MIT Press,
pages 2–41, 2005. ISBN: 9780262693141

[5] Markus Winand. Modern SQL: Beyond Relational. modern-sql.com, 2015.
Archived at perma.cc/D63V-WAPN

[6] Martin Fowler. OrmHate. martinfowler.com, May 2012. Archived at
perma.cc/VCM8-PKNG

[7] Vlad Mihalcea. N+1 query problem with JPA and Hibernate.
vladmihalcea.com, January 2023. Archived at perma.cc/79EV-TZKB

[8] Jens Schauder. This is the Beginning of the End of the N+1 Problem:
Introducing Single Query Loading. spring.io, August 2023. Archived at
perma.cc/6V96-R333

[9] William Zola. 6 Rules of Thumb for MongoDB Schema Design.
mongodb.com, June 2014. Archived at perma.cc/T2BZ-PPJB

[10] Sidney Andrews and Christopher McClister. Data modeling in Azure
Cosmos DB. learn.microsoft.com, February 2023. Archived at archive.org

[11] Raffi Krikorian. Timelines at Scale. At QCon San Francisco,
November 2012. Archived at perma.cc/V9G5-KLYK

[12] Ralph Kimball and Margy Ross. The Data Warehouse Toolkit: The
Definitive Guide to Dimensional Modeling, 3rd edition. John Wiley &
Sons, July 2013. ISBN: 9781118530801

[13] Michael Kaminsky. Data warehouse modeling: Star schema vs. OBT.
fivetran.com, August 2022. Archived at perma.cc/2PZK-BFFP

[14] Joe Nelson. User-defined Order in SQL. begriffs.com, March 2018.
Archived at perma.cc/GS3W-F7AD

[15] Evan Wallace. Realtime Editing of Ordered Sequences. figma.com,
March 2017. Archived at perma.cc/K6ER-CQZW

[16] David Greenspan. Implementing Fractional Indexing.
observablehq.com, October 2020. Archived at perma.cc/5N4R-MREN

[17] Martin Fowler. Schemaless Data Structures. martinfowler.com,
January 2013.

[18] Amr Awadallah. Schema-on-Read vs. Schema-on-Write. At Berkeley EECS
RAD Lab Retreat, Santa Cruz, CA, May 2009. Archived at
perma.cc/DTB2-JCFR

[19] Martin Odersky. The Trouble with Types. At Strange Loop, September
2013. Archived at perma.cc/85QE-PVEP

[20] Conrad Irwin. MongoDB—Confessions of a PostgreSQL Lover. At
HTML5DevConf, October 2013. Archived at perma.cc/C2J6-3AL5

[21] Percona Toolkit Documentation: pt-online-schema-change.
docs.percona.com, 2023. Archived at perma.cc/9K8R-E5UH

[22] Shlomi Noach. gh-ost: GitHub’s Online Schema Migration Tool for
MySQL. github.blog, August 2016. Archived at perma.cc/7XAG-XB72

[23] Shayon Mukherjee. pg-osc: Zero downtime schema changes in
PostgreSQL. shayon.dev, February 2022. Archived at perma.cc/35WN-7WMY

[24] Carlos Pérez-Aradros Herce. Introducing pgroll: zero-downtime,
reversible, schema migrations for Postgres. xata.io, October 2023.
Archived at archive.org

[25] James C. Corbett, Jeffrey Dean, Michael Epstein, Andrew Fikes,
Christopher Frost, JJ Furman, Sanjay Ghemawat, Andrey Gubarev,
Christopher Heiser, Peter Hochschild, Wilson Hsieh, Sebastian Kanthak,
Eugene Kogan, Hongyi Li, Alexander Lloyd, Sergey Melnik, David Mwaura,
David Nagle, Sean Quinlan, Rajesh Rao, Lindsay Rolig, Dale Woodford,
Yasushi Saito, Christopher Taylor, Michal Szymaniak, and Ruth Wang.
Spanner: Google’s Globally-Distributed Database. At 10th USENIX
Symposium on Operating System Design and Implementation (OSDI), October
2012.

[26] Donald K. Burleson. Reduce I/O with Oracle Cluster Tables.
dba-oracle.com. Archived at perma.cc/7LBJ-9X2C

[27] Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, Wilson C. Hsieh, Deborah
A. Wallach, Mike Burrows, Tushar Chandra, Andrew Fikes, and Robert E.
Gruber. Bigtable: A Distributed Storage System for Structured Data. At
7th USENIX Symposium on Operating System Design and Implementation
(OSDI), November 2006.

[28] Priscilla Walmsley. XQuery, 2nd Edition. O’Reilly Media, December
2015. ISBN: 9781491915080

[29] Paul C. Bryan, Kris Zyp, and Mark Nottingham. JavaScript Object
Notation (JSON) Pointer. RFC 6901, IETF, April 2013.

[30] Stefan Gössner, Glyn Normington, and Carsten Bormann. JSONPath:
Query Expressions for JSON. RFC 9535, IETF, February 2024.

[31] Michael Stonebraker and Andrew Pavlo. What Goes Around Comes
Around… And Around…. ACM SIGMOD Record, volume 53, issue 2, pages 21–37.
doi:10.1145/3685980.3685984

[32] Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and Terry Winograd. The
PageRank Citation Ranking: Bringing Order to the Web. Technical Report
1999-66, Stanford University InfoLab, November 1999. Archived at
perma.cc/UML9-UZHW

[33] Nathan Bronson, Zach Amsden, George Cabrera, Prasad Chakka, Peter
Dimov, Hui Ding, Jack Ferris, Anthony Giardullo, Sachin Kulkarni, Harry
Li, Mark Marchukov, Dmitri Petrov, Lovro Puzar, Yee Jiun Song, and
Venkat Venkataramani. TAO: Facebook’s Distributed Data Store for the
Social Graph. At USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC), June 2013.

[34] Natasha Noy, Yuqing Gao, Anshu Jain, Anant Narayanan, Alan
Patterson, and Jamie Taylor. Industry-Scale Knowledge Graphs: Lessons
and Challenges. Communications of the ACM, volume 62, issue 8, pages
36–43, August 2019. doi:10.1145/3331166

[35] Xiyang Feng, Guodong Jin, Ziyi Chen, Chang Liu, and Semih
Salihoğlu. KÙZU Graph Database Management System. At 3th Annual
Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR 2023), January
2023.

[36] Maciej Besta, Emanuel Peter, Robert Gerstenberger, Marc Fischer,
Michał Podstawski, Claude Barthels, Gustavo Alonso, Torsten Hoefler.
Demystifying Graph Databases: Analysis and Taxonomy of Data
Organization, System Designs, and Graph Queries. arxiv.org, October
2019.

[37] Apache TinkerPop 3.6.3 Documentation. tinkerpop.apache.org, May
2023. Archived at perma.cc/KM7W-7PAT

[38] Nadime Francis, Alastair Green, Paolo Guagliardo, Leonid Libkin,
Tobias Lindaaker, Victor Marsault, Stefan Plantikow, Mats Rydberg, Petra
Selmer, and Andrés Taylor. Cypher: An Evolving Query Language for
Property Graphs. At International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD), pages 1433–1445, May 2018. doi:10.1145/3183713.3190657

[39] Emil Eifrem. Twitter correspondence, January 2014. Archived at
perma.cc/WM4S-BW64

[40] Francesco Tisiot. Explore the new SEARCH and CYCLE features in
PostgreSQL® 14. aiven.io, December 2021. Archived at perma.cc/J6BT-83UZ

[41] Gaurav Goel. Understanding Hierarchies in Oracle.
towardsdatascience.com, May 2020. Archived at perma.cc/5ZLR-Q7EW

[42] Alin Deutsch, Nadime Francis, Alastair Green, Keith Hare, Bei Li,
Leonid Libkin, Tobias Lindaaker, Victor Marsault, Wim Martens, Jan
Michels, Filip Murlak, Stefan Plantikow, Petra Selmer, Oskar van Rest,
Hannes Voigt, Domagoj Vrgoč, Mingxi Wu, and Fred Zemke. Graph Pattern
Matching in GQL and SQL/PGQ. At International Conference on Management
of Data (SIGMOD), pages 2246–2258, June 2022.
doi:10.1145/3514221.3526057

[43] Alastair Green. SQL... and now GQL. opencypher.org, September 2019.
Archived at perma.cc/AFB2-3SY7

[44] Alin Deutsch, Yu Xu, and Mingxi Wu. Seamless Syntactic and Semantic
Integration of Query Primitives over Relational and Graph Data in GSQL.
tigergraph.com, November 2018. Archived at perma.cc/JG7J-Y35X

[45] Oskar van Rest, Sungpack Hong, Jinha Kim, Xuming Meng, and Hassan
Chafi. PGQL: a property graph query language. At 4th International
Workshop on Graph Data Management Experiences and Systems (GRADES), June
2016. doi:10.1145/2960414.2960421

[46] Amazon Web Services. Neptune Graph Data Model. Amazon Neptune User
Guide, docs.aws.amazon.com. Archived at perma.cc/CX3T-EZU9

[47] Cognitect. Datomic Data Model. Datomic Cloud Documentation,
docs.datomic.com. Archived at perma.cc/LGM9-LEUT

[48] David Beckett and Tim Berners-Lee. Turtle – Terse RDF Triple
Language. W3C Team Submission, March 2011.

[49] Sinclair Target. Whatever Happened to the Semantic Web?
twobithistory.org, May 2018. Archived at perma.cc/M8GL-9KHS

[50] Gavin Mendel-Gleason. The Semantic Web is Dead – Long Live the
Semantic Web! terminusdb.com, August 2022. Archived at
perma.cc/G2MZ-DSS3

[51] Manu Sporny. JSON-LD and Why I Hate the Semantic Web.
manu.sporny.org, January 2014. Archived at perma.cc/7PT4-PJKF

[52] University of Michigan Library. Biomedical Ontologies and
Controlled Vocabularies, guides.lib.umich.edu/ontology. Archived at
perma.cc/Q5GA-F2N8

[53] Facebook. The Open Graph protocol, ogp.me. Archived at
perma.cc/C49A-GUSY

[54] Matt Haughey. Everything you ever wanted to know about unfurling
but were afraid to ask /or/ How to make your site previews look amazing
in Slack. medium.com, November 2015. Archived at perma.cc/C7S8-4PZN

[55] W3C RDF Working Group. Resource Description Framework (RDF).
w3.org, February 2004.

[56] Steve Harris, Andy Seaborne, and Eric Prud’hommeaux. SPARQL 1.1
Query Language. W3C Recommendation, March 2013.

[57] Todd J. Green, Shan Shan Huang, Boon Thau Loo, and Wenchao Zhou.
Datalog and Recursive Query Processing. Foundations and Trends in
Databases, volume 5, issue 2, pages 105–195, November 2013.
doi:10.1561/1900000017

[58] Stefano Ceri, Georg Gottlob, and Letizia Tanca. What You Always
Wanted to Know About Datalog (And Never Dared to Ask). IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, volume 1, issue 1, pages 146–166,
March 1989. doi:10.1109/69.43410

[59] Serge Abiteboul, Richard Hull, and Victor Vianu. Foundations of
Databases. Addison-Wesley, 1995. ISBN: 9780201537710, available online
at webdam.inria.fr/Alice

[60] Scott Meyer, Andrew Carter, and Andrew Rodriguez. LIquid: The soul
of a new graph database, Part 2. engineering.linkedin.com, September
2020. Archived at perma.cc/K9M4-PD6Q

[61] Matt Bessey. Why, after 6 years, I’m over GraphQL. bessey.dev, May
2024. Archived at perma.cc/2PAU-JYRA

[62] Dominic Betts, Julián Domínguez, Grigori Melnik, Fernando
Simonazzi, and Mani Subramanian. Exploring CQRS and Event Sourcing.
Microsoft Patterns & Practices, July 2012. ISBN: 1621140164, archived at
perma.cc/7A39-3NM8

[63] Greg Young. CQRS and Event Sourcing. At Code on the Beach, August
2014.

[64] Greg Young. CQRS Documents. cqrs.wordpress.com, November 2010.
Archived at perma.cc/X5R6-R47F

[65] Devin Petersohn, Stephen Macke, Doris Xin, William Ma, Doris Lee,
Xiangxi Mo, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Joseph M. Hellerstein, Anthony D.
Joseph, and Aditya Parameswaran. Towards Scalable Dataframe Systems.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 13, issue 11, pages 2033–2046.
doi:10.14778/3407790.3407807

[66] Stavros Papadopoulos, Kushal Datta, Samuel Madden, and Timothy
Mattson. The TileDB Array Data Storage Manager. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment, volume 10, issue 4, pages 349–360, November 2016.
doi:10.14778/3025111.3025117

[67] Florin Rusu. Multidimensional Array Data Management. Foundations
and Trends in Databases, volume 12, numbers 2–3, pages 69–220, February
2023. doi:10.1561/1900000069

[68] Ed Targett. Bloomberg, Man Group team up to develop open source
“ArcticDB” database. thestack.technology, March 2023. Archived at
perma.cc/M5YD-QQYV

[69] Dennis A. Benson, Ilene Karsch-Mizrachi, David J. Lipman, James
Ostell, and David L. Wheeler. GenBank. Nucleic Acids Research, volume
36, database issue, pages D25–D30, December 2007. doi:10.1093/nar/gkm929

Chapter 4. Storage and Retrieval

  One of the miseries of life is that everybody names things a little
  bit wrong. And so it makes everything a little harder to understand in
  the world than it would be if it were named differently. A computer
  does not primarily compute in the sense of doing arithmetic. […] They
  primarily are filing systems.

  Richard Feynman, Idiosyncratic Thinking seminar (1985)

A Note for Early Release Readers

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
advantage of these technologies long before the official release of
these titles.

This will be the 4th chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo for this
book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content and/or
examples in this book, or if you notice missing material within this
chapter, please reach out on GitHub.

On the most fundamental level, a database needs to do two things: when
you give it some data, it should store the data, and when you ask it
again later, it should give the data back to you.

In Chapter 3 we discussed data models and query languages—i.e., the
format in which you give the database your data, and the interface
through which you can ask for it again later. In this chapter we discuss
the same from the database’s point of view: how the database can store
the data that you give it, and how it can find the data again when you
ask for it.

Why should you, as an application developer, care how the database
handles storage and retrieval internally? You’re probably not going to
implement your own storage engine from scratch, but you do need to
select a storage engine that is appropriate for your application, from
the many that are available. In order to configure a storage engine to
perform well on your kind of workload, you need to have a rough idea of
what the storage engine is doing under the hood.

In particular, there is a big difference between storage engines that
are optimized for transactional workloads (OLTP) and those that are
optimized for analytics (we introduced this distinction in “Analytical
versus Operational Systems”). This chapter starts by examining two
families of storage engines for OLTP: log-structured storage engines
that write out immutable data files, and storage engines such as B-trees
that update data in-place. These structures are used for both key-value
storage as well as secondary indexes.

Later in “Data Storage for Analytics” we’ll discuss a family of storage
engines that is optimized for analytics, and in “Multidimensional and
Full-Text Indexes” we’ll briefly look at indexes for more advanced
queries, such as text retrieval.

Storage and Indexing for OLTP

Consider the world’s simplest database, implemented as two Bash
functions:

    #!/bin/bash

    db_set () {
        echo "$1,$2" >> database
    }

    db_get () {
        grep "^$1," database | sed -e "s/^$1,//" | tail -n 1
    }

These two functions implement a key-value store. You can call
db_set key value, which will store key and value in the database. The
key and value can be (almost) anything you like—for example, the value
could be a JSON document. You can then call db_get key, which looks up
the most recent value associated with that particular key and returns
it.

And it works:


    $ db_set 12 '{"name":"London","attractions":["Big Ben","London Eye"]}'

    $ db_set 42 '{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Golden Gate Bridge"]}'

    $ db_get 42
    {"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Golden Gate Bridge"]}

The storage format is very simple: a text file where each line contains
a key-value pair, separated by a comma (roughly like a CSV file,
ignoring escaping issues). Every call to db_set appends to the end of
the file. If you update a key several times, old versions of the value
are not overwritten—you need to look at the last occurrence of a key in
a file to find the latest value (hence the tail -n 1 in db_get):


    $ db_set 42 '{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Exploratorium"]}'

    $ db_get 42
    {"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Exploratorium"]}

    $ cat database
    12,{"name":"London","attractions":["Big Ben","London Eye"]}
    42,{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Golden Gate Bridge"]}
    42,{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Exploratorium"]}

The db_set function actually has pretty good performance for something
that is so simple, because appending to a file is generally very
efficient. Similarly to what db_set does, many databases internally use
a log, which is an append-only data file. Real databases have more
issues to deal with (such as handling concurrent writes, reclaiming disk
space so that the log doesn’t grow forever, and handling partially
written records when recovering from a crash), but the basic principle
is the same. Logs are incredibly useful, and we will encounter them
several times in this book.

Note

The word log is often used to refer to application logs, where an
application outputs text that describes what’s happening. In this book,
log is used in the more general sense: an append-only sequence of
records on disk. It doesn’t have to be human-readable; it might be
binary and intended only for internal use by the database system.

On the other hand, the db_get function has terrible performance if you
have a large number of records in your database. Every time you want to
look up a key, db_get has to scan the entire database file from
beginning to end, looking for occurrences of the key. In algorithmic
terms, the cost of a lookup is O(n): if you double the number of records
n in your database, a lookup takes twice as long. That’s not good.

In order to efficiently find the value for a particular key in the
database, we need a different data structure: an index. In this chapter
we will look at a range of indexing structures and see how they compare;
the general idea is to structure the data in a particular way (e.g.,
sorted by some key) that makes it faster to locate the data you want. If
you want to search the same data in several different ways, you may need
several different indexes on different parts of the data.

An index is an additional structure that is derived from the primary
data. Many databases allow you to add and remove indexes, and this
doesn’t affect the contents of the database; it only affects the
performance of queries. Maintaining additional structures incurs
overhead, especially on writes. For writes, it’s hard to beat the
performance of simply appending to a file, because that’s the simplest
possible write operation. Any kind of index usually slows down writes,
because the index also needs to be updated every time data is written.

This is an important trade-off in storage systems: well-chosen indexes
speed up read queries, but every index consumes additional disk space
and slows down writes, sometimes substantially [1]. For this reason,
databases don’t usually index everything by default, but require you—the
person writing the application or administering the database—to choose
indexes manually, using your knowledge of the application’s typical
query patterns. You can then choose the indexes that give your
application the greatest benefit, without introducing more overhead on
writes than necessary.

Log-Structured Storage

To start, let’s assume that you want to continue storing data in the
append-only file written by db_set, and you just want to speed up reads.
One way you could do this is by keeping a hash map in memory, in which
every key is mapped to the byte offset in the file at which the most
recent value for that key can be found, as illustrated in Figure 4-1.

[ddia 0401]

Figure 4-1. Storing a log of key-value pairs in a CSV-like format, indexed with an in-memory hash map.

Whenever you append a new key-value pair to the file, you also update
the hash map to reflect the offset of the data you just wrote. When you
want to look up a value, you use the hash map to find the offset in the
log file, seek to that location, and read the value. If that part of the
data file is already in the filesystem cache, a read doesn’t require any
disk I/O at all.

This approach is much faster, but it still suffers from several
problems:

- You never free up disk space occupied by old log entries that have
  been overwritten; if you keep writing to the database you might run
  out of disk space.

- The hash map is not persisted, so you have to rebuild it when you
  restart the database—for example, by scanning the whole log file to
  find the latest byte offset for each key. This makes restarts slow if
  you have a lot of data.

- The hash table must fit in memory. In principle, you could maintain a
  hash table on disk, but unfortunately it is difficult to make an
  on-disk hash map perform well. It requires a lot of random access I/O,
  it is expensive to grow when it becomes full, and hash collisions
  require fiddly logic [2].

-  Range queries are not efficient. For example, you cannot easily scan
  over all keys between 10000 and 19999—you’d have to look up each key
  individually in the hash map.

The SSTable file format

In practice, hash tables are not used very often for database indexes,
and instead it is much more common to keep data in a structure that is
sorted by key [3]. One example of such a structure is a Sorted String
Table, or SSTable for short, as shown in Figure 4-2. This file format
also stores key-value pairs, but it ensures that they are sorted by key,
and each key only appears once in the file.

[ddia 0402]

Figure 4-2. An SSTable with a sparse index, allowing queries to jump to the right block.

Now you do not need to keep all the keys in memory: you can group the
key-value pairs within an SSTable into blocks of a few kilobytes, and
then store the first key of each block in the index. This kind of index,
which stores only some of the keys, is called sparse. This index is
stored in a separate part of the SSTable, for example using an immutable
B-tree, a trie, or another data structure that allows queries to quickly
look up a particular key [4].

For example, in Figure 4-2, the first key of one block is handbag, and
the first key of the next block is handsome. Now say you’re looking for
the key handiwork, which doesn’t appear in the sparse index. Because of
the sorting you know that handiwork must appear between handbag and
handsome. This means you can seek to the offset for handbag and scan the
file from there until you find handiwork (or not, if the key is not
present in the file). A block of a few kilobytes can be scanned very
quickly.

Moreover, each block of records can be compressed (indicated by the
shaded area in Figure 4-2). Besides saving disk space, compression also
reduces the I/O bandwidth use, at the cost of using a bit more CPU time.

Constructing and merging SSTables

The SSTable file format is better for reading than an append-only log,
but it makes writes more difficult. We can’t simply append at the end,
because then the file would no longer be sorted (unless the keys happen
to be written in ascending order). If we had to rewrite the whole
SSTable every time a key is inserted somewhere in the middle, writes
would become far too expensive.

We can solve this problem with a log-structured approach, which is a
hybrid between an append-only log and a sorted file:

1.   When a write comes in, add it to an in-memory ordered map data
    structure, such as a red-black tree, skip list [5], or trie [6].
    With these data structures, you can insert keys in any order, look
    them up efficiently, and read them back in sorted order. This
    in-memory data structure is called the memtable.

2.  When the memtable gets bigger than some threshold—typically a few
    megabytes—write it out to disk in sorted order as an SSTable file.
    We call this new SSTable file the most recent segment of the
    database, and it is stored as a separate file alongside the older
    segments. Each segment has a separate index of its contents. While
    the new segment is being written out to disk, the database can
    continue writing to a new memtable instance, and the old memtable’s
    memory is freed when the writing of the SSTable is complete.

3.  In order to read the value for some key, first try to find the key
    in the memtable and the most recent on-disk segment. If it’s not
    there, look in the next-older segment, etc. until you either find
    the key or reach the oldest segment. If the key does not appear in
    any of the segments, it does not exist in the database.

4.   From time to time, run a merging and compaction process in the
    background to combine segment files and to discard overwritten or
    deleted values.

Merging segments works similarly to the mergesort algorithm [5]. The
process is illustrated in Figure 4-3: start reading the input files side
by side, look at the first key in each file, copy the lowest key
(according to the sort order) to the output file, and repeat. If the
same key appears in more than one input file, keep only the more recent
value. This produces a new merged segment file, also sorted by key, with
one value per key, and it uses minimal memory because we can iterate
over the SSTables one key at a time.

[ddia 0403]

Figure 4-3. Merging several SSTable segments, retaining only the most recent value for each key.

To ensure that the data in the memtable is not lost if the database
crashes, the storage engine keeps a separate log on disk to which every
write is immediately appended. This log is not sorted by key, but that
doesn’t matter, because its only purpose is to restore the memtable
after a crash. Every time the memtable has been written out to an
SSTable, the corresponding part of the log can be discarded.

If you want to delete a key and its associated value, you have to append
a special deletion record called a tombstone to the data file. When log
segments are merged, the tombstone tells the merging process to discard
any previous values for the deleted key. Once the tombstone is merged
into the oldest segment, it can be dropped.

The algorithm described here is essentially what is used in RocksDB [7],
Cassandra, Scylla, and HBase [8], all of which were inspired by Google’s
Bigtable paper [9] (which introduced the terms SSTable and memtable).

The algorithm was originally published in 1996 under the name
Log-Structured Merge-Tree or LSM-Tree [10], building on earlier work on
log-structured filesystems [11]. For this reason, storage engines that
are based on the principle of merging and compacting sorted files are
often called LSM storage engines.

In LSM storage engines, a segment file is written in one pass (either by
writing out the memtable or by merging some existing segments), and
thereafter it is immutable. The merging and compaction of segments can
be done in a background thread, and while it is going on, we can still
continue to serve reads using the old segment files. When the merging
process is complete, we switch read requests to using the new merged
segment instead of the old segments, and then the old segment files can
be deleted.

The segment files don’t necessarily have to be stored on local disk:
they are also well suited for writing to object storage. SlateDB and
Delta Lake [12]. take this approach, for example.

Having immutable segment files also simplifies crash recovery: if a
crash happens while writing out the memtable or while merging segments,
the database can just delete the unfinished SSTable and start afresh.
The log that persists writes to the memtable could contain incomplete
records if there was a crash halfway through writing a record, or if the
disk was full; these are typically detected by including checksums in
the log, and discarding corrupted or incomplete log entries. We will
talk more about durability and crash recovery in [Link to Come].

Bloom filters

With LSM storage it can be slow to read a key that was last updated a
long time ago, or that does not exist, since the storage engine needs to
check several segment files. In order to speed up such reads, LSM
storage engines often include a Bloom filter [13] in each segment, which
provides a fast but approximate way of checking whether a particular key
appears in a particular SSTable.

Figure 4-4 shows an example of a Bloom filter containing two keys and 16
bits (in reality, it would contain more keys and more bits). For every
key in the SSTable we compute a hash function, producing a set of
numbers that are then interpreted as indexes into the array of bits
[14]. We set the bits corresponding to those indexes to 1, and leave the
rest as 0. For example, the key handbag hashes to the numbers (2, 9, 4),
so we set the 2nd, 9th, and 4th bits to 1. The bitmap is then stored as
part of the SSTable, along with the sparse index of keys. This takes a
bit of extra space, but the Bloom filter is generally small compared to
the rest of the SSTable.

[ddia 0404]

Figure 4-4. A Bloom filter provides a fast, probabilistic check whether a particular key exists in a particular SSTable.

When we want to know whether a key appears in the SSTable, we compute
the same hash of that key as before, and check the bits at those
indexes. For example, in Figure 4-4, we’re querying the key handheld,
which hashes to (6, 11, 2). One of those bits is 1 (namely, bit number
2), while the other two are 0. These checks can be made extremely fast
using the bitwise operations that all CPUs support.

If at least one of the bits is 0, we know that the key definitely does
not appear in the SSTable. If the bits in the query are all 1, it’s
likely that the key is in the SSTable, but it’s also possible that by
coincidence all of those bits were set to 1 by other keys. This case
when it looks as if a key is present, even though it isn’t, is called a
false positive.

The probability of false positives depends on the number of keys, the
number of bits set per key, and the total number of bits in the Bloom
filter. You can use an online calculator tool to work out the right
parameters for your application [15]. As a rule of thumb, you need to
allocate 10 bits of Bloom filter space for every key in the SSTable to
get a false positive probability of 1%, and the probability is reduced
tenfold for every 5 additional bits you allocate per key.

In the context of an LSM storage engines, false positives are no
problem:

- If the Bloom filter says that a key is not present, we can safely skip
  that SSTable, since we can be sure that it doesn’t contain the key.

- If the Bloom filter says the key is present, we have to consult the
  sparse index and decode the block of key-value pairs to check whether
  the key really is there. If it was a false positive, we have done a
  bit of unnecessary work, but otherwise no harm is done—we just
  continue the search with the next-oldest segment.

Compaction strategies

An important detail is how the LSM storage chooses when to perform
compaction, and which SSTables to include in a compaction. Many
LSM-based storage systems allow you to configure which compaction
strategy to use, and some of the common choices are [16]:

Size-tiered compaction

    Newer and smaller SSTables are successively merged into older and
    larger SSTables. The SSTables containing older data can get very
    large, and merging them requires a lot of temporary disk space. The
    advantage of this strategy is that it can handle very high write
    throughput.

Leveled compaction

    The key range is split up into smaller SSTables and older data is
    moved into separate “levels,” which allows the compaction to proceed
    more incrementally and use less disk space than the size-tiered
    strategy. This strategy is more efficient for reads than size-tiered
    compaction because the storage engine needs to read fewer SSTables
    to check whether they contain the key.

As a rule of thumb, size-tiered compaction performs better if you have
mostly writes and few reads, whereas leveled compaction performs better
if your workload is dominated by reads. If you write a small number of
keys frequently and a large number of keys rarely, then leveled
compaction can also be advantageous [17].

Even though there are many subtleties, the basic idea of
LSM-trees—keeping a cascade of SSTables that are merged in the
background—is simple and effective. We discuss their performance
characteristics in more detail in “Comparing B-Trees and LSM-Trees”.

Embedded storage engines

Many databases run as a service that accepts queries over a network, but
there are also embedded databases that don’t expose a network API.
Instead, they are libraries that run in the same process as your
application code, typically reading and writing files on the local disk,
and you interact with them through normal function calls. Examples of
embedded storage engines include RocksDB, SQLite, LMDB, DuckDB, and
KùzuDB [18].

Embedded databases are very commonly used in mobile apps to store the
local user’s data. On the backend, they can be an appropriate choice if
the data is small enough to fit on a single machine, and if there are
not many concurrent transactions. For example, in a multitenant system
in which each tenant is small enough and completely separate from others
(i.e., you do not need to run queries that combine data from multiple
tenants), you can potentially use a separate embedded database instance
per tenant [19].

The storage and retrieval methods we discuss in this chapter are used in
both embedded and in client-server databases. In Chapter 6 and Chapter 7
we will discuss techniques for scaling a database across multiple
machines.

B-Trees

The log-structured approach is popular, but it is not the only form of
key-value storage. The most widely used structure for reading and
writing database records by key is the B-tree.

Introduced in 1970 [20] and called “ubiquitous” less than 10 years later
[21], B-trees have stood the test of time very well. They remain the
standard index implementation in almost all relational databases, and
many nonrelational databases use them too.

Like SSTables, B-trees keep key-value pairs sorted by key, which allows
efficient key-value lookups and range queries. But that’s where the
similarity ends: B-trees have a very different design philosophy.

The log-structured indexes we saw earlier break the database down into
variable-size segments, typically several megabytes or more in size,
that are written once and are then immutable. By contrast, B-trees break
the database down into fixed-size blocks or pages, and may overwrite a
page in-place. A page is traditionally 4 KiB in size, but PostgreSQL now
uses 8 KiB and MySQL uses 16 KiB by default.

Each page can be identified using a page number, which allows one page
to refer to another—​similar to a pointer, but on disk instead of in
memory. If all the pages are stored in the same file, multiplying the
page number by the page size gives us the byte offset in the file where
the page is located. We can use these page references to construct a
tree of pages, as illustrated in Figure 4-5.

[ddia 0405]

Figure 4-5. Looking up the key 251 using a B-tree index. From the root page we first follow the reference to the page for keys 200–300, then the page for keys 250–270.

One page is designated as the root of the B-tree; whenever you want to
look up a key in the index, you start here. The page contains several
keys and references to child pages. Each child is responsible for a
continuous range of keys, and the keys between the references indicate
where the boundaries between those ranges lie. (This structure is
sometimes called a B⁺ tree, but we don’t need to distinguish it from
other B-tree variants.)

In the example in Figure 4-5, we are looking for the key 251, so we know
that we need to follow the page reference between the boundaries 200 and
300. That takes us to a similar-looking page that further breaks down
the 200–300 range into subranges. Eventually we get down to a page
containing individual keys (a leaf page), which either contains the
value for each key inline or contains references to the pages where the
values can be found.

The number of references to child pages in one page of the B-tree is
called the branching factor. For example, in Figure 4-5 the branching
factor is six. In practice, the branching factor depends on the amount
of space required to store the page references and the range boundaries,
but typically it is several hundred.

If you want to update the value for an existing key in a B-tree, you
search for the leaf page containing that key, and overwrite that page on
disk with a version that contains the new value. If you want to add a
new key, you need to find the page whose range encompasses the new key
and add it to that page. If there isn’t enough free space in the page to
accommodate the new key, the page is split into two half-full pages, and
the parent page is updated to account for the new subdivision of key
ranges.

[ddia 0406]

Figure 4-6. Growing a B-tree by splitting a page on the boundary key 337. The parent page is updated to reference both children.

In the example of Figure 4-6, we want to insert the key 334, but the
page for the range 333–345 is already full. We therefore split it into a
page for the range 333–337 (including the new key), and a page for
337–344. We also have to update the parent page to have references to
both children, with a boundary value of 337 between them. If the parent
page doesn’t have enough space for the new reference, it may also need
to be split, and the splits can continue all the way to the root of the
tree. When the root is split, we make a new root above it. Deleting keys
(which may require nodes to be merged) is more complex [5].

This algorithm ensures that the tree remains balanced: a B-tree with n
keys always has a depth of O(log n). Most databases can fit into a
B-tree that is three or four levels deep, so you don’t need to follow
many page references to find the page you are looking for. (A four-level
tree of 4 KiB pages with a branching factor of 500 can store up to
250 TB.)

Making B-trees reliable

The basic underlying write operation of a B-tree is to overwrite a page
on disk with new data. It is assumed that the overwrite does not change
the location of the page; i.e., all references to that page remain
intact when the page is overwritten. This is in stark contrast to
log-structured indexes such as LSM-trees, which only append to files
(and eventually delete obsolete files) but never modify files in place.

Overwriting several pages at once, like in a page split, is a dangerous
operation: if the database crashes after only some of the pages have
been written, you end up with a corrupted tree (e.g., there may be an
orphan page that is not a child of any parent).

In order to make the database resilient to crashes, it is common for
B-tree implementations to include an additional data structure on disk:
a write-ahead log (WAL). This is an append-only file to which every
B-tree modification must be written before it can be applied to the
pages of the tree itself. When the database comes back up after a crash,
this log is used to restore the B-tree back to a consistent state [2,
22]. In filesystems, the equivalent mechanism is known as journaling.

To improve performance, B-tree implementations typically don’t
immediately write every modified page to disk, but buffer the B-tree
pages in memory for a while first. The write-ahead log then also ensures
that data is not lost in the case of a crash: as long as data has been
written to the WAL, and flushed to disk using the fsync() system call,
the data will be durable as the database will be able to recover it
after a crash [23].

B-tree variants

As B-trees have been around for so long, many variants have been
developed over the years. To mention just a few:

-  Instead of overwriting pages and maintaining a WAL for crash
  recovery, some databases (like LMDB) use a copy-on-write scheme [24].
  A modified page is written to a different location, and a new version
  of the parent pages in the tree is created, pointing at the new
  location. This approach is also useful for concurrency control, as we
  shall see in [Link to Come].

-  We can save space in pages by not storing the entire key, but
  abbreviating it. Especially in pages on the interior of the tree, keys
  only need to provide enough information to act as boundaries between
  key ranges. Packing more keys into a page allows the tree to have a
  higher branching factor, and thus fewer levels.

- To speed up scans over the key range in sorted order, some B-tree
  implementations try to lay out the tree so that leaf pages appear in
  sequential order on disk, reducing the number of disk seeks. However,
  it’s difficult to maintain that order as the tree grows.

- Additional pointers have been added to the tree. For example, each
  leaf page may have references to its sibling pages to the left and
  right, which allows scanning keys in order without jumping back to
  parent pages.

Comparing B-Trees and LSM-Trees

As a rule of thumb, LSM-trees are better suited for write-heavy
applications, whereas B-trees are faster for reads [25, 26]. However,
benchmarks are often sensitive to details of the workload. You need to
test systems with your particular workload in order to make a valid
comparison. Moreover, it’s not a strict either/or choice between LSM and
B-trees: storage engines sometimes blend characteristics of both
approaches, for example by having multiple B-trees and merging them
LSM-style. In this section we will briefly discuss a few things that are
worth considering when measuring the performance of a storage engine.

Read performance

In a B-tree, looking up a key involves reading one page at each level of
the B-tree. Since the number of levels is usually quite small, this
means that reads from a B-tree are generally fast and have predictable
performance. In an LSM storage engine, reads often have to check several
different SSTables at different stages of compaction, but Bloom filters
help reduce the number of actual disk I/O operations required. Both
approaches can perform well, and which is faster depends on the details
of the storage engine and the workload.

Range queries are simple and fast on B-trees, as they can use the sorted
structure of the tree. On LSM storage, range queries can also take
advantage of the SSTable sorting, but they need to scan all the segments
in parallel and combine the results. Bloom filters don’t help for range
queries (since you would need to compute the hash of every possible key
within the range, which is impractical), making range queries more
expensive than point queries in the LSM approach [27].

High write throughput can cause latency spikes in a log-structured
storage engine if the memtable fills up. This happens if data can’t be
written out to disk fast enough, perhaps because the compaction process
cannot keep up with incoming writes. Many storage engines, including
RocksDB, perform backpressure in this situation: they suspend all reads
and writes until the memtable has been written out to disk [28, 29].

Regarding read throughput, modern SSDs (and especially NVMe) can perform
many independent read requests in parallel. Both LSM-trees and B-trees
are able to provide high read throughput, but storage engines need to be
carefully designed to take advantage of this parallelism [30].

Sequential vs. random writes

With a B-tree, if the application writes keys that are scattered all
over the key space, the resulting disk operations are also scattered
randomly, since the pages that the storage engine needs to overwrite
could be located anywhere on disk. On the other hand, a log-structured
storage engine writes entire segment files at a time (either writing out
the memtable or while compacting existing segments), which are much
bigger than a page in a B-tree.

The pattern of many small, scattered writes (as found in B-trees) is
called random writes, while the pattern of fewer large writes (as found
in LSM-trees) is called sequential writes. Disks generally have higher
sequential write throughput than random write throughput, which means
that a log-structured storage engine can generally handle higher write
throughput on the same hardware than a B-tree. This difference is
particularly big on spinning-disk hard drives (HDDs); on the solid state
drives (SSDs) that most databases use today, the difference is smaller,
but still noticeable (see “Sequential vs. Random Writes on SSDs”).

Sequential vs. Random Writes on SSDs

On spinning-disk hard drives (HDDs), sequential writes are much faster
than random writes: a random write has to mechanically move the disk
head to a new position and wait for the right part of the platter to
pass underneath the disk head, which takes several milliseconds—an
eternity in computing timescales. However, SSDs (solid-state drives)
including NVMe (Non-Volatile Memory Express, i.e. flash memory attached
to the PCI Express bus) have now overtaken HDDs for many use cases, and
they are not subject to such mechanical limitations.

Nevertheless, SSDs also have higher throughput for sequential writes
than for than random writes. The reason is that flash memory can be read
or written one page (typically 4 KiB) at a time, but it can only be
erased one block (typically 512 KiB) at a time. Some of the pages in a
block may contain valid data, whereas others may contain data that is no
longer needed. Before erasing a block, the controller must first move
pages containing valid data into other blocks; this process is called
garbage collection (GC) [31].

A sequential write workload writes larger chunks of data at a time, so
it is likely that a whole 512 KiB block belongs to a single file; when
that file is later deleted again, the whole block can be erased without
having to perform any GC. On the other hand, with a random write
workload, it is more likely that a block contains a mixture of pages
with valid and invalid data, so the GC has to perform more work before a
block can be erased [32, 33, 34].

The write bandwidth consumed by GC is then not available for the
application. Moreover, the additional writes performed by GC contribute
to wear on the flash memory; therefore, random writes wear out the drive
faster than sequential writes.

Write amplification

With any type of storage engine, one write request from the application
turns into multiple I/O operations on the underlying disk. With
LSM-trees, a value is first written to the log for durability, then
again when the memtable is written to disk, and again every time the
key-value pair is part of a compaction. (If the values are significantly
larger than the keys, this overhead can be reduced by storing values
separately from keys, and performing compaction only on SSTables
containing keys and references to values [35].)

A B-tree index must write every piece of data at least twice: once to
the write-ahead log, and once to the tree page itself. In addition, they
sometimes need to write out an entire page, even if only a few bytes in
that page changed, to ensure the B-tree can be correctly recovered after
a crash or power failure [36, 37].

If you take the total number of bytes written to disk in some workload,
and divide by the number of bytes you would have to write if you simply
wrote an append-only log with no index, you get the write amplification.
(Sometimes write amplification is defined in terms of I/O operations
rather than bytes.) In write-heavy applications, the bottleneck might be
the rate at which the database can write to disk. In this case, the
higher the write amplification, the fewer writes per second it can
handle within the available disk bandwidth.

Write amplification is a problem in both LSM-trees and B-trees. Which
one is better depends on various factors, such as the length of your
keys and values, and how often you overwrite existing keys versus insert
new ones. For typical workloads, LSM-trees tend to have lower write
amplification because they don’t have to write entire pages and they can
compress chunks of the SSTable [38]. This is another factor that makes
LSM storage engines well suited for write-heavy workloads.

Besides affecting throughput, write amplification is also relevant for
the wear on SSDs: a storage engine with lower write amplification will
wear out the SSD less quickly.

When measuring the write throughput of a storage engine, it is important
to run the experiment for long enough that the effects of write
amplification become clear. When writing to an empty LSM-tree, there are
no compactions going on yet, so all of the disk bandwidth is available
for new writes. As the database grows, new writes need to share the disk
bandwidth with compaction.

Disk space usage

B-trees can become fragmented over time: for example, if a large number
of keys are deleted, the database file may contain a lot of pages that
are no longer used by the B-tree. Subsequent additions to the B-tree can
use those free pages, but they can’t easily be returned to the operating
system because they are in the middle of the file, so they still take up
space on the filesystem. Databases therefore need a background process
that moves pages around to place them better, such as the vacuum process
in PostgreSQL [23].

Fragmentation is less of a problem in LSM-trees, since the compaction
process periodically rewrites the data files anyway, and SSTables don’t
have pages with unused space. Moreover, blocks of key-value pairs can
better be compressed in SSTables, and thus often produce smaller files
on disk than B-trees. Keys and values that have been overwritten
continue to consume space until they are removed by a compaction, but
this overhead is quite low when using leveled compaction [38, 39].
Size-tiered compaction (see “Compaction strategies”) uses more disk
space, especially temporarily during compaction.

Having multiple copies of some data on disk can also be a problem when
you need to delete some data, and be confident that it really has been
deleted (perhaps to comply with data protection regulations). For
example, in most LSM storage engines a deleted record may still exist in
the higher levels until the tombstone representing the deletion has been
propagated through all of the compaction levels, which may take a long
time. Specialist storage engine designs can propagate deletions faster
[40].

On the other hand, the immutable nature of SSTable segment files is
useful if you want to take a snapshot of a database at some point in
time (e.g. for a backup or to create a copy of the database for
testing): you can write out the memtable and record which segment files
existed at that point in time. As long as you don’t delete the files
that are part of the snapshot, you don’t need to actually copy them. In
a B-tree whose pages are overwritten, taking such a snapshot efficiently
is more difficult.

Multi-Column and Secondary Indexes

So far we have only discussed key-value indexes, which are like a
primary key index in the relational model. A primary key uniquely
identifies one row in a relational table, or one document in a document
database, or one vertex in a graph database. Other records in the
database can refer to that row/document/vertex by its primary key (or
ID), and the index is used to resolve such references.

It is also very common to have secondary indexes. In relational
databases, you can create several secondary indexes on the same table
using the CREATE INDEX command, allowing you to search by columns other
than the primary key. For example, in Figure 3-1 in Chapter 3 you would
most likely have a secondary index on the user_id columns so that you
can find all the rows belonging to the same user in each of the tables.

A secondary index can easily be constructed from a key-value index. The
main difference is that in a secondary index, the indexed values are not
necessarily unique; that is, there might be many rows (documents,
vertices) under the same index entry. This can be solved in two ways:
either by making each value in the index a list of matching row
identifiers (like a postings list in a full-text index) or by making
each entry unique by appending a row identifier to it. Storage engines
with in-place updates, like B-trees, and log-structured storage can both
be used to implement an index.

Storing values within the index

The key in an index is the thing that queries search by, but the value
can be one of several things:

-  If the actual data (row, document, vertex) is stored directly within
  the index structure, it is called a clustered index. For example, in
  MySQL’s InnoDB storage engine, the primary key of a table is always a
  clustered index, and in SQL Server, you can specify one clustered
  index per table.

- Alternatively, the value can be a reference to the actual data: either
  the primary key of the row in question (InnoDB does this for secondary
  indexes), or a direct reference to a location on disk. In the latter
  case, the place where rows are stored is known as a heap file, and it
  stores data in no particular order (it may be append-only, or it may
  keep track of deleted rows in order to overwrite them with new data
  later). For example, Postgres uses the heap file approach [41].

-  A middle ground between the two is a covering index or index with
  included columns, which stores some of a table’s columns within the
  index, in addition to storing the full row on the heap or in the
  primary key clustered index [42]. This allows some queries to be
  answered by using the index alone, without having to resolve the
  primary key or look in the heap file (in which case, the index is said
  to cover the query). This can make some queries faster, but the
  duplication of data means the index uses more disk space and slows
  down writes.

The indexes discussed so far only map a single key to a value. If you
need to query multiple columns of a table (or multiple fields in a
document) simultaneously, see “Multidimensional and Full-Text Indexes”.

When updating a value without changing the key, the heap file approach
can allow the record to be overwritten in place, provided that the new
value is not larger than the old value. The situation is more
complicated if the new value is larger, as it probably needs to be moved
to a new location in the heap where there is enough space. In that case,
either all indexes need to be updated to point at the new heap location
of the record, or a forwarding pointer is left behind in the old heap
location [2].

Keeping everything in memory

The data structures discussed so far in this chapter have all been
answers to the limitations of disks. Compared to main memory, disks are
awkward to deal with. With both magnetic disks and SSDs, data on disk
needs to be laid out carefully if you want good performance on reads and
writes. However, we tolerate this awkwardness because disks have two
significant advantages: they are durable (their contents are not lost if
the power is turned off), and they have a lower cost per gigabyte than
RAM.

As RAM becomes cheaper, the cost-per-gigabyte argument is eroded. Many
datasets are simply not that big, so it’s quite feasible to keep them
entirely in memory, potentially distributed across several machines.
This has led to the development of in-memory databases.

Some in-memory key-value stores, such as Memcached, are intended for
caching use only, where it’s acceptable for data to be lost if a machine
is restarted. But other in-memory databases aim for durability, which
can be achieved with special hardware (such as battery-powered RAM), by
writing a log of changes to disk, by writing periodic snapshots to disk,
or by replicating the in-memory state to other machines.

When an in-memory database is restarted, it needs to reload its state,
either from disk or over the network from a replica (unless special
hardware is used). Despite writing to disk, it’s still an in-memory
database, because the disk is merely used as an append-only log for
durability, and reads are served entirely from memory. Writing to disk
also has operational advantages: files on disk can easily be backed up,
inspected, and analyzed by external utilities.

Products such as VoltDB, SingleStore, and Oracle TimesTen are in-memory
databases with a relational model, and the vendors claim that they can
offer big performance improvements by removing all the overheads
associated with managing on-disk data structures [43, 44]. RAMCloud is
an open source, in-memory key-value store with durability (using a
log-structured approach for the data in memory as well as the data on
disk) [45]. Redis and Couchbase provide weak durability by writing to
disk asynchronously.

Counterintuitively, the performance advantage of in-memory databases is
not due to the fact that they don’t need to read from disk. Even a
disk-based storage engine may never need to read from disk if you have
enough memory, because the operating system caches recently used disk
blocks in memory anyway. Rather, they can be faster because they can
avoid the overheads of encoding in-memory data structures in a form that
can be written to disk [46].

Besides performance, another interesting area for in-memory databases is
providing data models that are difficult to implement with disk-based
indexes. For example, Redis offers a database-like interface to various
data structures such as priority queues and sets. Because it keeps all
data in memory, its implementation is comparatively simple.

Data Storage for Analytics

The data model of a data warehouse is most commonly relational, because
SQL is generally a good fit for analytic queries. There are many
graphical data analysis tools that generate SQL queries, visualize the
results, and allow analysts to explore the data (through operations such
as drill-down and slicing and dicing).

On the surface, a data warehouse and a relational OLTP database look
similar, because they both have a SQL query interface. However, the
internals of the systems can look quite different, because they are
optimized for very different query patterns. Many database vendors now
focus on supporting either transaction processing or analytics
workloads, but not both.

Some databases, such as Microsoft SQL Server, SAP HANA, and SingleStore,
have support for transaction processing and data warehousing in the same
product. However, these hybrid transactional and analytical processing
(HTAP) databases (introduced in “Data Warehousing”) are increasingly
becoming two separate storage and query engines, which happen to be
accessible through a common SQL interface [47, 48, 49, 50].

Cloud Data Warehouses

Data warehouse vendors such as Teradata, Vertica, and SAP HANA sell both
on-premises warehouses under commercial licenses and cloud-based
solutions. But as many of their customers move to the cloud, new cloud
data warehouses such as Google Cloud BigQuery, Amazon Redshift, and
Snowflake have also become widely adopted. Unlike traditional data
warehouses, cloud data warehouses take advantage of scalable cloud
infrastructure like object storage and serverless computation platforms.

Cloud data warehouses tend to integrate better with other cloud services
and to be more elastic. For example, many cloud warehouses support
automatic log ingestion, and offer easy integration with data processing
frameworks such as Google Cloud’s Dataflow or Amazon Web Services’
Kinesis. These warehouses are also more elastic because they decouple
query computation from the storage layer [51]. Data is persisted on
object storage rather than local disks, which makes it easy to adjust
storage capacity and compute resources for queries independently, as we
previously saw in “Cloud-Native System Architecture”.

Open source data warehouses such as Apache Hive, Trino, and Apache Spark
have also evolved with the cloud. As data storage for analytics has
moved to data lakes on object storage, open source warehouses have begun
to break apart [52]. The following components, which were previously
integrated in a single system such as Apache Hive, are now often
implemented as separate components:

Query engine

     Query engines such as Trino, Apache DataFusion, and Presto parse
    SQL queries, optimize them into execution plans, and execute them
    against the data. Execution usually requires parallel, distributed
    data processing tasks. Some query engines provide built-in task
    execution, while others choose to use third party execution
    frameworks such as Apache Spark or Apache Flink.

Storage format

     The storage format determines how the rows of a table are encoded
    as bytes in a file, which is then typically stored in object storage
    or a distributed filesystem [12]. This data can then be accessed by
    the query engine, but also by other applications using the data
    lake. Examples of such storage formats are Parquet, ORC, Lance, or
    Nimble, and we will see more about them in the next section.

Table format

     Files written in Apache Parquet and similar storage formats are
    typically immutable once written. To support row inserts and
    deletions, a table format such as Apache Iceberg or Databricks’s
    Delta format are used. Table formats specify a file format that
    defines which files constitute a table along with the table’s
    schema. Such formats also offer advanced features such as time
    travel (the ability to query a table as it was at a previous point
    in time), garbage collection, and even transactions.

Data catalog

     Much like a table format defines which files make up a table, a
    data catalog defines which tables comprise a database. Catalogs are
    used to create, rename, and drop tables. Unlike storage and table
    formats, data catalogs such as Snowflake’s Polaris and Databricks’s
    Unity Catalog usually run as a standalone service that can be
    queried using a REST interface. Apache Iceberg also offers a
    catalog, which can be run inside a client or as a separate process.
    Query engines use catalog information when reading and writing
    tables. Traditionally, catalogs and query engines have been
    integrated, but decoupling them has enabled data discovery and data
    governance systems (discussed in “Data Systems, Law, and Society”)
    to access a catalog’s metadata as well.

Column-Oriented Storage

As discussed in “Stars and Snowflakes: Schemas for Analytics”, data
warehouses by convention often use a relational schema with a big fact
table that contains foreign key references into dimension tables. If you
have trillions of rows and petabytes of data in your fact tables,
storing and querying them efficiently becomes a challenging problem.
Dimension tables are usually much smaller (millions of rows), so in this
section we will focus on storage of facts.

Although fact tables are often over 100 columns wide, a typical data
warehouse query only accesses 4 or 5 of them at one time ("SELECT *"
queries are rarely needed for analytics) [49]. Take the query in
Example 4-1: it accesses a large number of rows (every occurrence of
someone buying fruit or candy during the 2024 calendar year), but it
only needs to access three columns of the fact_sales table: date_key,
product_sk, and quantity. The query ignores all other columns.

Example 4-1. Analyzing whether people are more inclined to buy fresh fruit or candy, depending on the day of the week

    SELECT
      dim_date.weekday, dim_product.category,
      SUM(fact_sales.quantity) AS quantity_sold
    FROM fact_sales
      JOIN dim_date    ON fact_sales.date_key   = dim_date.date_key
      JOIN dim_product ON fact_sales.product_sk = dim_product.product_sk
    WHERE
      dim_date.year = 2024 AND
      dim_product.category IN ('Fresh fruit', 'Candy')
    GROUP BY
      dim_date.weekday, dim_product.category;

How can we execute this query efficiently?

In most OLTP databases, storage is laid out in a row-oriented fashion:
all the values from one row of a table are stored next to each other.
Document databases are similar: an entire document is typically stored
as one contiguous sequence of bytes. You can see this in the CSV example
of Figure 4-1.

In order to process a query like Example 4-1, you may have indexes on
fact_sales.date_key and/or fact_sales.product_sk that tell the storage
engine where to find all the sales for a particular date or for a
particular product. But then, a row-oriented storage engine still needs
to load all of those rows (each consisting of over 100 attributes) from
disk into memory, parse them, and filter out those that don’t meet the
required conditions. That can take a long time.

The idea behind column-oriented (or columnar) storage is simple: don’t
store all the values from one row together, but store all the values
from each column together instead [53]. If each column is stored
separately, a query only needs to read and parse those columns that are
used in that query, which can save a lot of work. Figure 4-7 shows this
principle using an expanded version of the fact table from Figure 3-5.

Note

Column storage is easiest to understand in a relational data model, but
it applies equally to nonrelational data. For example, Parquet [54] is a
columnar storage format that supports a document data model, based on
Google’s Dremel [55], using a technique known as shredding or striping
[56].

[ddia 0407]

Figure 4-7. Storing relational data by column, rather than by row.

The column-oriented storage layout relies on each column storing the
rows in the same order. Thus, if you need to reassemble an entire row,
you can take the 23rd entry from each of the individual columns and put
them together to form the 23rd row of the table.

In fact, columnar storage engines don’t actually store an entire column
(containing perhaps trillions of rows) in one go. Instead, they break
the table into blocks of thousands or millions of rows, and within each
block they store the values from each column separately [57]. Since many
queries are restricted to a particular date range, it is common to make
each block contain the rows for a particular timestamp range. A query
then only needs to load the columns it needs in those blocks that
overlap with the required date range.

Columnar storage is used in almost all analytic databases nowadays [57],
ranging from large-scale cloud data warehouses such as Snowflake [58] to
single-node embedded databases such as DuckDB [59], and product
analytics systems such as Pinot [60] and Druid [61]. It is used in
storage formats such as Parquet, ORC [62, 63], Lance [64], and Nimble
[65], and in-memory analytics formats like Apache Arrow [62, 66] and
Pandas/NumPy [67]. Some time-series databases, such as InfluxDB IOx [68]
and TimescaleDB [69], are also based on column-oriented storage.

Column Compression

Besides only loading those columns from disk that are required for a
query, we can further reduce the demands on disk throughput and network
bandwidth by compressing data. Fortunately, column-oriented storage
often lends itself very well to compression.

Take a look at the sequences of values for each column in Figure 4-7:
they often look quite repetitive, which is a good sign for compression.
Depending on the data in the column, different compression techniques
can be used. One technique that is particularly effective in data
warehouses is bitmap encoding, illustrated in Figure 4-8.

[ddia 0408]

Figure 4-8. Compressed, bitmap-indexed storage of a single column.

Often, the number of distinct values in a column is small compared to
the number of rows (for example, a retailer may have billions of sales
transactions, but only 100,000 distinct products). We can now take a
column with n distinct values and turn it into n separate bitmaps: one
bitmap for each distinct value, with one bit for each row. The bit is 1
if the row has that value, and 0 if not.

One option is to store those bitmaps using one bit per row. However,
these bitmaps typically contain a lot of zeros (we say that they are
sparse). In that case, the bitmaps can additionally be run-length
encoded: counting the number of consecutive zeros or ones and storing
that number, as shown at the bottom of Figure 4-8. Techniques such as
roaring bitmaps switch between the two bitmap representations, using
whichever is the most compact [70]. This can make the encoding of a
column remarkably efficient.

Bitmap indexes such as these are very well suited for the kinds of
queries that are common in a data warehouse. For example:

WHERE product_sk IN (31, 68, 69):

    Load the three bitmaps for product_sk = 31, product_sk = 68, and
    product_sk = 69, and calculate the bitwise OR of the three bitmaps,
    which can be done very efficiently.

WHERE product_sk = 30 AND store_sk = 3:

    Load the bitmaps for product_sk = 30 and store_sk = 3, and calculate
    the bitwise AND. This works because the columns contain the rows in
    the same order, so the kth bit in one column’s bitmap corresponds to
    the same row as the kth bit in another column’s bitmap.

Bitmaps can also be used to answer graph queries, such as finding all
users of a social network who are followed by user X and who also follow
user Y [71]. There are also various other compression schemes for
columnar databases, which you can find in the references [72].

Note

Don’t confuse column-oriented databases with the wide-column (also known
as column-family) data model, in which a row can have thousands of
columns, and there is no need for all the rows to have the same columns
[9]. Despite the similarity in name, wide-column databases are
row-oriented, since they store all values from a row together. Google’s
Bigtable, Apache Accumulo, and HBase are examples of the wide-column
model.

Sort Order in Column Storage

In a column store, it doesn’t necessarily matter in which order the rows
are stored. It’s easiest to store them in the order in which they were
inserted, since then inserting a new row just means appending to each of
the columns. However, we can choose to impose an order, like we did with
SSTables previously, and use that as an indexing mechanism.

Note that it wouldn’t make sense to sort each column independently,
because then we would no longer know which items in the columns belong
to the same row. We can only reconstruct a row because we know that the
kth item in one column belongs to the same row as the kth item in
another column.

Rather, the data needs to be sorted an entire row at a time, even though
it is stored by column. The administrator of the database can choose the
columns by which the table should be sorted, using their knowledge of
common queries. For example, if queries often target date ranges, such
as the last month, it might make sense to make date_key the first sort
key. Then the query can scan only the rows from the last month, which
will be much faster than scanning all rows.

A second column can determine the sort order of any rows that have the
same value in the first column. For example, if date_key is the first
sort key in Figure 4-7, it might make sense for product_sk to be the
second sort key so that all sales for the same product on the same day
are grouped together in storage. That will help queries that need to
group or filter sales by product within a certain date range.

Another advantage of sorted order is that it can help with compression
of columns. If the primary sort column does not have many distinct
values, then after sorting, it will have long sequences where the same
value is repeated many times in a row. A simple run-length encoding,
like we used for the bitmaps in Figure 4-8, could compress that column
down to a few kilobytes—even if the table has billions of rows.

That compression effect is strongest on the first sort key. The second
and third sort keys will be more jumbled up, and thus not have such long
runs of repeated values. Columns further down the sorting priority
appear in essentially random order, so they probably won’t compress as
well. But having the first few columns sorted is still a win overall.

Writing to Column-Oriented Storage

We saw in “Characterizing Transaction Processing and Analytics” that
reads in data warehouses tend to consist of aggregations over a large
number of rows; column-oriented storage, compression, and sorting all
help to make those read queries faster. Writes in a data warehouse tend
to be a bulk import of data, often via an ETL process.

With columnar storage, writing an individual row somewhere in the middle
of a sorted table would be very inefficient, as you would have to
rewrite all the compressed columns from the insertion position onwards.
However, a bulk write of many rows at once amortizes the cost of
rewriting those columns, making it efficient.

A log-structured approach is often used to perform writes in batches.
All writes first go to a row-oriented, sorted, in-memory store. When
enough writes have accumulated, they are merged with the column-encoded
files on disk and written to new files in bulk. As old files remain
immutable, and new files are written in one go, object storage is well
suited for storing these files.

Queries need to examine both the column data on disk and the recent
writes in memory, and combine the two. The query execution engine hides
this distinction from the user. From an analyst’s point of view, data
that has been modified with inserts, updates, or deletes is immediately
reflected in subsequent queries. Snowflake, Vertica, Apache Pinot,
Apache Druid, and many others do this [58, 60, 61, 73].

Query Execution: Compilation and Vectorization

A complex SQL query for analytics is broken down into a query plan
consisting of multiple stages, called operators, which may be
distributed across multiple machines for parallel execution. Query
planners can perform a lot of optimizations by choosing which operators
to use, in which order to perform them, and where to run each operator.

Within each operator, the query engine needs to do various things with
the values in a column, such as finding all the rows where the value is
among a particular set of values (perhaps as part of a join), or
checking whether the value is greater than 15. It also needs to look at
several columns for the same row, for example to find all sales
transactions where the product is bananas and the store is a particular
store of interest.

For data warehouse queries that need to scan over millions of rows, we
need to worry not only about the amount of data they need to read off
disk, but also the CPU time required to execute complex operators. The
simplest kind of operator is like an interpreter for a programming
language: while iterating over each row, it checks a data structure
representing the query to find out which comparisons or calculations it
needs to perform on which columns. Unfortunately, this is too slow for
many analytics purposes. Two alternative approaches for efficient query
execution have emerged [74]:

Query compilation

     The query engine takes the SQL query and generates code for
    executing it. The code iterates over the rows one by one, looks at
    the values in the columns of interest, performs whatever comparisons
    or calculations are needed, and copies the necessary values to an
    output buffer if the required conditions are satisfied. The query
    engine compiles the generated code to machine code (often using an
    existing compiler such as LLVM), and then runs it on the
    column-encoded data that has been loaded into memory. This approach
    to code generation is similar to the just-in-time (JIT) compilation
    approach that is used in the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) and similar
    runtimes.

Vectorized processing

     The query is interpreted, not compiled, but it is made fast by
    processing many values from a column in a batch, instead of
    iterating over rows one by one. A fixed set of predefined operators
    are built into the database; we can pass arguments to them and get
    back a batch of results [47, 72].

    For example, we could pass the product_sk column and the ID of
    “bananas” to an equality operator, and get back a bitmap (one bit
    per value in the input column, which is 1 if it’s a banana); we
    could then pass the store_sk column and the ID of the store of
    interest to the same equality operator, and get back another bitmap;
    and then we could pass the two bitmaps to a “bitwise AND” operator,
    as shown in Figure 4-9. The result would be a bitmap containing a 1
    for all sales of bananas in a particular store.

[ddia 0409]

Figure 4-9. A bitwise AND between two bitmaps lends itself to vectorization.

The two approaches are very different in terms of their implementation,
but both are used in practice [74]. Both can achieve very good
performance by taking advantages of the characteristics of modern CPUs:

-  preferring sequential memory access over random access to reduce
  cache misses [75],

-  doing most of the work in tight inner loops (that is, with a small
  number of instructions and no function calls) to keep the CPU
  instruction processing pipeline busy and avoid branch mispredictions,

-  making use of parallelism such as multiple threads and
  single-instruction-multi-data (SIMD) instructions [76, 77], and

- operating directly on compressed data without decoding it into a
  separate in-memory representation, which saves memory allocation and
  copying costs.

Materialized Views and Data Cubes

We previously encountered materialized views in “Materializing and
Updating Timelines”: in a relational data model, they are table-like
object whose contents are the results of some query. The difference is
that a materialized view is an actual copy of the query results, written
to disk, whereas a virtual view is just a shortcut for writing queries.
When you read from a virtual view, the SQL engine expands it into the
view’s underlying query on the fly and then processes the expanded
query.

When the underlying data changes, a materialized view needs to be
updated accordingly. Some databases can do that automatically, and there
are also systems such as Materialize that specialize in materialized
view maintenance [78]. Performing such updates means more work on
writes, but materialized views can improve read performance in workloads
that repeatedly need to perform the same queries.

Materialized aggregates are a type of materialized views that can be
useful in data warehouses. As discussed earlier, data warehouse queries
often involve an aggregate function, such as COUNT, SUM, AVG, MIN, or
MAX in SQL. If the same aggregates are used by many different queries,
it can be wasteful to crunch through the raw data every time. Why not
cache some of the counts or sums that queries use most often? A data
cube or OLAP cube does this by creating a grid of aggregates grouped by
different dimensions [79]. Figure 4-10 shows an example.

[ddia 0410]

Figure 4-10. Two dimensions of a data cube, aggregating data by summing.

Imagine for now that each fact has foreign keys to only two dimension
tables—in Figure 4-10, these are date_key and product_sk. You can now
draw a two-dimensional table, with dates along one axis and products
along the other. Each cell contains the aggregate (e.g., SUM) of an
attribute (e.g., net_price) of all facts with that date-product
combination. Then you can apply the same aggregate along each row or
column and get a summary that has been reduced by one dimension (the
sales by product regardless of date, or the sales by date regardless of
product).

In general, facts often have more than two dimensions. In Figure 3-5
there are five dimensions: date, product, store, promotion, and
customer. It’s a lot harder to imagine what a five-dimensional hypercube
would look like, but the principle remains the same: each cell contains
the sales for a particular date-product-store-promotion-customer
combination. These values can then repeatedly be summarized along each
of the dimensions.

The advantage of a materialized data cube is that certain queries become
very fast because they have effectively been precomputed. For example,
if you want to know the total sales per store yesterday, you just need
to look at the totals along the appropriate dimension—no need to scan
millions of rows.

The disadvantage is that a data cube doesn’t have the same flexibility
as querying the raw data. For example, there is no way of calculating
which proportion of sales comes from items that cost more than $100,
because the price isn’t one of the dimensions. Most data warehouses
therefore try to keep as much raw data as possible, and use aggregates
such as data cubes only as a performance boost for certain queries.

Multidimensional and Full-Text Indexes

The B-trees and LSM-trees we saw in the first half of this chapter allow
range queries over a single attribute: for example, if the key is a
username, you can use them as an index to efficiently find all names
starting with an L. But sometimes, searching by a single attribute is
not enough.

The most common type of multi-column index is called a concatenated
index, which simply combines several fields into one key by appending
one column to another (the index definition specifies in which order the
fields are concatenated). This is like an old-fashioned paper phone
book, which provides an index from (lastname, firstname) to phone
number. Due to the sort order, the index can be used to find all the
people with a particular last name, or all the people with a particular
lastname-firstname combination. However, the index is useless if you
want to find all the people with a particular first name.

On the other hand, multi-dimensional indexes allow you to query several
columns at once. One case where this is particularly important is
geospatial data. For example, a restaurant-search website may have a
database containing the latitude and longitude of each restaurant. When
a user is looking at the restaurants on a map, the website needs to
search for all the restaurants within the rectangular map area that the
user is currently viewing. This requires a two-dimensional range query
like the following:

    SELECT * FROM restaurants WHERE latitude  > 51.4946 AND latitude  < 51.5079
                                AND longitude > -0.1162 AND longitude < -0.1004;

A concatenated index over the latitude and longitude columns is not able
to answer that kind of query efficiently: it can give you either all the
restaurants in a range of latitudes (but at any longitude), or all the
restaurants in a range of longitudes (but anywhere between the North and
South poles), but not both simultaneously.

One option is to translate a two-dimensional location into a single
number using a space-filling curve, and then to use a regular B-tree
index [80]. More commonly, specialized spatial indexes such as R-trees
or Bkd-trees [81] are used; they divide up the space so that nearby data
points tend to be grouped in the same subtree. For example, PostGIS
implements geospatial indexes as R-trees using PostgreSQL’s Generalized
Search Tree indexing facility [82]. It is also possible to use regularly
spaced grids of triangles, squares, or hexagons [83].

Multi-dimensional indexes are not just for geographic locations. For
example, on an ecommerce website you could use a three-dimensional index
on the dimensions (red, green, blue) to search for products in a certain
range of colors, or in a database of weather observations you could have
a two-dimensional index on (date, temperature) in order to efficiently
search for all the observations during the year 2013 where the
temperature was between 25 and 30℃. With a one-dimensional index, you
would have to either scan over all the records from 2013 (regardless of
temperature) and then filter them by temperature, or vice versa. A 2D
index could narrow down by timestamp and temperature simultaneously
[84].

Full-Text Search

Full-text search allows you to search a collection of text documents
(web pages, product descriptions, etc.) by keywords that might appear
anywhere in the text [85]. Information retrieval is a big, specialist
topic that often involves language-specific processing: for example,
several Asian languages are written without spaces or punctuation
between words, and therefore splitting text into words requires a model
that indicates which character sequences constitute a word. Full-text
search also often involves matching words that are similar but not
identical (such as typos or different grammatical forms of words) and
synonyms. Those problems go beyond the scope of this book.

However, at its core, you can think of full-text search as another kind
of multidimensional query: in this case, each word that might appear in
a text (a term) is a dimension. A document that contains term x has a
value of 1 in dimension x, and a document that doesn’t contain x has a
value of 0. Searching for documents mentioning “red apples” means a
query that looks for a 1 in the red dimension, and simultaneously a 1 in
the apples dimension. The number of dimensions may thus be very large.

The data structure that many search engines use to answer such queries
is called an inverted index. This is a key-value structure where the key
is a term, and the value is the list of IDs of all the documents that
contain the term (the postings list). If the document IDs are sequential
numbers, the postings list can also be represented as a sparse bitmap,
like in Figure 4-8: the nth bit in the bitmap for term x is a 1 if the
document with ID n contains the term x [86].

Finding all the documents that contain both terms x and y is now similar
to a vectorized data warehouse query that searches for rows matching two
conditions (Figure 4-9): load the two bitmaps for terms x and y and
compute their bitwise AND. Even if the bitmaps are run-length encoded,
this can be done very efficiently.

For example, Lucene, the full-text indexing engine used by Elasticsearch
and Solr, works like this [87]. It stores the mapping from term to
postings list in SSTable-like sorted files, which are merged in the
background using the same log-structured approach we saw earlier in this
chapter [88]. PostgreSQL’s GIN index type also uses postings lists to
support full-text search and indexing inside JSON documents [89, 90].

Instead of breaking text into words, an alternative is to find all the
substrings of length n, which are called n-grams. For example, the
trigrams (n = 3) of the string "hello" are "hel", "ell", and "llo". If
we build an inverted index of all trigrams, we can search the documents
for arbitrary substrings that are at least three characters long.
Trigram indexes even allows regular expressions in search queries; the
downside is that they are quite large [91].

To cope with typos in documents or queries, Lucene is able to search
text for words within a certain edit distance (an edit distance of 1
means that one letter has been added, removed, or replaced) [92]. It
does this by storing the set of terms as a finite state automaton over
the characters in the keys, similar to a trie [93], and transforming it
into a Levenshtein automaton, which supports efficient search for words
within a given edit distance [94].

Vector Embeddings

Semantic search goes beyond synonyms and typos to try and understand
document concepts and user intentions. For example, if your help pages
contain a page titled “cancelling your subscription”, users should still
be able to find that page when searching for “how to close my account”
or “terminate contract”, which are close in terms of meaning even though
they use completely different words.

To understand a document’s semantics—​its meaning—​semantic search indexes
use embedding models to translate a document into a vector of
floating-point values, called a vector embedding. The vector represents
a point in a multi-dimensional space, and each floating-point value
represents the document’s location along one dimension’s axis. Embedding
models generate vector embeddings that are near each other (in this
multi-dimensional space) when the embedding’s input documents are
semantically similar.

Note

We saw the term vectorized processing in “Query Execution: Compilation
and Vectorization”. Vectors in semantic search have a different meaning.
In vectorized processing, the vector refers to a batch of bits that can
be processed with specially optimized code. In embedding models, vectors
are a list of floating point numbers that represent a location in
multi-dimensional space.

For example, a three-dimensional vector embedding for a Wikipedia page
about agriculture might be [0.1, 0.22, 0.11]. A Wikipedia page about
vegetables would be quite near, perhaps with an embedding of [0.13,
0.19, 0.24]. A page about star schemas might have an embedding of [0.82,
0.39, -0.74], comparatively far away. We can tell by looking that the
first two vectors are closer than the third.

Embedding models use much larger vectors (often over 1,000 numbers), but
the principles are the same. We don’t try to understand what the
individual numbers mean; they’re simply a way for embedding models to
point to a location in an abstract multi-dimensional space. Search
engines use distance functions such as cosine similarity or Euclidean
distance to measure the distance between vectors. Cosine similarity
measures the cosine of the angle of two vectors to determine how close
they are, while Euclidean distance measures the straight-line distance
between two points in space.

Many early embedding models such as Word2Vec [95], BERT [96], and GPT
[97] worked with text data. Such models are usually implemented as
neural networks. Researchers went on to create embedding models for
video, audio, and images as well. More recently, model architecture has
become multimodal: a single model can generate vector embeddings for
multiple modalities such as text and images.

Semantic search engines use an embedding model to generate a vector
embedding when a user enters a query. The user’s query and related
context (such as a user’s location) are fed into the embedding model.
After the embedding model generates the query’s vector embedding, the
search engine must find documents with similar vector embeddings using a
vector index.

Vector indexes store the vector embeddings of a collection of documents.
To query the index, you pass in the vector embedding of the query, and
the index returns the documents whose vectors are closest to the query
vector. Since the R-trees we saw previously don’t work well for vectors
with many dimensions, specialized vector indexes are used, such as:

Flat indexes

    Vectors are stored in the index as they are. A query must read every
    vector and measure its distance to the query vector. Flat indexes
    are accurate, but measuring the distance between the query and each
    vector is slow.

Inverted file (IVF) indexes

    The vector space is clustered into partitions (called centroids) of
    vectors to reduce the number of vectors that must be compared. IVF
    indexes are faster than flat indexes, but can give only approximate
    results: the query and a document may fall into different
    partitions, even though they are close to each other. A query on an
    IVF index first defines probes, which are simply the number of
    partitions to check. Queries that use more probes will be more
    accurate, but will be slower, as more vectors must be compared.

Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW)

    HNSW indexes maintain multiple layers of the vector space, as
    illustrated in Figure 4-11. Each layer is represented as a graph,
    where nodes represent vectors, and edges represent proximity to
    nearby vectors. A query starts by locating the nearest vector in the
    topmost layer, which has a small number of nodes. The query then
    moves to the same node in the layer below and follows the edges in
    that layer, which is more densely connected, looking for a vector
    that is closer to the query vector. The process continues until the
    last layer is reached. As with IVF indexes, HNSW indexes are
    approximate.

[ddia 0411]

Figure 4-11. Searching for the database entry that is closest to a given query vector in a HNSW index.

Many popular vector databases implement IVF and HNSW indexes. Facebook’s
Faiss library has many variations of each [98], and PostgreSQL’s
pgvector supports both as well [99]. The full details of the IVF and
HNSW algorithms are beyond the scope of this book, but their papers are
an excellent resource [100, 101].

Summary

In this chapter we tried to get to the bottom of how databases perform
storage and retrieval. What happens when you store data in a database,
and what does the database do when you query for the data again later?

“Analytical versus Operational Systems” introduced the distinction
between transaction processing (OLTP) and analytics (OLAP). In this
chapter we saw that storage engines optimized for OLTP look very
different from those optimized for analytics:

- OLTP systems are optimized for a high volume of requests, each of
  which reads and writes a small number of records, and which need fast
  responses. The records are typically accessed via a primary key or a
  secondary index, and these indexes are typically ordered mappings from
  key to record, which also support range queries.

- Data warehouses and similar analytic systems are optimized for complex
  read queries that scan over a large number of records. They generally
  use a column-oriented storage layout with compression that minimizes
  the amount of data that such a query needs to read off disk, and
  just-in-time compilation of queries or vectorization to minimize the
  amount of CPU time spent processing the data.

On the OLTP side, we saw storage engines from two main schools of
thought:

- The log-structured approach, which only permits appending to files and
  deleting obsolete files, but never updates a file that has been
  written. SSTables, LSM-trees, RocksDB, Cassandra, HBase, Scylla,
  Lucene, and others belong to this group. In general, log-structured
  storage engines tend to provide high write throughput.

- The update-in-place approach, which treats the disk as a set of
  fixed-size pages that can be overwritten. B-trees, the biggest example
  of this philosophy, are used in all major relational OLTP databases
  and also many nonrelational ones. As a rule of thumb, B-trees tend to
  be better for reads, providing higher read throughput and lower
  response times than log-structured storage.

We then looked at indexes that can search for multiple conditions at the
same time: multidimensional indexes such as R-trees that can search for
points on a map by latitude and longitude at the same time, and
full-text search indexes that can search for multiple keywords appearing
in the same text. Finally, vector databases are used for semantic search
on text documents and other media; they use vectors with a larger number
of dimensions and find similar documents by comparing vector similarity.

As an application developer, if you’re armed with this knowledge about
the internals of storage engines, you are in a much better position to
know which tool is best suited for your particular application. If you
need to adjust a database’s tuning parameters, this understanding allows
you to imagine what effect a higher or a lower value may have.

Although this chapter couldn’t make you an expert in tuning any one
particular storage engine, it has hopefully equipped you with enough
vocabulary and ideas that you can make sense of the documentation for
the database of your choice.

Footnotes

References

[1] Nikolay Samokhvalov. How partial, covering, and multicolumn indexes
may slow down UPDATEs in PostgreSQL. postgres.ai, October 2021. Archived
at perma.cc/PBK3-F4G9

[2] Goetz Graefe. Modern B-Tree Techniques. Foundations and Trends in
Databases, volume 3, issue 4, pages 203–402, August 2011.
doi:10.1561/1900000028

[3] Evan Jones. Why databases use ordered indexes but programming uses
hash tables. evanjones.ca, December 2019. Archived at perma.cc/NJX8-3ZZD

[4] Branimir Lambov. CEP-25: Trie-indexed SSTable format.
cwiki.apache.org, November 2022. Archived at perma.cc/HD7W-PW8U. Linked
Google Doc archived at perma.cc/UL6C-AAAE

[5] Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and
Clifford Stein: Introduction to Algorithms, 3rd edition. MIT Press,
2009. ISBN: 978-0-262-53305-8

[6] Branimir Lambov. Trie Memtables in Cassandra. Proceedings of the
VLDB Endowment, volume 15, issue 12, pages 3359–3371, August 2022.
doi:10.14778/3554821.3554828

[7] Dhruba Borthakur. The History of RocksDB. rocksdb.blogspot.com,
November 2013. Archived at perma.cc/Z7C5-JPSP

[8] Matteo Bertozzi. Apache HBase I/O – HFile. blog.cloudera.com, June
2012. Archived at perma.cc/U9XH-L2KL

[9] Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, Wilson C. Hsieh, Deborah
A. Wallach, Mike Burrows, Tushar Chandra, Andrew Fikes, and Robert E.
Gruber. Bigtable: A Distributed Storage System for Structured Data. At
7th USENIX Symposium on Operating System Design and Implementation
(OSDI), November 2006.

[10] Patrick O’Neil, Edward Cheng, Dieter Gawlick, and Elizabeth O’Neil.
The Log-Structured Merge-Tree (LSM-Tree). Acta Informatica, volume 33,
issue 4, pages 351–385, June 1996. doi:10.1007/s002360050048

[11] Mendel Rosenblum and John K. Ousterhout. The Design and
Implementation of a Log-Structured File System. ACM Transactions on
Computer Systems, volume 10, issue 1, pages 26–52, February 1992.
doi:10.1145/146941.146943

[12] Michael Armbrust, Tathagata Das, Liwen Sun, Burak Yavuz, Shixiong
Zhu, Mukul Murthy, Joseph Torres, Herman van Hovell, Adrian Ionescu,
Alicja Łuszczak, Michał Świtakowski, Michał Szafrański, Xiao Li, Takuya
Ueshin, Mostafa Mokhtar, Peter Boncz, Ali Ghodsi, Sameer Paranjpye,
Pieter Senster, Reynold Xin, and Matei Zaharia. Delta Lake:
High-Performance ACID Table Storage over Cloud Object Stores.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 13, issue 12, pages 3411–3424,
August 2020. doi:10.14778/3415478.3415560

[13] Burton H. Bloom. Space/Time Trade-offs in Hash Coding with
Allowable Errors. Communications of the ACM, volume 13, issue 7, pages
422–426, July 1970. doi:10.1145/362686.362692

[14] Adam Kirsch and Michael Mitzenmacher. Less Hashing, Same
Performance: Building a Better Bloom Filter. Random Structures &
Algorithms, volume 33, issue 2, pages 187–218, September 2008.
doi:10.1002/rsa.20208

[15] Thomas Hurst. Bloom Filter Calculator. hur.st, September 2023.
Archived at perma.cc/L3AV-6VC2

[16] Chen Luo and Michael J. Carey. LSM-based storage techniques: a
survey. The VLDB Journal, volume 29, pages 393–418, July 2019.
doi:10.1007/s00778-019-00555-y

[17] Mark Callaghan. Name that compaction algorithm.
smalldatum.blogspot.com, August 2018. Archived at perma.cc/CN4M-82DY

[18] Prashanth Rao. Embedded databases (1): The harmony of DuckDB,
KùzuDB and LanceDB. thedataquarry.com, August 2023. Archived at
perma.cc/PA28-2R35

[19] Hacker News discussion. Bluesky migrates to single-tenant SQLite.
news.ycombinator.com, October 2023. Archived at perma.cc/69LM-5P6X

[20] Rudolf Bayer and Edward M. McCreight. Organization and Maintenance
of Large Ordered Indices. Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories,
Mathematical and Information Sciences Laboratory, report no. 20, July
1970. doi:10.1145/1734663.1734671

[21] Douglas Comer. The Ubiquitous B-Tree. ACM Computing Surveys, volume
11, issue 2, pages 121–137, June 1979. doi:10.1145/356770.356776

[22] C. Mohan and Frank Levine. ARIES/IM: An Efficient and High
Concurrency Index Management Method Using Write-Ahead Logging. At ACM
International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), June 1992.
doi:10.1145/130283.130338

[23] Hironobu Suzuki. The Internals of PostgreSQL. interdb.jp, 2017.

[24] Howard Chu. LDAP at Lightning Speed. At Build Stuff ’14, November
2014. Archived at perma.cc/GB6Z-P8YH

[25] Manos Athanassoulis, Michael S. Kester, Lukas M. Maas, Radu Stoica,
Stratos Idreos, Anastasia Ailamaki, and Mark Callaghan. Designing Access
Methods: The RUM Conjecture. At 19th International Conference on
Extending Database Technology (EDBT), March 2016.
doi:10.5441/002/edbt.2016.42

[26] Ben Stopford. Log Structured Merge Trees. benstopford.com, February
2015. Archived at perma.cc/E5BV-KUJ6

[27] Mark Callaghan. The Advantages of an LSM vs a B-Tree.
smalldatum.blogspot.co.uk, January 2016. Archived at perma.cc/3TYZ-EFUD

[28] Oana Balmau, Florin Dinu, Willy Zwaenepoel, Karan Gupta,
Ravishankar Chandhiramoorthi, and Diego Didona. SILK: Preventing Latency
Spikes in Log-Structured Merge Key-Value Stores. At USENIX Annual
Technical Conference, July 2019.

[29] Igor Canadi, Siying Dong, Mark Callaghan, et al. RocksDB Tuning
Guide. github.com, 2023. Archived at perma.cc/UNY4-MK6C

[30] Gabriel Haas and Viktor Leis. What Modern NVMe Storage Can Do, and
How to Exploit it: High-Performance I/O for High-Performance Storage
Engines. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 16, issue 9, pages
2090-2102. doi:10.14778/3598581.3598584

[31] Emmanuel Goossaert. Coding for SSDs. codecapsule.com, February
2014.

[32] Jack Vanlightly. Is sequential IO dead in the era of the NVMe
drive? jack-vanlightly.com, May 2023. Archived at perma.cc/7TMZ-TAPU

[33] Alibaba Cloud Storage Team. Storage System Design Analysis: Factors
Affecting NVMe SSD Performance (2). alibabacloud.com, January 2019.
Archived at archive.org

[34] Xiao-Yu Hu and Robert Haas. The Fundamental Limit of Flash Random
Write Performance: Understanding, Analysis and Performance Modelling.
dominoweb.draco.res.ibm.com, March 2010. Archived at perma.cc/8JUL-4ZDS

[35] Lanyue Lu, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Andrea C.
Arpaci-Dusseau, and Remzi H. Arpaci-Dusseau. WiscKey: Separating Keys
from Values in SSD-conscious Storage. At 4th USENIX Conference on File
and Storage Technologies (FAST), February 2016.

[36] Peter Zaitsev. Innodb Double Write. percona.com, August 2006.
Archived at perma.cc/NT4S-DK7T

[37] Tomas Vondra. On the Impact of Full-Page Writes. 2ndquadrant.com,
November 2016. Archived at perma.cc/7N6B-CVL3

[38] Mark Callaghan. Read, write & space amplification - B-Tree vs LSM.
smalldatum.blogspot.com, November 2015. Archived at perma.cc/S487-WK5P

[39] Mark Callaghan. Choosing Between Efficiency and Performance with
RocksDB. At Code Mesh, November 2016. Video at
youtube.com/watch?v=tgzkgZVXKB4

[40] Subhadeep Sarkar, Tarikul Islam Papon, Dimitris Staratzis, Zichen
Zhu, and Manos Athanassoulis. Enabling Timely and Persistent Deletion in
LSM-Engines. ACM Transactions on Database Systems, volume 48, issue 3,
article no. 8, August 2023. doi:10.1145/3599724

[41] Drew Silcock. How Postgres stores data on disk – this one’s a page
turner. drew.silcock.dev, August 2024. Archived at perma.cc/8K7K-7VJ2

[42] Joe Webb. Using Covering Indexes to Improve Query Performance.
simple-talk.com, September 2008. Archived at perma.cc/6MEZ-R5VR

[43] Michael Stonebraker, Samuel Madden, Daniel J. Abadi, Stavros
Harizopoulos, Nabil Hachem, and Pat Helland. The End of an Architectural
Era (It’s Time for a Complete Rewrite). At 33rd International Conference
on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), September 2007.

[44] VoltDB Technical Overview White Paper. VoltDB, 2017. Archived at
perma.cc/B9SF-SK5G

[45] Stephen M. Rumble, Ankita Kejriwal, and John K. Ousterhout.
Log-Structured Memory for DRAM-Based Storage. At 12th USENIX Conference
on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), February 2014.

[46] Stavros Harizopoulos, Daniel J. Abadi, Samuel Madden, and Michael
Stonebraker. OLTP Through the Looking Glass, and What We Found There. At
ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), June 2008.
doi:10.1145/1376616.1376713

[47] Per-Åke Larson, Cipri Clinciu, Campbell Fraser, Eric N. Hanson,
Mostafa Mokhtar, Michal Nowakiewicz, Vassilis Papadimos, Susan L. Price,
Srikumar Rangarajan, Remus Rusanu, and Mayukh Saubhasik. Enhancements to
SQL Server Column Stores. At ACM International Conference on Management
of Data (SIGMOD), June 2013. doi:10.1145/2463676.2463708

[48] Franz Färber, Norman May, Wolfgang Lehner, Philipp Große, Ingo
Müller, Hannes Rauhe, and Jonathan Dees. The SAP HANA Database – An
Architecture Overview. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, volume 35, issue
1, pages 28–33, March 2012.

[49] Michael Stonebraker. The Traditional RDBMS Wisdom Is (Almost
Certainly) All Wrong. Presentation at EPFL, May 2013.

[50] Adam Prout, Szu-Po Wang, Joseph Victor, Zhou Sun, Yongzhu Li, Jack
Chen, Evan Bergeron, Eric Hanson, Robert Walzer, Rodrigo Gomes, and
Nikita Shamgunov. Cloud-Native Transactions and Analytics in
SingleStore. At ACM International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD), June 2022. doi:10.1145/3514221.3526055

[51] Tino Tereshko and Jordan Tigani. BigQuery under the hood.
cloud.google.com, January 2016. Archived at perma.cc/WP2Y-FUCF

[52] Wes McKinney. The Road to Composable Data Systems: Thoughts on the
Last 15 Years and the Future. wesmckinney.com, September 2023. Archived
at perma.cc/6L2M-GTJX

[53] Michael Stonebraker, Daniel J. Abadi, Adam Batkin, Xuedong Chen,
Mitch Cherniack, Miguel Ferreira, Edmond Lau, Amerson Lin, Sam Madden,
Elizabeth O’Neil, Pat O’Neil, Alex Rasin, Nga Tran, and Stan Zdonik.
C-Store: A Column-oriented DBMS. At 31st International Conference on
Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), pages 553–564, September 2005.

[54] Julien Le Dem. Dremel Made Simple with Parquet. blog.twitter.com,
September 2013.

[55] Sergey Melnik, Andrey Gubarev, Jing Jing Long, Geoffrey Romer,
Shiva Shivakumar, Matt Tolton, and Theo Vassilakis. Dremel: Interactive
Analysis of Web-Scale Datasets. At 36th International Conference on Very
Large Data Bases (VLDB), pages 330–339, September 2010.
doi:10.14778/1920841.1920886

[56] Joe Kearney. Understanding Record Shredding: storing nested data in
columns. joekearney.co.uk, December 2016. Archived at perma.cc/ZD5N-AX5D

[57] Jamie Brandon. A shallow survey of OLAP and HTAP query engines.
scattered-thoughts.net, September 2023. Archived at perma.cc/L3KH-J4JF

[58] Benoit Dageville, Thierry Cruanes, Marcin Zukowski, Vadim Antonov,
Artin Avanes, Jon Bock, Jonathan Claybaugh, Daniel Engovatov, Martin
Hentschel, Jiansheng Huang, Allison W. Lee, Ashish Motivala, Abdul Q.
Munir, Steven Pelley, Peter Povinec, Greg Rahn, Spyridon Triantafyllis,
and Philipp Unterbrunner. The Snowflake Elastic Data Warehouse. At ACM
International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages 215–226,
June 2016. doi:10.1145/2882903.2903741

[59] Mark Raasveldt and Hannes Mühleisen. Data Management for Data
Science Towards Embedded Analytics. At 10th Conference on Innovative
Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2020.

[60] Jean-François Im, Kishore Gopalakrishna, Subbu Subramaniam, Mayank
Shrivastava, Adwait Tumbde, Xiaotian Jiang, Jennifer Dai, Seunghyun Lee,
Neha Pawar, Jialiang Li, and Ravi Aringunram. Pinot: Realtime OLAP for
530 Million Users. At ACM International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD), pages 583–594, May 2018. doi:10.1145/3183713.3190661

[61] Fangjin Yang, Eric Tschetter, Xavier Léauté, Nelson Ray, Gian
Merlino, and Deep Ganguli. Druid: A Real-time Analytical Data Store. At
ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), June 2014.
doi:10.1145/2588555.2595631

[62] Chunwei Liu, Anna Pavlenko, Matteo Interlandi, and Brandon Haynes.
Deep Dive into Common Open Formats for Analytical DBMSs. Proceedings of
the VLDB Endowment, volume 16, issue 11, pages 3044–3056, July 2023.
doi:10.14778/3611479.3611507

[63] Xinyu Zeng, Yulong Hui, Jiahong Shen, Andrew Pavlo, Wes McKinney,
and Huanchen Zhang. An Empirical Evaluation of Columnar Storage Formats.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 17, issue 2, pages 148–161.
doi:10.14778/3626292.3626298

[64] Weston Pace. Lance v2: A columnar container format for modern data.
blog.lancedb.com, April 2024. Archived at perma.cc/ZK3Q-S9VJ

[65] Yoav Helfman. Nimble, A New Columnar File Format. At VeloxCon,
April 2024.

[66] Wes McKinney. Apache Arrow: High-Performance Columnar Data
Framework. At CMU Database Group – Vaccination Database Tech Talks,
December 2021.

[67] Wes McKinney. Python for Data Analysis, 3rd Edition. O’Reilly
Media, August 2022. ISBN: 9781098104023

[68] Paul Dix. The Design of InfluxDB IOx: An In-Memory Columnar
Database Written in Rust with Apache Arrow. At CMU Database Group –
Vaccination Database Tech Talks, May 2021.

[69] Carlota Soto and Mike Freedman. Building Columnar Compression for
Large PostgreSQL Databases. timescale.com, March 2024. Archived at
perma.cc/7KTF-V3EH

[70] Daniel Lemire, Gregory Ssi‐Yan‐Kai, and Owen Kaser. Consistently
faster and smaller compressed bitmaps with Roaring. Software: Practice
and Experience, volume 46, issue 11, pages 1547–1569, November 2016.
doi:10.1002/spe.2402

[71] Jaz Volpert. An entire Social Network in 1.6GB (GraphD Part 2).
jazco.dev, April 2024. Archived at perma.cc/L27Z-QVMG

[72] Daniel J. Abadi, Peter Boncz, Stavros Harizopoulos, Stratos Idreos,
and Samuel Madden. The Design and Implementation of Modern
Column-Oriented Database Systems. Foundations and Trends in Databases,
volume 5, issue 3, pages 197–280, December 2013. doi:10.1561/1900000024

[73] Andrew Lamb, Matt Fuller, Ramakrishna Varadarajan, Nga Tran, Ben
Vandiver, Lyric Doshi, and Chuck Bear. The Vertica Analytic Database:
C-Store 7 Years Later. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 5,
issue 12, pages 1790–1801, August 2012. doi:10.14778/2367502.2367518

[74] Timo Kersten, Viktor Leis, Alfons Kemper, Thomas Neumann, Andrew
Pavlo, and Peter Boncz. Everything You Always Wanted to Know About
Compiled and Vectorized Queries But Were Afraid to Ask. Proceedings of
the VLDB Endowment, volume 11, issue 13, pages 2209–2222, September
2018. doi:10.14778/3275366.3284966

[75] Forrest Smith. Memory Bandwidth Napkin Math. forrestthewoods.com,
February 2020. Archived at perma.cc/Y8U4-PS7N

[76] Peter Boncz, Marcin Zukowski, and Niels Nes. MonetDB/X100:
Hyper-Pipelining Query Execution. At 2nd Biennial Conference on
Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2005.

[77] Jingren Zhou and Kenneth A. Ross. Implementing Database Operations
Using SIMD Instructions. At ACM International Conference on Management
of Data (SIGMOD), pages 145–156, June 2002. doi:10.1145/564691.564709

[78] Kevin Bartley. OLTP Queries: Transfer Expensive Workloads to
Materialize. materialize.com, August 2024. Archived at
perma.cc/4TYM-TYD8

[79] Jim Gray, Surajit Chaudhuri, Adam Bosworth, Andrew Layman, Don
Reichart, Murali Venkatrao, Frank Pellow, and Hamid Pirahesh. Data Cube:
A Relational Aggregation Operator Generalizing Group-By, Cross-Tab, and
Sub-Totals. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, volume 1, issue 1,
pages 29–53, March 2007. doi:10.1023/A:1009726021843

[80] Frank Ramsak, Volker Markl, Robert Fenk, Martin Zirkel, Klaus
Elhardt, and Rudolf Bayer. Integrating the UB-Tree into a Database
System Kernel. At 26th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases
(VLDB), September 2000.

[81] Octavian Procopiuc, Pankaj K. Agarwal, Lars Arge, and Jeffrey Scott
Vitter. Bkd-Tree: A Dynamic Scalable kd-Tree. At 8th International
Symposium on Spatial and Temporal Databases (SSTD), pages 46–65, July
2003. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-45072-6_4

[82] Joseph M. Hellerstein, Jeffrey F. Naughton, and Avi Pfeffer.
Generalized Search Trees for Database Systems. At 21st International
Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), September 1995.

[83] Isaac Brodsky. H3: Uber’s Hexagonal Hierarchical Spatial Index.
eng.uber.com, June 2018. Archived at archive.org

[84] Robert Escriva, Bernard Wong, and Emin Gün Sirer. HyperDex: A
Distributed, Searchable Key-Value Store. At ACM SIGCOMM Conference,
August 2012. doi:10.1145/2377677.2377681

[85] Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze.
Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
ISBN: 978-0-521-86571-5, available online at nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book

[86] Jianguo Wang, Chunbin Lin, Yannis Papakonstantinou, and Steven
Swanson. An Experimental Study of Bitmap Compression vs. Inverted List
Compression. At ACM International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD), pages 993–1008, May 2017. doi:10.1145/3035918.3064007

[87] Adrien Grand. What is in a Lucene Index? At Lucene/Solr Revolution,
November 2013. Archived at perma.cc/Z7QN-GBYY

[88] Michael McCandless. Visualizing Lucene’s Segment Merges.
blog.mikemccandless.com, February 2011. Archived at perma.cc/3ZV8-72W6

[89] Lukas Fittl. Understanding Postgres GIN Indexes: The Good and the
Bad. pganalyze.com, December 2021. Archived at perma.cc/V3MW-26H6

[90] Jimmy Angelakos. The State of (Full) Text Search in PostgreSQL 12.
At FOSDEM, February 2020. Archived at perma.cc/J6US-3WZS

[91] Alexander Korotkov. Index support for regular expression search. At
PGConf.EU Prague, October 2012. Archived at perma.cc/5RFZ-ZKDQ

[92] Michael McCandless. Lucene’s FuzzyQuery Is 100 Times Faster in 4.0.
blog.mikemccandless.com, March 2011. Archived at perma.cc/E2WC-GHTW

[93] Steffen Heinz, Justin Zobel, and Hugh E. Williams. Burst Tries: A
Fast, Efficient Data Structure for String Keys. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems, volume 20, issue 2, pages 192–223, April 2002.
doi:10.1145/506309.506312

[94] Klaus U. Schulz and Stoyan Mihov. Fast String Correction with
Levenshtein Automata. International Journal on Document Analysis and
Recognition, volume 5, issue 1, pages 67–85, November 2002.
doi:10.1007/s10032-002-0082-8

[95] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient
Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space. At International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), May 2013.
doi:10.48550/arXiv.1301.3781

[96] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova.
BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
Understanding. At Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
volume 1, pages 4171–4186, June 2019. doi:10.18653/v1/N19-1423

[97] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever.
Improving Language Understanding by Generative Pre-Training. openai.com,
June 2018. Archived at perma.cc/5N3C-DJ4C

[98] Matthijs Douze, Maria Lomeli, and Lucas Hosseini. Faiss indexes.
github.com, August 2024. Archived at perma.cc/2EWG-FPBS

[99] Varik Matevosyan. Understanding pgvector’s HNSW Index Storage in
Postgres. lantern.dev, August 2024. Archived at perma.cc/B2YB-JB59

[100] Dmitry Baranchuk, Artem Babenko, and Yury Malkov. Revisiting the
Inverted Indices for Billion-Scale Approximate Nearest Neighbors. At
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 202–216, September
2018. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-01258-8_13

[101] Yury A. Malkov and Dmitry A. Yashunin. Efficient and robust
approximate nearest neighbor search using Hierarchical Navigable Small
World graphs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, volume 42, issue 4, pages 824–836, April 2020.
doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889473

Chapter 5. Encoding and Evolution

  Everything changes and nothing stands still.

  Heraclitus of Ephesus, as quoted by Plato in Cratylus (360 BCE)

A Note for Early Release Readers

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
advantage of these technologies long before the official release of
these titles.

This will be the 5th chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo for this
book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content and/or
examples in this book, or if you notice missing material within this
chapter, please reach out on GitHub.

Applications inevitably change over time. Features are added or modified
as new products are launched, user requirements become better
understood, or business circumstances change. In Chapter 2 we introduced
the idea of evolvability: we should aim to build systems that make it
easy to adapt to change (see “Evolvability: Making Change Easy”).

In most cases, a change to an application’s features also requires a
change to data that it stores: perhaps a new field or record type needs
to be captured, or perhaps existing data needs to be presented in a new
way.

The data models we discussed in Chapter 3 have different ways of coping
with such change. Relational databases generally assume that all data in
the database conforms to one schema: although that schema can be changed
(through schema migrations; i.e., ALTER statements), there is exactly
one schema in force at any one point in time. By contrast,
schema-on-read (“schemaless”) databases don’t enforce a schema, so the
database can contain a mixture of older and newer data formats written
at different times (see “Schema flexibility in the document model”).

When a data format or schema changes, a corresponding change to
application code often needs to happen (for example, you add a new field
to a record, and the application code starts reading and writing that
field). However, in a large application, code changes often cannot
happen instantaneously:

-  With server-side applications you may want to perform a rolling
  upgrade (also known as a staged rollout), deploying the new version to
  a few nodes at a time, checking whether the new version is running
  smoothly, and gradually working your way through all the nodes. This
  allows new versions to be deployed without service downtime, and thus
  encourages more frequent releases and better evolvability.

- With client-side applications you’re at the mercy of the user, who may
  not install the update for some time.

This means that old and new versions of the code, and old and new data
formats, may potentially all coexist in the system at the same time. In
order for the system to continue running smoothly, we need to maintain
compatibility in both directions:

Backward compatibility

     Newer code can read data that was written by older code.

Forward compatibility

     Older code can read data that was written by newer code.

Backward compatibility is normally not hard to achieve: as author of the
newer code, you know the format of data written by older code, and so
you can explicitly handle it (if necessary by simply keeping the old
code to read the old data). Forward compatibility can be trickier,
because it requires older code to ignore additions made by a newer
version of the code.

Another challenge with forward compatibility is illustrated in
Figure 5-1. Say you add a field to a record schema, and the newer code
creates a record containing that new field and stores it in a database.
Subsequently, an older version of the code (which doesn’t yet know about
the new field) reads the record, updates it, and writes it back. In this
situation, the desirable behavior is usually for the old code to keep
the new field intact, even though it couldn’t be interpreted. But if the
record is decoded into into a model object that does not explicitly
preserve unknown fields, data can be lost, like in Figure 5-1.

[ddia 0501]

Figure 5-1. When an older version of the application updates data previously written by a newer version of the application, data may be lost if you’re not careful.

In this chapter we will look at several formats for encoding data,
including JSON, XML, Protocol Buffers, and Avro. In particular, we will
look at how they handle schema changes and how they support systems
where old and new data and code need to coexist. We will then discuss
how those formats are used for data storage and for communication: in
databases, web services, REST APIs, remote procedure calls (RPC),
workflow engines, and event-driven systems such as actors and message
queues.

Formats for Encoding Data

Programs usually work with data in (at least) two different
representations:

1.  In memory, data is kept in objects, structs, lists, arrays, hash
    tables, trees, and so on. These data structures are optimized for
    efficient access and manipulation by the CPU (typically using
    pointers).

2.  When you want to write data to a file or send it over the network,
    you have to encode it as some kind of self-contained sequence of
    bytes (for example, a JSON document). Since a pointer wouldn’t make
    sense to any other process, this sequence-of-bytes representation
    often looks quite different from the data structures that are
    normally used in memory.

Thus, we need some kind of translation between the two representations.
The translation from the in-memory representation to a byte sequence is
called encoding (also known as serialization or marshalling), and the
reverse is called decoding (parsing, deserialization, unmarshalling).

Terminology clash

Serialization is unfortunately also used in the context of transactions
(see [Link to Come]), with a completely different meaning. To avoid
overloading the word we’ll stick with encoding in this book, even though
serialization is perhaps a more common term.

There are exceptions in which encoding/decoding is not needed—for
example, when a database operates directly on compressed data loaded
from disk, as discussed in “Query Execution: Compilation and
Vectorization”. There are also zero-copy data formats that are designed
to be used both at runtime and on disk/on the network, without an
explicit conversion step, such as Cap’n Proto and FlatBuffers.

However, most systems need to convert between in-memory objects and flat
byte sequences. As this is such a common problem, there are a myriad
different libraries and encoding formats to choose from. Let’s do a
brief overview.

Language-Specific Formats

Many programming languages come with built-in support for encoding
in-memory objects into byte sequences. For example, Java has
java.io.Serializable, Python has pickle, Ruby has Marshal, and so on.
Many third-party libraries also exist, such as Kryo for Java.

These encoding libraries are very convenient, because they allow
in-memory objects to be saved and restored with minimal additional code.
However, they also have a number of deep problems:

- The encoding is often tied to a particular programming language, and
  reading the data in another language is very difficult. If you store
  or transmit data in such an encoding, you are committing yourself to
  your current programming language for potentially a very long time,
  and precluding integrating your systems with those of other
  organizations (which may use different languages).

- In order to restore data in the same object types, the decoding
  process needs to be able to instantiate arbitrary classes. This is
  frequently a source of security problems [1]: if an attacker can get
  your application to decode an arbitrary byte sequence, they can
  instantiate arbitrary classes, which in turn often allows them to do
  terrible things such as remotely executing arbitrary code [2, 3].

- Versioning data is often an afterthought in these libraries: as they
  are intended for quick and easy encoding of data, they often neglect
  the inconvenient problems of forward and backward compatibility [4].

- Efficiency (CPU time taken to encode or decode, and the size of the
  encoded structure) is also often an afterthought. For example, Java’s
  built-in serialization is notorious for its bad performance and
  bloated encoding [5].

For these reasons it’s generally a bad idea to use your language’s
built-in encoding for anything other than very transient purposes.

JSON, XML, and Binary Variants

When moving to standardized encodings that can be written and read by
many programming languages, JSON and XML are the obvious contenders.
They are widely known, widely supported, and almost as widely disliked.
XML is often criticized for being too verbose and unnecessarily
complicated [6]. JSON’s popularity is mainly due to its built-in support
in web browsers and simplicity relative to XML. CSV is another popular
language-independent format, but it only supports tabular data without
nesting.

JSON, XML, and CSV are textual formats, and thus somewhat human-readable
(although the syntax is a popular topic of debate). Besides the
superficial syntactic issues, they also have some subtle problems:

-  There is a lot of ambiguity around the encoding of numbers. In XML
  and CSV, you cannot distinguish between a number and a string that
  happens to consist of digits (except by referring to an external
  schema). JSON distinguishes strings and numbers, but it doesn’t
  distinguish integers and floating-point numbers, and it doesn’t
  specify a precision.

  This is a problem when dealing with large numbers; for example,
  integers greater than 2⁵³ cannot be exactly represented in an IEEE 754
  double-precision floating-point number, so such numbers become
  inaccurate when parsed in a language that uses floating-point numbers,
  such as JavaScript [7]. An example of numbers larger than 2⁵³ occurs
  on X (formerly Twitter), which uses a 64-bit number to identify each
  post. The JSON returned by the API includes post IDs twice, once as a
  JSON number and once as a decimal string, to work around the fact that
  the numbers are not correctly parsed by JavaScript applications [8].

-  JSON and XML have good support for Unicode character strings (i.e.,
  human-readable text), but they don’t support binary strings (sequences
  of bytes without a character encoding). Binary strings are a useful
  feature, so people get around this limitation by encoding the binary
  data as text using Base64. The schema is then used to indicate that
  the value should be interpreted as Base64-encoded. This works, but
  it’s somewhat hacky and increases the data size by 33%.

-  XML Schema and JSON Schema are powerful, and thus quite complicated
  to learn and implement. Since the correct interpretation of data (such
  as numbers and binary strings) depends on information in the schema,
  applications that don’t use XML/JSON schemas need to potentially
  hard-code the appropriate encoding/decoding logic instead.

- CSV does not have any schema, so it is up to the application to define
  the meaning of each row and column. If an application change adds a
  new row or column, you have to handle that change manually. CSV is
  also a quite vague format (what happens if a value contains a comma or
  a newline character?). Although its escaping rules have been formally
  specified [9], not all parsers implement them correctly.

Despite these flaws, JSON, XML, and CSV are good enough for many
purposes. It’s likely that they will remain popular, especially as data
interchange formats (i.e., for sending data from one organization to
another). In these situations, as long as people agree on what the
format is, it often doesn’t matter how pretty or efficient the format
is. The difficulty of getting different organizations to agree on
anything outweighs most other concerns.

JSON Schema

JSON Schema has become widely adopted as a way to model data whenever
it’s exchanged between systems or written to storage. You’ll find JSON
schemas in web services (see “Web services”) as part of the OpenAPI web
service specification, schema registries such as Confluent’s Schema
Registry and Red Hat’s Apicurio Registry, and in databases such as
PostgreSQL’s pg_jsonschema validator extension and MongoDB’s $jsonSchema
validator syntax.

The JSON Schema specification offers a number of features. Schemas
include standard primitive types including strings, numbers, integers,
objects, arrays, booleans, or nulls. But JSON Schema also offers a
separate validation specification that allows developers to overlay
constraints on fields. For example, a port field might have a minimum of
1 and a maximum of 65535.

JSON Schemas can have either open or closed content models. An open
content model permits any field not defined in the schema to exist with
any data type, whereas a closed content model only allows fields that
are explicitly defined. The open content model in JSON Schema is enabled
when additionalProperties is set to true, which is the default. Thus,
JSON Schemas are usually a definition of what isn’t permitted (namely,
invalid values on any of the defined fields), rather than what is
permitted in a schema.

Open content models are powerful, but can be complex. For example, say
you want to define a map from integers (such as IDs) to strings. JSON
does not have a map or dictionary type, only an “object” type that can
contain string keys, and values of any type. You can then constrain this
type with JSON Schema so that keys may only contain digits, and values
can only be strings, using patternProperties and additionalProperties as
shown in Example 5-1.

Example 5-1. Example JSON Schema with integer keys and string values. Integer keys are represented as strings containing only integers since JSON Schema requires all keys to be strings.

    {
      "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
      "type": "object",
      "patternProperties": {
        "^[0-9]+$": {
          "type": "string"
        }
      },
      "additionalProperties": false
    }

In addition to open and closed content models and validators, JSON
Schema supports conditional if/else schema logic, named types,
references to remote schemas, and much more. All of this makes for a
very powerful schema language. Such features also make for unwieldy
definitions. It can be challenging to resolve remote schemas, reason
about conditional rules, or evolve schemas in a forwards or backwards
compatible way [10]. Similar concerns apply to XML Schema [11].

Binary encoding

JSON is less verbose than XML, but both still use a lot of space
compared to binary formats. This observation led to the development of a
profusion of binary encodings for JSON (MessagePack, CBOR, BSON, BJSON,
UBJSON, BISON, Hessian, and Smile, to name a few) and for XML (WBXML and
Fast Infoset, for example). These formats have been adopted in various
niches, as they are more compact and sometimes faster to parse, but none
of them are as widely adopted as the textual versions of JSON and XML
[12].

Some of these formats extend the set of datatypes (e.g., distinguishing
integers and floating-point numbers, or adding support for binary
strings), but otherwise they keep the JSON/XML data model unchanged. In
particular, since they don’t prescribe a schema, they need to include
all the object field names within the encoded data. That is, in a binary
encoding of the JSON document in Example 5-2, they will need to include
the strings userName, favoriteNumber, and interests somewhere.

Example 5-2. Example record which we will encode in several binary formats in this chapter

    {
        "userName": "Martin",
        "favoriteNumber": 1337,
        "interests": ["daydreaming", "hacking"]
    }

Let’s look at an example of MessagePack, a binary encoding for JSON.
Figure 5-2 shows the byte sequence that you get if you encode the JSON
document in Example 5-2 with MessagePack. The first few bytes are as
follows:

1.  The first byte, 0x83, indicates that what follows is an object (top
    four bits = 0x80) with three fields (bottom four bits = 0x03). (In
    case you’re wondering what happens if an object has more than 15
    fields, so that the number of fields doesn’t fit in four bits, it
    then gets a different type indicator, and the number of fields is
    encoded in two or four bytes.)

2.  The second byte, 0xa8, indicates that what follows is a string (top
    four bits = 0xa0) that is eight bytes long (bottom four bits =
    0x08).

3.  The next eight bytes are the field name userName in ASCII. Since the
    length was indicated previously, there’s no need for any marker to
    tell us where the string ends (or any escaping).

4.  The next seven bytes encode the six-letter string value Martin with
    a prefix 0xa6, and so on.

The binary encoding is 66 bytes long, which is only a little less than
the 81 bytes taken by the textual JSON encoding (with whitespace
removed). All the binary encodings of JSON are similar in this regard.
It’s not clear whether such a small space reduction (and perhaps a
speedup in parsing) is worth the loss of human-readability.

In the following sections we will see how we can do much better, and
encode the same record in just 32 bytes.

[ddia 0502]

Figure 5-2. Example record (Example 5-2) encoded using MessagePack.

Protocol Buffers

Protocol Buffers (protobuf) is a binary encoding library developed at
Google. It is similar to Apache Thrift, which was originally developed
by Facebook [13]; most of what this section says about Protocol Buffers
applies also to Thrift.

Protocol Buffers requires a schema for any data that is encoded. To
encode the data in Example 5-2 in Protocol Buffers, you would describe
the schema in the Protocol Buffers interface definition language (IDL)
like this:

    syntax = "proto3";

    message Person {
        string user_name = 1;
        int64 favorite_number = 2;
        repeated string interests = 3;
    }

Protocol Buffers comes with a code generation tool that takes a schema
definition like the one shown here, and produces classes that implement
the schema in various programming languages. Your application code can
call this generated code to encode or decode records of the schema. The
schema language is very simple compared to JSON Schema: it only defines
the fields of records and their types, but it does not support other
restrictions on the possible values of fields.

Encoding Example 5-2 using a Protocol Buffers encoder requires 33 bytes,
as shown in Figure 5-3 [14].

[ddia 0503]

Figure 5-3. Example record encoded using Protocol Buffers.

Similarly to Figure 5-2, each field has a type annotation (to indicate
whether it is a string, integer, etc.) and, where required, a length
indication (such as the length of a string). The strings that appear in
the data (“Martin”, “daydreaming”, “hacking”) are also encoded as ASCII
(to be precise, UTF-8), similar to before.

The big difference compared to Figure 5-2 is that there are no field
names (userName, favoriteNumber, interests). Instead, the encoded data
contains field tags, which are numbers (1, 2, and 3). Those are the
numbers that appear in the schema definition. Field tags are like
aliases for fields—they are a compact way of saying what field we’re
talking about, without having to spell out the field name.

As you can see, Protocol Buffers saves even more space by packing the
field type and tag number into a single byte. It uses variable-length
integers: the number 1337 is encoded in two bytes, with the top bit of
each byte used to indicate whether there are still more bytes to come.
This means numbers between –64 and 63 are encoded in one byte, numbers
between –8192 and 8191 are encoded in two bytes, etc. Bigger numbers use
more bytes.

Protocol Buffers doesn’t have an explicit list or array datatype.
Instead, the repeated modifier on the interests field indicates that the
field contains a list of values, rather than a single value. In the
binary encoding, the list elements are represented simply as repeated
occurrences of the same field tag within the same record.

Field tags and schema evolution

We said previously that schemas inevitably need to change over time. We
call this schema evolution. How does Protocol Buffers handle schema
changes while keeping backward and forward compatibility?

As you can see from the examples, an encoded record is just the
concatenation of its encoded fields. Each field is identified by its tag
number (the numbers 1, 2, 3 in the sample schema) and annotated with a
datatype (e.g., string or integer). If a field value is not set, it is
simply omitted from the encoded record. From this you can see that field
tags are critical to the meaning of the encoded data. You can change the
name of a field in the schema, since the encoded data never refers to
field names, but you cannot change a field’s tag, since that would make
all existing encoded data invalid.

You can add new fields to the schema, provided that you give each field
a new tag number. If old code (which doesn’t know about the new tag
numbers you added) tries to read data written by new code, including a
new field with a tag number it doesn’t recognize, it can simply ignore
that field. The datatype annotation allows the parser to determine how
many bytes it needs to skip, and preserve the unknown fields to avoid
the problem in Figure 5-1. This maintains forward compatibility: old
code can read records that were written by new code.

What about backward compatibility? As long as each field has a unique
tag number, new code can always read old data, because the tag numbers
still have the same meaning. If a field was added in the new schema, and
you read old data that does not yet contain that field, it is filled in
with a default value (for example, the empty string if the field type is
string, or zero if it’s a number).

Removing a field is just like adding a field, with backward and forward
compatibility concerns reversed. You can never use the same tag number
again, because you may still have data written somewhere that includes
the old tag number, and that field must be ignored by new code. Tag
numbers used in the past can be reserved in the schema definition to
ensure they are not forgotten.

What about changing the datatype of a field? That is possible with some
types—check the documentation for details—but there is a risk that
values will get truncated. For example, say you change a 32-bit integer
into a 64-bit integer. New code can easily read data written by old
code, because the parser can fill in any missing bits with zeros.
However, if old code reads data written by new code, the old code is
still using a 32-bit variable to hold the value. If the decoded 64-bit
value won’t fit in 32 bits, it will be truncated.

Avro

Apache Avro is another binary encoding format that is interestingly
different from Protocol Buffers. It was started in 2009 as a subproject
of Hadoop, as a result of Protocol Buffers not being a good fit for
Hadoop’s use cases [15].

Avro also uses a schema to specify the structure of the data being
encoded. It has two schema languages: one (Avro IDL) intended for human
editing, and one (based on JSON) that is more easily machine-readable.
Like Protocol Buffers, this schema language specifies only fields and
their types, and not complex validation rules like in JSON Schema.

Our example schema, written in Avro IDL, might look like this:

    record Person {
        string               userName;
        union { null, long } favoriteNumber = null;
        array<string>        interests;
    }

The equivalent JSON representation of that schema is as follows:

    {
        "type": "record",
        "name": "Person",
        "fields": [
            {"name": "userName",       "type": "string"},
            {"name": "favoriteNumber", "type": ["null", "long"], "default": null},
            {"name": "interests",      "type": {"type": "array", "items": "string"}}
        ]
    }

First of all, notice that there are no tag numbers in the schema. If we
encode our example record (Example 5-2) using this schema, the Avro
binary encoding is just 32 bytes long—the most compact of all the
encodings we have seen. The breakdown of the encoded byte sequence is
shown in Figure 5-4.

If you examine the byte sequence, you can see that there is nothing to
identify fields or their datatypes. The encoding simply consists of
values concatenated together. A string is just a length prefix followed
by UTF-8 bytes, but there’s nothing in the encoded data that tells you
that it is a string. It could just as well be an integer, or something
else entirely. An integer is encoded using a variable-length encoding.

[ddia 0504]

Figure 5-4. Example record encoded using Avro.

To parse the binary data, you go through the fields in the order that
they appear in the schema and use the schema to tell you the datatype of
each field. This means that the binary data can only be decoded
correctly if the code reading the data is using the exact same schema as
the code that wrote the data. Any mismatch in the schema between the
reader and the writer would mean incorrectly decoded data.

So, how does Avro support schema evolution?

The writer’s schema and the reader’s schema

When an application wants to encode some data (to write it to a file or
database, to send it over the network, etc.), it encodes the data using
whatever version of the schema it knows about—for example, that schema
may be compiled into the application. This is known as the writer’s
schema.

When an application wants to decode some data (read it from a file or
database, receive it from the network, etc.), it uses two schemas: the
writer’s schema that is identical to the one used for encoding, and the
reader’s schema, which may be different. This is illustrated in
Figure 5-5. The reader’s schema defines the fields of each record that
the application code is expecting, and their types.

[ddia 0505]

Figure 5-5. In Protocol Buffers, encoding and decoding can use different versions of a schema. In Avro, decoding uses two schemas: the writer’s schema must be identical to the one used for encoding, but the reader’s schema can be an older or newer version.

If the reader’s and writer’s schema are the same, decoding is easy. If
they are different, Avro resolves the differences by looking at the
writer’s schema and the reader’s schema side by side and translating the
data from the writer’s schema into the reader’s schema. The Avro
specification [16, 17] defines exactly how this resolution works, and it
is illustrated in Figure 5-6.

For example, it’s no problem if the writer’s schema and the reader’s
schema have their fields in a different order, because the schema
resolution matches up the fields by field name. If the code reading the
data encounters a field that appears in the writer’s schema but not in
the reader’s schema, it is ignored. If the code reading the data expects
some field, but the writer’s schema does not contain a field of that
name, it is filled in with a default value declared in the reader’s
schema.

[ddia 0506]

Figure 5-6. An Avro reader resolves differences between the writer’s schema and the reader’s schema.

Schema evolution rules

With Avro, forward compatibility means that you can have a new version
of the schema as writer and an old version of the schema as reader.
Conversely, backward compatibility means that you can have a new version
of the schema as reader and an old version as writer.

To maintain compatibility, you may only add or remove a field that has a
default value. (The field favoriteNumber in our Avro schema has a
default value of null.) For example, say you add a field with a default
value, so this new field exists in the new schema but not the old one.
When a reader using the new schema reads a record written with the old
schema, the default value is filled in for the missing field.

If you were to add a field that has no default value, new readers
wouldn’t be able to read data written by old writers, so you would break
backward compatibility. If you were to remove a field that has no
default value, old readers wouldn’t be able to read data written by new
writers, so you would break forward compatibility.

In some programming languages, null is an acceptable default for any
variable, but this is not the case in Avro: if you want to allow a field
to be null, you have to use a union type. For example,
union { null, long, string } field; indicates that field can be a
number, or a string, or null. You can only use null as a default value
if it is the first branch of the union. This is a little more verbose
than having everything nullable by default, but it helps prevent bugs by
being explicit about what can and cannot be null [18].

Changing the datatype of a field is possible, provided that Avro can
convert the type. Changing the name of a field is possible but a little
tricky: the reader’s schema can contain aliases for field names, so it
can match an old writer’s schema field names against the aliases. This
means that changing a field name is backward compatible but not forward
compatible. Similarly, adding a branch to a union type is backward
compatible but not forward compatible.

But what is the writer’s schema?

There is an important question that we’ve glossed over so far: how does
the reader know the writer’s schema with which a particular piece of
data was encoded? We can’t just include the entire schema with every
record, because the schema would likely be much bigger than the encoded
data, making all the space savings from the binary encoding futile.

The answer depends on the context in which Avro is being used. To give a
few examples:

Large file with lots of records

     A common use for Avro is for storing a large file containing
    millions of records, all encoded with the same schema. (We will
    discuss this kind of situation in [Link to Come].) In this case, the
    writer of that file can just include the writer’s schema once at the
    beginning of the file. Avro specifies a file format (object
    container files) to do this.

Database with individually written records

    In a database, different records may be written at different points
    in time using different writer’s schemas—you cannot assume that all
    the records will have the same schema. The simplest solution is to
    include a version number at the beginning of every encoded record,
    and to keep a list of schema versions in your database. A reader can
    fetch a record, extract the version number, and then fetch the
    writer’s schema for that version number from the database. Using
    that writer’s schema, it can decode the rest of the record.
    Confluent’s schema registry for Apache Kafka [19] and LinkedIn’s
    Espresso [20] work this way, for example.

Sending records over a network connection

     When two processes are communicating over a bidirectional network
    connection, they can negotiate the schema version on connection
    setup and then use that schema for the lifetime of the connection.
    The Avro RPC protocol (see “Dataflow Through Services: REST and
    RPC”) works like this.

A database of schema versions is a useful thing to have in any case,
since it acts as documentation and gives you a chance to check schema
compatibility [21]. As the version number, you could use a simple
incrementing integer, or you could use a hash of the schema.

Dynamically generated schemas

One advantage of Avro’s approach, compared to Protocol Buffers, is that
the schema doesn’t contain any tag numbers. But why is this important?
What’s the problem with keeping a couple of numbers in the schema?

The difference is that Avro is friendlier to dynamically generated
schemas. For example, say you have a relational database whose contents
you want to dump to a file, and you want to use a binary format to avoid
the aforementioned problems with textual formats (JSON, CSV, XML). If
you use Avro, you can fairly easily generate an Avro schema (in the JSON
representation we saw earlier) from the relational schema and encode the
database contents using that schema, dumping it all to an Avro object
container file [22]. You can generate a record schema for each database
table, and each column becomes a field in that record. The column name
in the database maps to the field name in Avro.

Now, if the database schema changes (for example, a table has one column
added and one column removed), you can just generate a new Avro schema
from the updated database schema and export data in the new Avro schema.
The data export process does not need to pay any attention to the schema
change—it can simply do the schema conversion every time it runs. Anyone
who reads the new data files will see that the fields of the record have
changed, but since the fields are identified by name, the updated
writer’s schema can still be matched up with the old reader’s schema.

By contrast, if you were using Protocol Buffers for this purpose, the
field tags would likely have to be assigned by hand: every time the
database schema changes, an administrator would have to manually update
the mapping from database column names to field tags. (It might be
possible to automate this, but the schema generator would have to be
very careful to not assign previously used field tags.) This kind of
dynamically generated schema simply wasn’t a design goal of Protocol
Buffers, whereas it was for Avro.

The Merits of Schemas

As we saw, Protocol Buffers and Avro both use a schema to describe a
binary encoding format. Their schema languages are much simpler than XML
Schema or JSON Schema, which support much more detailed validation rules
(e.g., “the string value of this field must match this regular
expression” or “the integer value of this field must be between 0 and
100”). As Protocol Buffers and Avro are simpler to implement and simpler
to use, they have grown to support a fairly wide range of programming
languages.

The ideas on which these encodings are based are by no means new. For
example, they have a lot in common with ASN.1, a schema definition
language that was first standardized in 1984 [23, 24]. It was used to
define various network protocols, and its binary encoding (DER) is still
used to encode SSL certificates (X.509), for example [25]. ASN.1
supports schema evolution using tag numbers, similar to Protocol Buffers
[26]. However, it’s also very complex and badly documented, so ASN.1 is
probably not a good choice for new applications.

Many data systems also implement some kind of proprietary binary
encoding for their data. For example, most relational databases have a
network protocol over which you can send queries to the database and get
back responses. Those protocols are generally specific to a particular
database, and the database vendor provides a driver (e.g., using the
ODBC or JDBC APIs) that decodes responses from the database’s network
protocol into in-memory data structures.

So, we can see that although textual data formats such as JSON, XML, and
CSV are widespread, binary encodings based on schemas are also a viable
option. They have a number of nice properties:

- They can be much more compact than the various “binary JSON” variants,
  since they can omit field names from the encoded data.

- The schema is a valuable form of documentation, and because the schema
  is required for decoding, you can be sure that it is up to date
  (whereas manually maintained documentation may easily diverge from
  reality).

- Keeping a database of schemas allows you to check forward and backward
  compatibility of schema changes, before anything is deployed.

- For users of statically typed programming languages, the ability to
  generate code from the schema is useful, since it enables
  type-checking at compile time.

In summary, schema evolution allows the same kind of flexibility as
schemaless/schema-on-read JSON databases provide (see “Schema
flexibility in the document model”), while also providing better
guarantees about your data and better tooling.

Modes of Dataflow

At the beginning of this chapter we said that whenever you want to send
some data to another process with which you don’t share memory—for
example, whenever you want to send data over the network or write it to
a file—you need to encode it as a sequence of bytes. We then discussed a
variety of different encodings for doing this.

We talked about forward and backward compatibility, which are important
for evolvability (making change easy by allowing you to upgrade
different parts of your system independently, and not having to change
everything at once). Compatibility is a relationship between one process
that encodes the data, and another process that decodes it.

That’s a fairly abstract idea—there are many ways data can flow from one
process to another. Who encodes the data, and who decodes it? In the
rest of this chapter we will explore some of the most common ways how
data flows between processes:

- Via databases (see “Dataflow Through Databases”)

- Via service calls (see “Dataflow Through Services: REST and RPC”)

- Via workflow engines (see “Durable Execution and Workflows”)

- Via asynchronous messages (see “Event-Driven Architectures”)

Dataflow Through Databases

In a database, the process that writes to the database encodes the data,
and the process that reads from the database decodes it. There may just
be a single process accessing the database, in which case the reader is
simply a later version of the same process—in that case you can think of
storing something in the database as sending a message to your future
self.

Backward compatibility is clearly necessary here; otherwise your future
self won’t be able to decode what you previously wrote.

In general, it’s common for several different processes to be accessing
a database at the same time. Those processes might be several different
applications or services, or they may simply be several instances of the
same service (running in parallel for scalability or fault tolerance).
Either way, in an environment where the application is changing, it is
likely that some processes accessing the database will be running newer
code and some will be running older code—for example because a new
version is currently being deployed in a rolling upgrade, so some
instances have been updated while others haven’t yet.

This means that a value in the database may be written by a newer
version of the code, and subsequently read by an older version of the
code that is still running. Thus, forward compatibility is also often
required for databases.

Different values written at different times

A database generally allows any value to be updated at any time. This
means that within a single database you may have some values that were
written five milliseconds ago, and some values that were written five
years ago.

When you deploy a new version of your application (of a server-side
application, at least), you may entirely replace the old version with
the new version within a few minutes. The same is not true of database
contents: the five-year-old data will still be there, in the original
encoding, unless you have explicitly rewritten it since then. This
observation is sometimes summed up as data outlives code.

Rewriting (migrating) data into a new schema is certainly possible, but
it’s an expensive thing to do on a large dataset, so most databases
avoid it if possible. Most relational databases allow simple schema
changes, such as adding a new column with a null default value, without
rewriting existing data. When an old row is read, the database fills in
nulls for any columns that are missing from the encoded data on disk.
Schema evolution thus allows the entire database to appear as if it was
encoded with a single schema, even though the underlying storage may
contain records encoded with various historical versions of the schema.

More complex schema changes—for example, changing a single-valued
attribute to be multi-valued, or moving some data into a separate
table—still require data to be rewritten, often at the application level
[27]. Maintaining forward and backward compatibility across such
migrations is still a research problem [28].

Archival storage

Perhaps you take a snapshot of your database from time to time, say for
backup purposes or for loading into a data warehouse (see “Data
Warehousing”). In this case, the data dump will typically be encoded
using the latest schema, even if the original encoding in the source
database contained a mixture of schema versions from different eras.
Since you’re copying the data anyway, you might as well encode the copy
of the data consistently.

As the data dump is written in one go and is thereafter immutable,
formats like Avro object container files are a good fit. This is also a
good opportunity to encode the data in an analytics-friendly
column-oriented format such as Parquet (see “Column Compression”).

In [Link to Come] we will talk more about using data in archival
storage.

Dataflow Through Services: REST and RPC

When you have processes that need to communicate over a network, there
are a few different ways of arranging that communication. The most
common arrangement is to have two roles: clients and servers. The
servers expose an API over the network, and the clients can connect to
the servers to make requests to that API. The API exposed by the server
is known as a service.

The web works this way: clients (web browsers) make requests to web
servers, making GET requests to download HTML, CSS, JavaScript, images,
etc., and making POST requests to submit data to the server. The API
consists of a standardized set of protocols and data formats (HTTP,
URLs, SSL/TLS, HTML, etc.). Because web browsers, web servers, and
website authors mostly agree on these standards, you can use any web
browser to access any website (at least in theory!).

Web browsers are not the only type of client. For example, native apps
running on mobile devices and desktop computers often talk to servers,
and client-side JavaScript applications running inside web browsers can
also make HTTP requests. In this case, the server’s response is
typically not HTML for displaying to a human, but rather data in an
encoding that is convenient for further processing by the client-side
application code (most often JSON). Although HTTP may be used as the
transport protocol, the API implemented on top is application-specific,
and the client and server need to agree on the details of that API.

In some ways, services are similar to databases: they typically allow
clients to submit and query data. However, while databases allow
arbitrary queries using the query languages we discussed in Chapter 3,
services expose an application-specific API that only allows inputs and
outputs that are predetermined by the business logic (application code)
of the service [29]. This restriction provides a degree of
encapsulation: services can impose fine-grained restrictions on what
clients can and cannot do.

A key design goal of a service-oriented/microservices architecture is to
make the application easier to change and maintain by making services
independently deployable and evolvable. A common principle is that each
service should be owned by one team, and that team should be able to
release new versions of the service frequently, without having to
coordinate with other teams. We should therefore expect old and new
versions of servers and clients to be running at the same time, and so
the data encoding used by servers and clients must be compatible across
versions of the service API.

Web services

When HTTP is used as the underlying protocol for talking to the service,
it is called a web service. Web services are commonly used when building
a service oriented or microservices architecture (discussed earlier in
“Microservices and Serverless”). The term “web service” is perhaps a
slight misnomer, because web services are not only used on the web, but
in several different contexts. For example:

1.  A client application running on a user’s device (e.g., a native app
    on a mobile device, or a JavaScript web app in a browser) making
    requests to a service over HTTP. These requests typically go over
    the public internet.

2.  One service making requests to another service owned by the same
    organization, often located within the same datacenter, as part of a
    service-oriented/microservices architecture.

3.  One service making requests to a service owned by a different
    organization, usually via the internet. This is used for data
    exchange between different organizations’ backend systems. This
    category includes public APIs provided by online services, such as
    credit card processing systems, or OAuth for shared access to user
    data.

The most popular service design philosophy is REST, which builds upon
the principles of HTTP [30, 31]. It emphasizes simple data formats,
using URLs for identifying resources and using HTTP features for cache
control, authentication, and content type negotiation. An API designed
according to the principles of REST is called RESTful.

Code that needs to invoke a web service API must know which HTTP
endpoint to query, and what data format to send and expect in response.
Even if a service adopts RESTful design principles, clients need to
somehow find out these details. Service developers often use an
interface definition language (IDL) to define and document their
service’s API endpoints and data models, and to evolve them over time.
Other developers can then use the service definition to determine how to
query the service. The two most popular service IDLs are OpenAPI (also
known as Swagger [32]) and gRPC. OpenAPI is used for web services that
send and receive JSON data, while gRPC services send and receive
Protocol Buffers.

Developers typically write OpenAPI service definitions in JSON or YAML;
see Example 5-3. The service definition allows developers to define
service endpoints, documentation, versions, data models, and much more.
gRPC definitions look similar, but are defined using Protocol Buffers
service definitions.

Example 5-3. Example OpenAPI service definition in YAML

    openapi: 3.0.0
    info:
      title: Ping, Pong
      version: 1.0.0
    servers:
      - url: http://localhost:8080
    paths:
      /ping:
        get:
          summary: Given a ping, returns a pong message
          responses:
            '200':
              description: A pong
              content:
                application/json:
                  schema:
                    type: object
                    properties:
                      message:
                        type: string
                        example: Pong!

Even if a design philosophy and IDL are adopted, developers must still
write the code that implements their service’s API calls. A service
framework is often adopted to simplify this effort. Service frameworks
such as Spring Boot, FastAPI, and gRPC allow developers to write the
business logic for each API endpoint while the framework code handles
routing, metrics, caching, authentication, and so on. Example 5-4 shows
an example Python implementation of the service defined in Example 5-3.

Example 5-4. Example FastAPI service implementing the definition from Example 5-3

    from fastapi import FastAPI
    from pydantic import BaseModel

    app = FastAPI(title="Ping, Pong", version="1.0.0")

    class PongResponse(BaseModel):
        message: str = "Pong!"

    @app.get("/ping", response_model=PongResponse,
             summary="Given a ping, returns a pong message")
    async def ping():
        return PongResponse()

Many frameworks couple service definitions and server code together. In
some cases, such as with the popular Python FastAPI framework, servers
are written in code and an IDL is generated automatically. In other
cases, such as with gRPC, the service definition is written first, and
server code scaffolding is generated. Both approaches allow developers
to generate client libraries and SDKs in a variety of languages from the
service definition. In addition to code generation, IDL tools such as
Swagger’s can generate documentation, verify schema change
compatibility, and provide a graphical user interfaces for developers to
query and test services.

The problems with remote procedure calls (RPCs)

Web services are merely the latest incarnation of a long line of
technologies for making API requests over a network, many of which
received a lot of hype but have serious problems. Enterprise JavaBeans
(EJB) and Java’s Remote Method Invocation (RMI) are limited to Java. The
Distributed Component Object Model (DCOM) is limited to Microsoft
platforms. The Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) is
excessively complex, and does not provide backward or forward
compatibility [33]. SOAP and the WS-* web services framework aim to
provide interoperability across vendors, but are also plagued by
complexity and compatibility problems [34, 35, 36].

All of these are based on the idea of a remote procedure call (RPC),
which has been around since the 1970s [37]. The RPC model tries to make
a request to a remote network service look the same as calling a
function or method in your programming language, within the same process
(this abstraction is called location transparency). Although RPC seems
convenient at first, the approach is fundamentally flawed [38, 39]. A
network request is very different from a local function call:

- A local function call is predictable and either succeeds or fails,
  depending only on parameters that are under your control. A network
  request is unpredictable: the request or response may be lost due to a
  network problem, or the remote machine may be slow or unavailable, and
  such problems are entirely outside of your control. Network problems
  are common, so you have to anticipate them, for example by retrying a
  failed request.

- A local function call either returns a result, or throws an exception,
  or never returns (because it goes into an infinite loop or the process
  crashes). A network request has another possible outcome: it may
  return without a result, due to a timeout. In that case, you simply
  don’t know what happened: if you don’t get a response from the remote
  service, you have no way of knowing whether the request got through or
  not. (We discuss this issue in more detail in [Link to Come].)

- If you retry a failed network request, it could happen that the
  previous request actually got through, and only the response was lost.
  In that case, retrying will cause the action to be performed multiple
  times, unless you build a mechanism for deduplication (idempotence)
  into the protocol [40]. Local function calls don’t have this problem.
  (We discuss idempotence in more detail in [Link to Come].)

- Every time you call a local function, it normally takes about the same
  time to execute. A network request is much slower than a function
  call, and its latency is also wildly variable: at good times it may
  complete in less than a millisecond, but when the network is congested
  or the remote service is overloaded it may take many seconds to do
  exactly the same thing.

- When you call a local function, you can efficiently pass it references
  (pointers) to objects in local memory. When you make a network
  request, all those parameters need to be encoded into a sequence of
  bytes that can be sent over the network. That’s okay if the parameters
  are immutable primitives like numbers or short strings, but it quickly
  becomes problematic with larger amounts of data and mutable objects.

- The client and the service may be implemented in different programming
  languages, so the RPC framework must translate datatypes from one
  language into another. This can end up ugly, since not all languages
  have the same types—recall JavaScript’s problems with numbers greater
  than 2⁵³, for example (see “JSON, XML, and Binary Variants”). This
  problem doesn’t exist in a single process written in a single
  language.

All of these factors mean that there’s no point trying to make a remote
service look too much like a local object in your programming language,
because it’s a fundamentally different thing. Part of the appeal of REST
is that it treats state transfer over a network as a process that is
distinct from a function call.

Load balancers, service discovery, and service meshes

All services communicate over the network. For this reason, a client
must know the address of the service it’s connecting to—a problem known
as service discovery. The simplest approach is to configure a client to
connect to the IP address and port where the service is running. This
configuration will work, but if the server goes offline, is transferred
to a new machine, or becomes overloaded, the client has to be manually
reconfigured.

To provide higher availability and scalability, there are usually
multiple instances of a service running on different machines, any of
which can handle an incoming request. Spreading requests across these
instances is called load balancing [41]. There are many load balancing
and service discovery solutions available:

-  Hardware load balancers are specialized pieces of equipment that are
  installed in data centers. They allow clients to connect to a single
  host and port, and incoming connections are routed to one of the
  servers running the service. Such load balancers detect network
  failures when connecting to a downstream server and shift the traffic
  to other servers.

-  Software load balancers behave in much the same way as hardware load
  balancers. But rather than requiring a special appliance, software
  load balancers such as Nginx and HAProxy are applications that can be
  installed on a standard machine.

-  The domain name service (DNS) is how domain names are resolved on the
  Internet when you open a webpage. It supports load balancing by
  allowing multiple IP addresses to be associated with a single domain
  name. Clients can then be configured to connect to a service using a
  domain name rather than IP address, and the client’s network layer
  picks which IP address to use when making a connection. One drawback
  of this approach is that DNS is designed to propagate changes over
  longer periods of time, and to cache DNS entries. If servers are
  started, stopped, or moved frequently, clients might see stale IP
  addresses that no longer have a server running on them.

-  Service discovery systems use a centralized registry rather than DNS
  to track which service endpoints are available. When a new service
  instance starts up, it registers itself with the service discovery
  system by declaring the host and port it’s listening on, along with
  relevant metadata such as shard ownership information (see Chapter 7),
  data center location, and more. The service then periodically sends a
  heartbeat signal to the discovery system to signal that the service is
  still available.

  When a client wishes to connect to a service, it first queries the
  discovery system to get a list of available endpoints, and then
  connects directly to the endpoint. Compared to DNS, service discovery
  supports a much more dynamic environment where service instances
  change frequently. Discovery systems also give clients more metadata
  about the service they’re connecting to, which enables clients to make
  smarter load balancing decisions.

-  Service meshes are a sophisticated form of load balancing that
  combine software load balancers and service discovery. Unlike
  traditional software load balancers, which run on a separate machine,
  service mesh load balancers are typically deployed as an in-process
  client library or as a process or “sidecar” container on both the
  client and server. Client applications connect to their own local
  service load balancer, which connects to the server’s load balancer.
  From there, the connection is routed to the local server process.

  Though complicated, this topology offers a number of advantages.
  Because the clients and servers are routed entirely through local
  connections, connection encryption can be handled entirely at the load
  balancer level. This shields clients and servers from having to deal
  with the complexities of SSL certificates and TLS. Mesh systems also
  provide sophisticated observability. They can track which services are
  calling each other in realtime, detect failures, track traffic load,
  and more.

Which solution is appropriate depends on an organization’s needs. Those
running in a very dynamic service environment with an orchestrator such
as Kubernetes often choose to run a service mesh such as Istio or
Linkerd. Specialized infrastructure such as databases or messaging
systems might require their own purpose-built load balancer. Simpler
deployments are best served with software load balancers.

Data encoding and evolution for RPC

For evolvability, it is important that RPC clients and servers can be
changed and deployed independently. Compared to data flowing through
databases (as described in the last section), we can make a simplifying
assumption in the case of dataflow through services: it is reasonable to
assume that all the servers will be updated first, and all the clients
second. Thus, you only need backward compatibility on requests, and
forward compatibility on responses.

The backward and forward compatibility properties of an RPC scheme are
inherited from whatever encoding it uses:

- gRPC (Protocol Buffers) and Avro RPC can be evolved according to the
  compatibility rules of the respective encoding format.

- RESTful APIs most commonly use JSON for responses, and JSON or
  URI-encoded/form-encoded request parameters for requests. Adding
  optional request parameters and adding new fields to response objects
  are usually considered changes that maintain compatibility.

Service compatibility is made harder by the fact that RPC is often used
for communication across organizational boundaries, so the provider of a
service often has no control over its clients and cannot force them to
upgrade. Thus, compatibility needs to be maintained for a long time,
perhaps indefinitely. If a compatibility-breaking change is required,
the service provider often ends up maintaining multiple versions of the
service API side by side.

There is no agreement on how API versioning should work (i.e., how a
client can indicate which version of the API it wants to use [42]). For
RESTful APIs, common approaches are to use a version number in the URL
or in the HTTP Accept header. For services that use API keys to identify
a particular client, another option is to store a client’s requested API
version on the server and to allow this version selection to be updated
through a separate administrative interface [43].

Durable Execution and Workflows

By definition, service-based architectures have multiple services that
are all responsible for different portions of an application. Consider a
payment processing application that charges a credit card and deposits
the funds into a bank account. This system would likely have different
services responsible for fraud detection, credit card integration, bank
integration, and so on.

Processing a single payment in our example requires many service calls.
A payment processor service might invoke the fraud detection service to
check for fraud, call the credit card service to debit the credit card,
and call the banking service to deposit debited funds, as shown in
Figure 5-7. We call this sequence of steps a workflow, and each step a
task. Workflows are typically defined as a graph of tasks. Workflow
definitions may be written in a general-purpose programming language, a
domain specific language (DSL), or a markup language such as Business
Process Execution Language (BPEL) [44].

Tasks, Activities, and Functions

Different workflow engines use different names for tasks. Temporal, for
example, uses the term activity. Others refer to tasks as durable
functions. Though the names differ, the concepts are the same.

[ddia 0507]

Figure 5-7. Example of a workflow expressed using Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN), a graphical notation.

Workflows are run, or executed, by a workflow engine. Workflow engines
determine when to run each task, on which machine a task must be run,
what to do if a task fails (e.g., if the machine crashes while the task
is running), how many tasks are allowed to execute in parallel, and
more.

Workflow engines are typically composed of an orchestrator and an
executor. The orchestrator is responsible for scheduling tasks to be
executed and the executor is responsible for executing tasks. Execution
begins when a workflow is triggered. The orchestrator triggers the
workflow itself if users define a time-based schedule, such as hourly
execution. External sources such as a web service or even a human can
also trigger workflow executions. Once triggered, executors are invoked
to run tasks.

There are many kinds of workflow engines that address a diverse set of
use cases. Some, such as Airflow, Dagster, and Prefect, integrate with
data systems and orchestrate ETL tasks. Others, such as Camunda and
Orkes, provide a graphical notation for workflows (such as BPMN, used in
Figure 5-7) so that non-engineers can more easily define and execute
workflows. Still others, such as Temporal and Restate provide durable
execution.

Durable execution

Durable execution frameworks have become a popular way to build
service-based architectures that require transactionality. In our
payment example, we would like to process each payment exactly once. A
failure while the workflow is executing could result in a credit card
charge, but no corresponding bank account deposit. In a service-based
architecture, we can’t simply wrap the two tasks in a database
transaction. Moreover, we might be interacting with third-party payment
gateways that we have limited control over.

Durable execution frameworks are a way to provide exactly-once semantics
for workflows. If a task fails, the framework will re-execute the task,
but will skip any RPC calls or state changes that the task made
successfully before failing. Instead, the framework will pretend to make
the call, but will instead return the results from the previous call.
This is possible because durable execution frameworks log all RPCs and
state changes to durable storage like a write-ahead log [45, 46].
Example 5-5 shows an example of a workflow definition that supports
durable execution using Temporal.

Example 5-5. A Temporal workflow definition fragment for the payment workflow in Figure 5-7.

    @workflow.defn
    class PaymentWorkflow:
        @workflow.run
        async def run(self, payment: PaymentRequest) -> PaymentResult:
            is_fraud = await workflow.execute_activity(
                check_fraud,
                payment,
                start_to_close_timeout=timedelta(seconds=15),
            )
            if is_fraud:
                return PaymentResultFraudulent
            credit_card_response = await workflow.execute_activity(
                debit_credit_card,
                payment,
                start_to_close_timeout=timedelta(seconds=15),
            )
            # ...

Frameworks like Temporal are not without their challenges. External
services, such as the third-party payment gateway in our example, must
still provide an idempotent API. Developers must remember to use unique
IDs for these APIs to prevent duplicate execution [47]. And because
durable execution frameworks log each RPC call in order, it expects a
subsequent execution to make the same RPC calls in the same order. This
makes code changes brittle. You might introduce undefined behavior
simply by re-ordering function calls [48].

Similarly, because durable execution frameworks expect to replay all
code deterministically (the same inputs produce the same outputs),
non-deterministic code such as random number generators or system clocks
are problematic [48]. Frameworks often provide their own, deterministic
implementations of such library functions, but you have to remember to
use them. In some cases, such as with Temporal’s workflowcheck tool,
frameworks provide static analysis tools to determine if
non-deterministic behavior has been introduced.

Event-Driven Architectures

In this final section, we will briefly look at event-driven
architectures, which are another way how encoded data can flow from one
process to another. A request is called an event or message; unlike RPC,
the sender usually does not wait for the recipient to process the event.
Moreover, events are typically not sent to the recipient via a direct
network connection, but go via an intermediary called a message broker
(also called an event broker, message queue, or message-oriented
middleware), which stores the message temporarily. [49].

Using a message broker has several advantages compared to direct RPC:

- It can act as a buffer if the recipient is unavailable or overloaded,
  and thus improve system reliability.

- It can automatically redeliver messages to a process that has crashed,
  and thus prevent messages from being lost.

- It avoids the need for service discovery, since senders do not need to
  directly connect to the IP address of the recipient.

- It allows the same message to be sent to several recipients.

- It logically decouples the sender from the recipient (the sender just
  publishes messages and doesn’t care who consumes them).

The communication via a message broker is asynchronous: the sender
doesn’t wait for the message to be delivered, but simply sends it and
then forgets about it. It’s possible to implement a synchronous RPC-like
model by having the sender wait for a response on a separate channel.

Message brokers

In the past, the landscape of message brokers was dominated by
commercial enterprise software from companies such as TIBCO, IBM
WebSphere, and webMethods, before open source implementations such as
RabbitMQ, ActiveMQ, HornetQ, NATS, and Apache Kafka become popular. More
recently, cloud services such as Amazon Kinesis, Azure Service Bus, and
Google Cloud Pub/Sub have gained adoption. We will compare them in more
detail in [Link to Come].

The detailed delivery semantics vary by implementation and
configuration, but in general, two message distribution patterns are
most often used:

- One process adds a message to a named queue, and the broker delivers
  that message to a consumer of that queue. If there are multiple
  consumers, one of them receives the message.

- One process publishes a message to a named topic, and the broker
  delivers that message to all subscribers of that topic. If there are
  multiple subscribers, they all receive the message.

Message brokers typically don’t enforce any particular data model—a
message is just a sequence of bytes with some metadata, so you can use
any encoding format. A common approach is to use Protocol Buffers, Avro,
or JSON, and to deploy a schema registry alongside the message broker to
store all the valid schema versions and check their compatibility [19,
21]. AsyncAPI, a messaging-based equivalent of OpenAPI, can also be used
to specify the schema of messages.

Message brokers differ in terms of how durable their messages are. Many
write messages to disk, so that they are not lost in case the message
broker crashes or needs to be restarted. Unlike databases, many message
brokers automatically delete messages again after they have been
consumed. Some brokers can be configured to store messages indefinitely,
which you would require if you want to use event sourcing (see “Event
Sourcing and CQRS”).

If a consumer republishes messages to another topic, you may need to be
careful to preserve unknown fields, to prevent the issue described
previously in the context of databases (Figure 5-1).

Distributed actor frameworks

The actor model is a programming model for concurrency in a single
process. Rather than dealing directly with threads (and the associated
problems of race conditions, locking, and deadlock), logic is
encapsulated in actors. Each actor typically represents one client or
entity, it may have some local state (which is not shared with any other
actor), and it communicates with other actors by sending and receiving
asynchronous messages. Message delivery is not guaranteed: in certain
error scenarios, messages will be lost. Since each actor processes only
one message at a time, it doesn’t need to worry about threads, and each
actor can be scheduled independently by the framework.

In distributed actor frameworks such as Akka, Orleans [50], and
Erlang/OTP, this programming model is used to scale an application
across multiple nodes. The same message-passing mechanism is used, no
matter whether the sender and recipient are on the same node or
different nodes. If they are on different nodes, the message is
transparently encoded into a byte sequence, sent over the network, and
decoded on the other side.

Location transparency works better in the actor model than in RPC,
because the actor model already assumes that messages may be lost, even
within a single process. Although latency over the network is likely
higher than within the same process, there is less of a fundamental
mismatch between local and remote communication when using the actor
model.

A distributed actor framework essentially integrates a message broker
and the actor programming model into a single framework. However, if you
want to perform rolling upgrades of your actor-based application, you
still have to worry about forward and backward compatibility, as
messages may be sent from a node running the new version to a node
running the old version, and vice versa. This can be achieved by using
one of the encodings discussed in this chapter.

Summary

In this chapter we looked at several ways of turning data structures
into bytes on the network or bytes on disk. We saw how the details of
these encodings affect not only their efficiency, but more importantly
also the architecture of applications and your options for evolving
them.

In particular, many services need to support rolling upgrades, where a
new version of a service is gradually deployed to a few nodes at a time,
rather than deploying to all nodes simultaneously. Rolling upgrades
allow new versions of a service to be released without downtime (thus
encouraging frequent small releases over rare big releases) and make
deployments less risky (allowing faulty releases to be detected and
rolled back before they affect a large number of users). These
properties are hugely beneficial for evolvability, the ease of making
changes to an application.

During rolling upgrades, or for various other reasons, we must assume
that different nodes are running the different versions of our
application’s code. Thus, it is important that all data flowing around
the system is encoded in a way that provides backward compatibility (new
code can read old data) and forward compatibility (old code can read new
data).

We discussed several data encoding formats and their compatibility
properties:

- Programming language–specific encodings are restricted to a single
  programming language and often fail to provide forward and backward
  compatibility.

- Textual formats like JSON, XML, and CSV are widespread, and their
  compatibility depends on how you use them. They have optional schema
  languages, which are sometimes helpful and sometimes a hindrance.
  These formats are somewhat vague about datatypes, so you have to be
  careful with things like numbers and binary strings.

- Binary schema–driven formats like Protocol Buffers and Avro allow
  compact, efficient encoding with clearly defined forward and backward
  compatibility semantics. The schemas can be useful for documentation
  and code generation in statically typed languages. However, these
  formats have the downside that data needs to be decoded before it is
  human-readable.

We also discussed several modes of dataflow, illustrating different
scenarios in which data encodings are important:

- Databases, where the process writing to the database encodes the data
  and the process reading from the database decodes it

- RPC and REST APIs, where the client encodes a request, the server
  decodes the request and encodes a response, and the client finally
  decodes the response

- Event-driven architectures (using message brokers or actors), where
  nodes communicate by sending each other messages that are encoded by
  the sender and decoded by the recipient

We can conclude that with a bit of care, backward/forward compatibility
and rolling upgrades are quite achievable. May your application’s
evolution be rapid and your deployments be frequent.

Footnotes

References

[1] CWE-502: Deserialization of Untrusted Data. Common Weakness
Enumeration, cwe.mitre.org, July 2006. Archived at perma.cc/26EU-UK9Y

[2] Steve Breen. What Do WebLogic, WebSphere, JBoss, Jenkins, OpenNMS,
and Your Application Have in Common? This Vulnerability.
foxglovesecurity.com, November 2015. Archived at perma.cc/9U97-UVVD

[3] Patrick McKenzie. What the Rails Security Issue Means for Your
Startup. kalzumeus.com, January 2013. Archived at perma.cc/2MBJ-7PZ6

[4] Brian Goetz. Towards Better Serialization. openjdk.org, June 2019.
Archived at perma.cc/UK6U-GQDE

[5] Eishay Smith. jvm-serializers wiki. github.com, October 2023.
Archived at perma.cc/PJP7-WCNG

[6] XML Is a Poor Copy of S-Expressions. wiki.c2.com, May 2013. Archived
at perma.cc/7FAN-YBKL

[7] Julia Evans. Examples of floating point problems. jvns.ca, January
2023. Archived at perma.cc/M57L-QKKW

[8] Matt Harris. Snowflake: An Update and Some Very Important
Information. Email to Twitter Development Talk mailing list, October
2010. Archived at perma.cc/8UBV-MZ3D

[9] Yakov Shafranovich. RFC 4180: Common Format and MIME Type for
Comma-Separated Values (CSV) Files. IETF, October 2005.

[10] Andy Coates. Evolving JSON Schemas - Part I and Part II.
creekservice.org, January 2024. Archived at perma.cc/MZW3-UA54 and
perma.cc/GT5H-WKZ5

[11] Pierre Genevès, Nabil Layaïda, and Vincent Quint. Ensuring Query
Compatibility with Evolving XML Schemas. INRIA Technical Report 6711,
November 2008.

[12] Tim Bray. Bits On the Wire. tbray.org, November 2019. Archived at
perma.cc/3BT3-BQU3

[13] Mark Slee, Aditya Agarwal, and Marc Kwiatkowski. Thrift: Scalable
Cross-Language Services Implementation. Facebook technical report, April
2007. Archived at perma.cc/22BS-TUFB

[14] Martin Kleppmann. Schema Evolution in Avro, Protocol Buffers and
Thrift. martin.kleppmann.com, December 2012. Archived at
perma.cc/E4R2-9RJT

[15] Doug Cutting, Chad Walters, Jim Kellerman, et al. [PROPOSAL] New
Subproject: Avro. Email thread on hadoop-general mailing list,
lists.apache.org, April 2009. Archived at perma.cc/4A79-BMEB

[16] Apache Software Foundation. Apache Avro 1.12.0 Specification.
avro.apache.org, August 2024. Archived at perma.cc/C36P-5EBQ

[17] Apache Software Foundation. Avro schemas as LL(1) CFG definitions.
avro.apache.org, August 2024. Archived at perma.cc/JB44-EM9Q

[18] Tony Hoare. Null References: The Billion Dollar Mistake. Talk at
QCon London, March 2009.

[19] Confluent, Inc. Schema Registry Overview. docs.confluent.io, 2024.
Archived at perma.cc/92C3-A9JA

[20] Aditya Auradkar and Tom Quiggle. Introducing Espresso—LinkedIn’s
Hot New Distributed Document Store. engineering.linkedin.com, January
2015. Archived at perma.cc/FX4P-VW9T

[21] Jay Kreps. Putting Apache Kafka to Use: A Practical Guide to
Building a Stream Data Platform (Part 2). confluent.io, February 2015.
Archived at perma.cc/8UA4-ZS5S

[22] Gwen Shapira. The Problem of Managing Schemas. oreilly.com,
November 2014. Archived at perma.cc/BY8Q-RYV3

[23] John Larmouth. ASN.1 Complete. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999. ISBN:
978-0-122-33435-1. Archived at perma.cc/GB7Y-XSXQ

[24] Burton S. Kaliski Jr. A Layman’s Guide to a Subset of ASN.1, BER,
and DER. Technical Note, RSA Data Security, Inc., November 1993.
Archived at perma.cc/2LMN-W9U8

[25] Jacob Hoffman-Andrews. A Warm Welcome to ASN.1 and DER.
letsencrypt.org, April 2020. Archived at perma.cc/CYT2-GPQ8

[26] Lev Walkin. Question: Extensibility and Dropping Fields.
lionet.info, September 2010. Archived at perma.cc/VX8E-NLH3

[27] Jacqueline Xu. Online migrations at scale. stripe.com, February
2017. Archived at perma.cc/X59W-DK7Y

[28] Geoffrey Litt, Peter van Hardenberg, and Orion Henry. Project
Cambria: Translate your data with lenses. Technical Report, Ink &
Switch, October 2020. Archived at perma.cc/WA4V-VKDB

[29] Pat Helland. Data on the Outside Versus Data on the Inside. At 2nd
Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January
2005.

[30] Roy Thomas Fielding. Architectural Styles and the Design of
Network-Based Software Architectures. PhD Thesis, University of
California, Irvine, 2000. Archived at perma.cc/LWY9-7BPE

[31] Roy Thomas Fielding. REST APIs must be hypertext-driven.”
roy.gbiv.com, October 2008. Archived at perma.cc/M2ZW-8ATG

[32] OpenAPI Specification Version 3.1.0. swagger.io, February 2021.
Archived at perma.cc/3S6S-K5M4

[33] Michi Henning. The Rise and Fall of CORBA. Communications of the
ACM, volume 51, issue 8, pages 52–57, August 2008.
doi:10.1145/1378704.1378718

[34] Pete Lacey. The S Stands for Simple. harmful.cat-v.org, November
2006. Archived at perma.cc/4PMK-Z9X7

[35] Stefan Tilkov. Interview: Pete Lacey Criticizes Web Services.
infoq.com, December 2006. Archived at perma.cc/JWF4-XY3P

[36] Tim Bray. The Loyal WS-Opposition. tbray.org, September 2004.
Archived at perma.cc/J5Q8-69Q2

[37] Andrew D. Birrell and Bruce Jay Nelson. Implementing Remote
Procedure Calls. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), volume 2,
issue 1, pages 39–59, February 1984. doi:10.1145/2080.357392

[38] Jim Waldo, Geoff Wyant, Ann Wollrath, and Sam Kendall. A Note on
Distributed Computing. Sun Microsystems Laboratories, Inc., Technical
Report TR-94-29, November 1994. Archived at perma.cc/8LRZ-BSZR

[39] Steve Vinoski. Convenience over Correctness. IEEE Internet
Computing, volume 12, issue 4, pages 89–92, July 2008.
doi:10.1109/MIC.2008.75

[40] Brandur Leach. Designing robust and predictable APIs with
idempotency. stripe.com, February 2017. Archived at perma.cc/JD22-XZQT

[41] Sam Rose. Load Balancing. samwho.dev, April 2023. Archived at
perma.cc/Q7BA-9AE2

[42] Troy Hunt. Your API versioning is wrong, which is why I decided to
do it 3 different wrong ways. troyhunt.com, February 2014. Archived at
perma.cc/9DSW-DGR5

[43] Brandur Leach. APIs as infrastructure: future-proofing Stripe with
versioning. stripe.com, August 2017. Archived at perma.cc/L63K-USFW

[44] Alexandre Alves, Assaf Arkin, Sid Askary, et al. Web Services
Business Process Execution Language Version 2.0. docs.oasis-open.org,
April 2007.

[45] What is a Temporal Service? docs.temporal.io, 2024. Archived at
perma.cc/32P3-CJ9V

[46] Stephan Ewen. Why we built Restate. restate.dev, August 2023.
Archived at perma.cc/BJJ2-X75K

[47] Keith Tenzer and Joshua Smith. Idempotency and Durable Execution.
temporal.io, February 2024. Archived at perma.cc/9LGW-PCLU

[48] What is a Temporal Workflow? docs.temporal.io, 2024. Archived at
perma.cc/B5C5-Y396

[49] Srinath Perera. Exploring Event-Driven Architecture: A Beginner’s
Guide for Cloud Native Developers. wso2.com, August 2023. Archived at
archive.org

[50] Philip A. Bernstein, Sergey Bykov, Alan Geller, Gabriel Kliot, and
Jorgen Thelin. Orleans: Distributed Virtual Actors for Programmability
and Scalability. Microsoft Research Technical Report MSR-TR-2014-41,
March 2014. Archived at perma.cc/PD3U-WDMF

Chapter 6. Replication

  The major difference between a thing that might go wrong and a thing
  that cannot possibly go wrong is that when a thing that cannot
  possibly go wrong goes wrong it usually turns out to be impossible to
  get at or repair.

  Douglas Adams, Mostly Harmless (1992)

A Note for Early Release Readers

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
advantage of these technologies long before the official release of
these titles.

This will be the 6th chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo for this
book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content and/or
examples in this book, or if you notice missing material within this
chapter, please reach out on GitHub.

Replication means keeping a copy of the same data on multiple machines
that are connected via a network. As discussed in “Distributed versus
Single-Node Systems”, there are several reasons why you might want to
replicate data:

- To keep data geographically close to your users (and thus reduce
  access latency)

- To allow the system to continue working even if some of its parts have
  failed (and thus increase availability)

- To scale out the number of machines that can serve read queries (and
  thus increase read throughput)

In this chapter we will assume that your dataset is small enough that
each machine can hold a copy of the entire dataset. In Chapter 7 we will
relax that assumption and discuss sharding (partitioning) of datasets
that are too big for a single machine. In later chapters we will discuss
various kinds of faults that can occur in a replicated data system, and
how to deal with them.

If the data that you’re replicating does not change over time, then
replication is easy: you just need to copy the data to every node once,
and you’re done. All of the difficulty in replication lies in handling
changes to replicated data, and that’s what this chapter is about. We
will discuss three familes of algorithms for replicating changes between
nodes: single-leader, multi-leader, and leaderless replication. Almost
all distributed databases use one of these three approaches. They all
have various pros and cons, which we will examine in detail.

There are many trade-offs to consider with replication: for example,
whether to use synchronous or asynchronous replication, and how to
handle failed replicas. Those are often configuration options in
databases, and although the details vary by database, the general
principles are similar across many different implementations. We will
discuss the consequences of such choices in this chapter.

Replication of databases is an old topic—the principles haven’t changed
much since they were studied in the 1970s [1], because the fundamental
constraints of networks have remained the same. Despite being so old,
concepts such as eventual consistency still cause confusion. In
“Problems with Replication Lag” we will get more precise about eventual
consistency and discuss things like the read-your-writes and monotonic
reads guarantees.

Backups and replication

You might be wondering whether you still need backups if you have
replication. The answer is yes, because they have different purposes:
replicas quickly reflect writes from one node on other nodes, but
backups store old snapshots of the data so that you can go back in time.
If you accidentally delete some data, replication doesn’t help since the
deletion will have also been propagated to the replicas, so you need a
backup if you want to restore the deleted data.

In fact, replication and backups are often complementary to each other.
Backups are sometimes part of the process of setting up replication, as
we shall see in “Setting Up New Followers”. Conversely, archiving
replication logs can be part of a backup process.

Some databases internally maintain immutable snapshots of past states,
which serve as a kind of internal backup. However, this means keeping
old versions of the data on the same storage media as the current state.
If you have a large amount of data, it can be cheaper to keep the
backups of old data in an object store that is optimized for
infrequently-accessed data, and to store only the current state of the
database in primary storage.

Single-Leader Replication

Each node that stores a copy of the database is called a replica. With
multiple replicas, a question inevitably arises: how do we ensure that
all the data ends up on all the replicas?

Every write to the database needs to be processed by every replica;
otherwise, the replicas would no longer contain the same data. The most
common solution is called leader-based replication, primary-backup, or
active/passive. It works as follows (see Figure 6-1):

1.  One of the replicas is designated the leader (also known as primary
    or source [2]). When clients want to write to the database, they
    must send their requests to the leader, which first writes the new
    data to its local storage.

2.   The other replicas are known as followers (read replicas,
    secondaries, or hot standbys). Whenever the leader writes new data
    to its local storage, it also sends the data change to all of its
    followers as part of a replication log or change stream. Each
    follower takes the log from the leader and updates its local copy of
    the database accordingly, by applying all writes in the same order
    as they were processed on the leader.

3.  When a client wants to read from the database, it can query either
    the leader or any of the followers. However, writes are only
    accepted on the leader (the followers are read-only from the
    client’s point of view).

[ddia 0601]

Figure 6-1. Single-leader replication directs all writes to a designated leader, which sends a stream of changes to the follower replicas.

If the database is sharded (see Chapter 7), each shard has one leader.
Different shards may have their leaders on different nodes, but each
shard must nevertheless have one leader node. In “Multi-Leader
Replication” we will discuss an alternative model in which a system may
have multiple leaders for the same shard at the same time.

Single-leader replication is very widely used. It’s a built-in feature
of many relational databases, such as PostgreSQL, MySQL, Oracle Data
Guard [3], and SQL Server’s Always On Availability Groups [4]. It is
also used in some document databases such as MongoDB and DynamoDB [5],
message brokers such as Kafka, replicated block devices such as DRBD,
and some network filesystems. Many consensus algorithms such as Raft,
which is used for replication in CockroachDB [6], TiDB [7], etcd, and
RabbitMQ quorum queues (among others), are also based on a single
leader, and automatically elect a new leader if the old one fails (we
will discuss consensus in more detail in [Link to Come]).

Note

In older documents you may see the term master–slave replication. It
means the same as leader-based replication, but the term should be
avoided as it is widely considered offensive [8].

Synchronous Versus Asynchronous Replication

An important detail of a replicated system is whether the replication
happens synchronously or asynchronously. (In relational databases, this
is often a configurable option; other systems are often hardcoded to be
either one or the other.)

Think about what happens in Figure 6-1, where the user of a website
updates their profile image. At some point in time, the client sends the
update request to the leader; shortly afterward, it is received by the
leader. At some point, the leader forwards the data change to the
followers. Eventually, the leader notifies the client that the update
was successful. Figure 6-2 shows one possible way how the timings could
work out.

[ddia 0602]

Figure 6-2. Leader-based replication with one synchronous and one asynchronous follower.

In the example of Figure 6-2, the replication to follower 1 is
synchronous: the leader waits until follower 1 has confirmed that it
received the write before reporting success to the user, and before
making the write visible to other clients. The replication to follower 2
is asynchronous: the leader sends the message, but doesn’t wait for a
response from the follower.

The diagram shows that there is a substantial delay before follower 2
processes the message. Normally, replication is quite fast: most
database systems apply changes to followers in less than a second.
However, there is no guarantee of how long it might take. There are
circumstances when followers might fall behind the leader by several
minutes or more; for example, if a follower is recovering from a
failure, if the system is operating near maximum capacity, or if there
are network problems between the nodes.

The advantage of synchronous replication is that the follower is
guaranteed to have an up-to-date copy of the data that is consistent
with the leader. If the leader suddenly fails, we can be sure that the
data is still available on the follower. The disadvantage is that if the
synchronous follower doesn’t respond (because it has crashed, or there
is a network fault, or for any other reason), the write cannot be
processed. The leader must block all writes and wait until the
synchronous replica is available again.

For that reason, it is impracticable for all followers to be
synchronous: any one node outage would cause the whole system to grind
to a halt. In practice, if a database offers synchronous replication, it
often means that one of the followers is synchronous, and the others are
asynchronous. If the synchronous follower becomes unavailable or slow,
one of the asynchronous followers is made synchronous. This guarantees
that you have an up-to-date copy of the data on at least two nodes: the
leader and one synchronous follower. This configuration is sometimes
also called semi-synchronous.

In some systems, a majority (e.g., 3 out of 5 replicas, including the
leader) of replicas is updated synchronously, and the remaining minority
is asynchronous. This is an example of a quorum, which we will discuss
further in “Quorums for reading and writing”. Majority quorums are often
used in systems that use a consensus protocol for automatic leader
election, which we will return to in [Link to Come].

Sometimes, leader-based replication is configured to be completely
asynchronous. In this case, if the leader fails and is not recoverable,
any writes that have not yet been replicated to followers are lost. This
means that a write is not guaranteed to be durable, even if it has been
confirmed to the client. However, a fully asynchronous configuration has
the advantage that the leader can continue processing writes, even if
all of its followers have fallen behind.

Weakening durability may sound like a bad trade-off, but asynchronous
replication is nevertheless widely used, especially if there are many
followers or if they are geographically distributed [9]. We will return
to this issue in “Problems with Replication Lag”.

Setting Up New Followers

From time to time, you need to set up new followers—perhaps to increase
the number of replicas, or to replace failed nodes. How do you ensure
that the new follower has an accurate copy of the leader’s data?

Simply copying data files from one node to another is typically not
sufficient: clients are constantly writing to the database, and the data
is always in flux, so a standard file copy would see different parts of
the database at different points in time. The result might not make any
sense.

You could make the files on disk consistent by locking the database
(making it unavailable for writes), but that would go against our goal
of high availability. Fortunately, setting up a follower can usually be
done without downtime. Conceptually, the process looks like this:

1.   Take a consistent snapshot of the leader’s database at some point
    in time—if possible, without taking a lock on the entire database.
    Most databases have this feature, as it is also required for
    backups. In some cases, third-party tools are needed, such as
    Percona XtraBackup for MySQL.

2.  Copy the snapshot to the new follower node.

3.   The follower connects to the leader and requests all the data
    changes that have happened since the snapshot was taken. This
    requires that the snapshot is associated with an exact position in
    the leader’s replication log. That position has various names: for
    example, PostgreSQL calls it the log sequence number; MySQL has two
    mechanisms, binlog coordinates and global transaction identifiers
    (GTIDs).

4.  When the follower has processed the backlog of data changes since
    the snapshot, we say it has caught up. It can now continue to
    process data changes from the leader as they happen.

The practical steps of setting up a follower vary significantly by
database. In some systems the process is fully automated, whereas in
others it can be a somewhat arcane multi-step workflow that needs to be
manually performed by an administrator.

You can also archive the replication log to an object store; along with
periodic snapshots of the whole database in the object store this is a
good way of implementing database backups and disaster recovery. You can
also perform steps 1 and 2 of setting up a new follower by downloading
those files from the object store. For example, WAL-G does this for
PostgreSQL, MySQL, and SQL Server, and Litestream does the equivalent
for SQLite.

Databases backed by object storage

Object storage can be used for more than archiving data. Many databases
are beginning to use object stores such as Amazon Web Services S3,
Google Cloud Storage, and Azure Blob Storage to serve data for live
queries. Storing database data in object storage has many benefits:

-  Object storage is inexpensive compared to other cloud storage
  options, which allow cloud databases to store less-often queried data
  on cheaper, higher-latency storage while serving the working set from
  memory, SSDs, and NVMe.

- Object stores also provide multi-zone, dual-region, or multi-region
  replication with very high durability guarantees. This also allows
  databases to bypass inter-zone network fees.

-  Databases can use an object store’s conditional write
  feature—essentially, a compare-and-swap (CAS) operation—to implement
  transactions and leadership election [10]).

-  Storing data from multiple databases in the same object store can
  simplify data integration, particularly when open formats such as
  Apache Parquet and Apache Iceberg are used.

These benefits dramatically simplify the database architecture by
shifting the responsibility of transactions, leadership election, and
replication to object storage.

Systems that adopt object storage for replication must grapple with some
tradeoffs. Notably, object stores have much higher read and write
latencies than local disks or virtual block devices such as EBS. Many
cloud providers also charge a per-API call fee, which forces systems to
batch reads and writes to reduce cost. Such batching further increases
latency. Moreover, many object stores do not offer standard filesystem
interfaces. This prevents systems that lack object storage integration
from leveraging object storage. Interfaces such as filesystem in
userspace (FUSE) allow operators to mount object store buckets as
filesystems that applications can use without knowing their data is
stored on object storage. Still, many FUSE interfaces to object stores
lack POSIX features such as non-sequential writes or symlinks, which
systems might depend on.

Different systems deal with these trade-offs in various ways. Some
introduce a tiered storage architecture that places less frequently
accessed data on object storage while new or frequently accessed data is
kept on faster storage devices such as SSDs, NVMe, or even in memory.
Other systems use object storage as their primary storage tier, but use
a separate low-latency storage system such as Amazon’s EBS or Neon’s
Safekeepers [11]) to store their WAL. Recently, some systems have gone
even farther by adopting a zero-disk architecture (ZDA). ZDA-based
systems persist all data to object storage and use disks and memory
strictly for caching. This allows nodes to have no persistent state,
which dramatically simplifies operations. WarpStream, Confluent Freight,
Buf’s Bufstream, and Redpanda Serverless are all Kafka-compatible
systems built using a zero-disk architecture. Nearly every modern cloud
data warehouse also adopts such an architecture, as does Turbopuffer (a
vector search engine), and SlateDB (a cloud-native LSM storage engine).

Handling Node Outages

Any node in the system can go down, perhaps unexpectedly due to a fault,
but just as likely due to planned maintenance (for example, rebooting a
machine to install a kernel security patch). Being able to reboot
individual nodes without downtime is a big advantage for operations and
maintenance. Thus, our goal is to keep the system as a whole running
despite individual node failures, and to keep the impact of a node
outage as small as possible.

How do you achieve high availability with leader-based replication?

Follower failure: Catch-up recovery

On its local disk, each follower keeps a log of the data changes it has
received from the leader. If a follower crashes and is restarted, or if
the network between the leader and the follower is temporarily
interrupted, the follower can recover quite easily: from its log, it
knows the last transaction that was processed before the fault occurred.
Thus, the follower can connect to the leader and request all the data
changes that occurred during the time when the follower was
disconnected. When it has applied these changes, it has caught up to the
leader and can continue receiving a stream of data changes as before.

Although follower recovery is conceptually simple, it can be challenging
in terms of performance: if the database has a high write throughput or
if the follower has been offline for a long time, there might be a lot
of writes to catch up on. There will be high load on both the recovering
follower and the leader (which needs to send the backlog of writes to
the follower) while this catch-up is ongoing.

The leader can delete its log of writes once all followers have
confirmed that they have processed it, but if a follower is unavailable
for a long time, the leader faces a choice: either it retains the log
until the follower recovers and catches up (at the risk of running out
of disk space on the leader), or it deletes the log that the unavailable
follower has not yet acknowledged (in which case the follower won’t be
able to recover from the log, and will have to be restored from a backup
when it comes back).

Leader failure: Failover

Handling a failure of the leader is trickier: one of the followers needs
to be promoted to be the new leader, clients need to be reconfigured to
send their writes to the new leader, and the other followers need to
start consuming data changes from the new leader. This process is called
failover.

Failover can happen manually (an administrator is notified that the
leader has failed and takes the necessary steps to make a new leader) or
automatically. An automatic failover process usually consists of the
following steps:

1.  Determining that the leader has failed. There are many things that
    could potentially go wrong: crashes, power outages, network issues,
    and more. There is no foolproof way of detecting what has gone
    wrong, so most systems simply use a timeout: nodes frequently bounce
    messages back and forth between each other, and if a node doesn’t
    respond for some period of time—say, 30 seconds—it is assumed to be
    dead. (If the leader is deliberately taken down for planned
    maintenance, this doesn’t apply.)

2.  Choosing a new leader. This could be done through an election
    process (where the leader is chosen by a majority of the remaining
    replicas), or a new leader could be appointed by a previously
    established controller node [12]. The best candidate for leadership
    is usually the replica with the most up-to-date data changes from
    the old leader (to minimize any data loss). Getting all the nodes to
    agree on a new leader is a consensus problem, discussed in detail in
    [Link to Come].

3.  Reconfiguring the system to use the new leader. Clients now need to
    send their write requests to the new leader (we discuss this in
    “Request Routing”). If the old leader comes back, it might still
    believe that it is the leader, not realizing that the other replicas
    have forced it to step down. The system needs to ensure that the old
    leader becomes a follower and recognizes the new leader.

Failover is fraught with things that can go wrong:

-  If asynchronous replication is used, the new leader may not have
  received all the writes from the old leader before it failed. If the
  former leader rejoins the cluster after a new leader has been chosen,
  what should happen to those writes? The new leader may have received
  conflicting writes in the meantime. The most common solution is for
  the old leader’s unreplicated writes to simply be discarded, which
  means that writes you believed to be committed actually weren’t
  durable after all.

-  Discarding writes is especially dangerous if other storage systems
  outside of the database need to be coordinated with the database
  contents. For example, in one incident at GitHub [13], an out-of-date
  MySQL follower was promoted to leader. The database used an
  autoincrementing counter to assign primary keys to new rows, but
  because the new leader’s counter lagged behind the old leader’s, it
  reused some primary keys that were previously assigned by the old
  leader. These primary keys were also used in a Redis store, so the
  reuse of primary keys resulted in inconsistency between MySQL and
  Redis, which caused some private data to be disclosed to the wrong
  users.

-  In certain fault scenarios (see [Link to Come]), it could happen that
  two nodes both believe that they are the leader. This situation is
  called split brain, and it is dangerous: if both leaders accept
  writes, and there is no process for resolving conflicts (see
  “Multi-Leader Replication”), data is likely to be lost or corrupted.
  As a safety catch, some systems have a mechanism to shut down one node
  if two leaders are detected. However, if this mechanism is not
  carefully designed, you can end up with both nodes being shut down
  [14].

-  What is the right timeout before the leader is declared dead? A
  longer timeout means a longer time to recovery in the case where the
  leader fails. However, if the timeout is too short, there could be
  unnecessary failovers. For example, a temporary load spike could cause
  a node’s response time to increase above the timeout, or a network
  glitch could cause delayed packets. If the system is already
  struggling with high load or network problems, an unnecessary failover
  is likely to make the situation worse, not better.

Note

Guarding against split brain by limiting or shutting down old leaders is
known as fencing or, more emphatically, Shoot The Other Node In The Head
(STONITH). We will discuss fencing in more detail in [Link to Come].

There are no easy solutions to these problems. For this reason, some
operations teams prefer to perform failovers manually, even if the
software supports automatic failover.

The most important thing with failover is to pick an up-to-date follower
as the new leader—if synchronous or semi-synchronous replication is
used, this would be the follower that the old leader waited for before
acknowledging writes. With asynchronous replication, you can pick the
follower with the greatest log sequence number. This minimizes the
amount of data that is lost during failover: losing a fraction of a
second of writes may be tolerable, but picking a follower that is behind
by several days could be catastrophic.

These issues—node failures; unreliable networks; and trade-offs around
replica consistency, durability, availability, and latency—are in fact
fundamental problems in distributed systems. In [Link to Come] and [Link
to Come] we will discuss them in greater depth.

Implementation of Replication Logs

How does leader-based replication work under the hood? Several different
replication methods are used in practice, so let’s look at each one
briefly.

Statement-based replication

In the simplest case, the leader logs every write request (statement)
that it executes and sends that statement log to its followers. For a
relational database, this means that every INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE
statement is forwarded to followers, and each follower parses and
executes that SQL statement as if it had been received from a client.

Although this may sound reasonable, there are various ways in which this
approach to replication can break down:

- Any statement that calls a nondeterministic function, such as NOW() to
  get the current date and time or RAND() to get a random number, is
  likely to generate a different value on each replica.

- If statements use an autoincrementing column, or if they depend on the
  existing data in the database (e.g., UPDATE …​ WHERE <some condition>),
  they must be executed in exactly the same order on each replica, or
  else they may have a different effect. This can be limiting when there
  are multiple concurrently executing transactions.

- Statements that have side effects (e.g., triggers, stored procedures,
  user-defined functions) may result in different side effects occurring
  on each replica, unless the side effects are absolutely deterministic.

It is possible to work around those issues—for example, the leader can
replace any nondeterministic function calls with a fixed return value
when the statement is logged so that the followers all get the same
value. The idea of executing deterministic statements in a fixed order
is similar to the event sourcing model that we previously discussed in
“Event Sourcing and CQRS”. This approach is also known as state machine
replication, and we will discuss the theory behind it in [Link to Come].

Statement-based replication was used in MySQL before version 5.1. It is
still sometimes used today, as it is quite compact, but by default MySQL
now switches to row-based replication (discussed shortly) if there is
any nondeterminism in a statement. VoltDB uses statement-based
replication, and makes it safe by requiring transactions to be
deterministic [15]. However, determinism can be hard to guarantee in
practice, so many databases prefer other replication methods.

Write-ahead log (WAL) shipping

In Chapter 4 we saw that a write-ahead log is needed to make B-tree
storage engines robust: every modification is first written to the WAL
so that the tree can be restored to a consistent state after a crash.
Since the WAL contains all the information necessary to restore the
indexes and heap into a consistent state, we can use the exact same log
to build a replica on another node: besides writing the log to disk, the
leader also sends it across the network to its followers. When the
follower processes this log, it builds a copy of the exact same files as
found on the leader.

This method of replication is used in PostgreSQL and Oracle, among
others [16, 17]. The main disadvantage is that the log describes the
data on a very low level: a WAL contains details of which bytes were
changed in which disk blocks. This makes replication tightly coupled to
the storage engine. If the database changes its storage format from one
version to another, it is typically not possible to run different
versions of the database software on the leader and the followers.

That may seem like a minor implementation detail, but it can have a big
operational impact. If the replication protocol allows the follower to
use a newer software version than the leader, you can perform a
zero-downtime upgrade of the database software by first upgrading the
followers and then performing a failover to make one of the upgraded
nodes the new leader. If the replication protocol does not allow this
version mismatch, as is often the case with WAL shipping, such upgrades
require downtime.

Logical (row-based) log replication

An alternative is to use different log formats for replication and for
the storage engine, which allows the replication log to be decoupled
from the storage engine internals. This kind of replication log is
called a logical log, to distinguish it from the storage engine’s
(physical) data representation.

A logical log for a relational database is usually a sequence of records
describing writes to database tables at the granularity of a row:

- For an inserted row, the log contains the new values of all columns.

- For a deleted row, the log contains enough information to uniquely
  identify the row that was deleted. Typically this would be the primary
  key, but if there is no primary key on the table, the old values of
  all columns need to be logged.

- For an updated row, the log contains enough information to uniquely
  identify the updated row, and the new values of all columns (or at
  least the new values of all columns that changed).

A transaction that modifies several rows generates several such log
records, followed by a record indicating that the transaction was
committed. MySQL keeps a separate logical replication log, called the
binlog, in addition to the WAL (when configured to use row-based
replication). PostgreSQL implements logical replication by decoding the
physical WAL into row insertion/update/delete events [18].

Since a logical log is decoupled from the storage engine internals, it
can more easily be kept backward compatible, allowing the leader and the
follower to run different versions of the database software. This in
turn enables upgrading to a new version with minimal downtime [19].

A logical log format is also easier for external applications to parse.
This aspect is useful if you want to send the contents of a database to
an external system, such as a data warehouse for offline analysis, or
for building custom indexes and caches [20]. This technique is called
change data capture, and we will return to it in [Link to Come].

Problems with Replication Lag

Being able to tolerate node failures is just one reason for wanting
replication. As mentioned in “Distributed versus Single-Node Systems”,
other reasons are scalability (processing more requests than a single
machine can handle) and latency (placing replicas geographically closer
to users).

Leader-based replication requires all writes to go through a single
node, but read-only queries can go to any replica. For workloads that
consist of mostly reads and only a small percentage of writes (which is
often the case with online services), there is an attractive option:
create many followers, and distribute the read requests across those
followers. This removes load from the leader and allows read requests to
be served by nearby replicas.

In this read-scaling architecture, you can increase the capacity for
serving read-only requests simply by adding more followers. However,
this approach only realistically works with asynchronous replication—if
you tried to synchronously replicate to all followers, a single node
failure or network outage would make the entire system unavailable for
writing. And the more nodes you have, the likelier it is that one will
be down, so a fully synchronous configuration would be very unreliable.

Unfortunately, if an application reads from an asynchronous follower, it
may see outdated information if the follower has fallen behind. This
leads to apparent inconsistencies in the database: if you run the same
query on the leader and a follower at the same time, you may get
different results, because not all writes have been reflected in the
follower. This inconsistency is just a temporary state—if you stop
writing to the database and wait a while, the followers will eventually
catch up and become consistent with the leader. For that reason, this
effect is known as eventual consistency [21].

Note

The term eventual consistency was coined by Douglas Terry et al. [22],
popularized by Werner Vogels [23], and became the battle cry of many
NoSQL projects. However, not only NoSQL databases are eventually
consistent: followers in an asynchronously replicated relational
database have the same characteristics.

The term “eventually” is deliberately vague: in general, there is no
limit to how far a replica can fall behind. In normal operation, the
delay between a write happening on the leader and being reflected on a
follower—the replication lag—may be only a fraction of a second, and not
noticeable in practice. However, if the system is operating near
capacity or if there is a problem in the network, the lag can easily
increase to several seconds or even minutes.

When the lag is so large, the inconsistencies it introduces are not just
a theoretical issue but a real problem for applications. In this section
we will highlight three examples of problems that are likely to occur
when there is replication lag. We’ll also outline some approaches to
solving them.

Reading Your Own Writes

Many applications let the user submit some data and then view what they
have submitted. This might be a record in a customer database, or a
comment on a discussion thread, or something else of that sort. When new
data is submitted, it must be sent to the leader, but when the user
views the data, it can be read from a follower. This is especially
appropriate if data is frequently viewed but only occasionally written.

With asynchronous replication, there is a problem, illustrated in
Figure 6-3: if the user views the data shortly after making a write, the
new data may not yet have reached the replica. To the user, it looks as
though the data they submitted was lost, so they will be understandably
unhappy.

[ddia 0603]

Figure 6-3. A user makes a write, followed by a read from a stale replica. To prevent this anomaly, we need read-after-write consistency.

In this situation, we need read-after-write consistency, also known as
read-your-writes consistency [22]. This is a guarantee that if the user
reloads the page, they will always see any updates they submitted
themselves. It makes no promises about other users: other users’ updates
may not be visible until some later time. However, it reassures the user
that their own input has been saved correctly.

How can we implement read-after-write consistency in a system with
leader-based replication? There are various possible techniques. To
mention a few:

- When reading something that the user may have modified, read it from
  the leader or a synchronously updated follower; otherwise, read it
  from an asynchronously updated follower. This requires that you have
  some way of knowing whether something might have been modified,
  without actually querying it. For example, user profile information on
  a social network is normally only editable by the owner of the
  profile, not by anybody else. Thus, a simple rule is: always read the
  user’s own profile from the leader, and any other users’ profiles from
  a follower.

- If most things in the application are potentially editable by the
  user, that approach won’t be effective, as most things would have to
  be read from the leader (negating the benefit of read scaling). In
  that case, other criteria may be used to decide whether to read from
  the leader. For example, you could track the time of the last update
  and, for one minute after the last update, make all reads from the
  leader [24]. You could also monitor the replication lag on followers
  and prevent queries on any follower that is more than one minute
  behind the leader.

-  The client can remember the timestamp of its most recent write—then
  the system can ensure that the replica serving any reads for that user
  reflects updates at least until that timestamp. If a replica is not
  sufficiently up to date, either the read can be handled by another
  replica or the query can wait until the replica has caught up [25].
  The timestamp could be a logical timestamp (something that indicates
  ordering of writes, such as the log sequence number) or the actual
  system clock (in which case clock synchronization becomes critical;
  see [Link to Come]).

-  If your replicas are distributed across regions (for geographical
  proximity to users or for availability), there is additional
  complexity. Any request that needs to be served by the leader must be
  routed to the region that contains the leader.

Another complication arises when the same user is accessing your service
from multiple devices, for example a desktop web browser and a mobile
app. In this case you may want to provide cross-device read-after-write
consistency: if the user enters some information on one device and then
views it on another device, they should see the information they just
entered.

In this case, there are some additional issues to consider:

- Approaches that require remembering the timestamp of the user’s last
  update become more difficult, because the code running on one device
  doesn’t know what updates have happened on the other device. This
  metadata will need to be centralized.

- If your replicas are distributed across different regions, there is no
  guarantee that connections from different devices will be routed to
  the same region. (For example, if the user’s desktop computer uses the
  home broadband connection and their mobile device uses the cellular
  data network, the devices’ network routes may be completely
  different.) If your approach requires reading from the leader, you may
  first need to route requests from all of a user’s devices to the same
  region.

Regions and Availability Zones

We use the term region to refer to one or more datacenters in a single
geographic location. Cloud providers locate multiple datacenters in the
same geographic region. Each datacenter is referred to as an
availability zone or simply zone. Thus, a single cloud region is made up
of multiple zones. Each zone is a separate datacenter located in
separate physical facility with its own power, cooling, and so on.

Zones in the same region are connected by very high speed network
connections. Latency is low enough that most distributed systems can run
with nodes spread across multiple zones in the same region as though
they were in a single zone. Multi-zone configurations allow distributed
systems to survive zonal outages where one zone goes offline, but they
do not protect against regional outages where all zones in a region are
unavailable. To survive a regional outage, a distributed system must be
deployed across multiple regions, which can result in higher latencies,
lower throughput, and increased cloud networking bills. We will discuss
these tradeoffs more in “Multi-leader replication topologies”. For now,
just know that when we say region, we mean a collection of
zones/datacenters in a single geographic location.

Monotonic Reads

Our second example of an anomaly that can occur when reading from
asynchronous followers is that it’s possible for a user to see things
moving backward in time.

This can happen if a user makes several reads from different replicas.
For example, Figure 6-4 shows user 2345 making the same query twice,
first to a follower with little lag, then to a follower with greater
lag. (This scenario is quite likely if the user refreshes a web page,
and each request is routed to a random server.) The first query returns
a comment that was recently added by user 1234, but the second query
doesn’t return anything because the lagging follower has not yet picked
up that write. In effect, the second query observes the system state at
an earlier point in time than the first query. This wouldn’t be so bad
if the first query hadn’t returned anything, because user 2345 probably
wouldn’t know that user 1234 had recently added a comment. However, it’s
very confusing for user 2345 if they first see user 1234’s comment
appear, and then see it disappear again.

[ddia 0604]

Figure 6-4. A user first reads from a fresh replica, then from a stale replica. Time appears to go backward. To prevent this anomaly, we need monotonic reads.

Monotonic reads [21] is a guarantee that this kind of anomaly does not
happen. It’s a lesser guarantee than strong consistency, but a stronger
guarantee than eventual consistency. When you read data, you may see an
old value; monotonic reads only means that if one user makes several
reads in sequence, they will not see time go backward—i.e., they will
not read older data after having previously read newer data.

One way of achieving monotonic reads is to make sure that each user
always makes their reads from the same replica (different users can read
from different replicas). For example, the replica can be chosen based
on a hash of the user ID, rather than randomly. However, if that replica
fails, the user’s queries will need to be rerouted to another replica.

Consistent Prefix Reads

Our third example of replication lag anomalies concerns violation of
causality. Imagine the following short dialog between Mr. Poons and Mrs.
Cake:

Mr. Poons

    How far into the future can you see, Mrs. Cake?

Mrs. Cake

    About ten seconds usually, Mr. Poons.

There is a causal dependency between those two sentences: Mrs. Cake
heard Mr. Poons’s question and answered it.

Now, imagine a third person is listening to this conversation through
followers. The things said by Mrs. Cake go through a follower with
little lag, but the things said by Mr. Poons have a longer replication
lag (see Figure 6-5). This observer would hear the following:

Mrs. Cake

    About ten seconds usually, Mr. Poons.

Mr. Poons

    How far into the future can you see, Mrs. Cake?

To the observer it looks as though Mrs. Cake is answering the question
before Mr. Poons has even asked it. Such psychic powers are impressive,
but very confusing [26].

[ddia 0605]

Figure 6-5. If some shards are replicated slower than others, an observer may see the answer before they see the question.

Preventing this kind of anomaly requires another type of guarantee:
consistent prefix reads [21]. This guarantee says that if a sequence of
writes happens in a certain order, then anyone reading those writes will
see them appear in the same order.

This is a particular problem in sharded (partitioned) databases, which
we will discuss in Chapter 7. If the database always applies writes in
the same order, reads always see a consistent prefix, so this anomaly
cannot happen. However, in many distributed databases, different shards
operate independently, so there is no global ordering of writes: when a
user reads from the database, they may see some parts of the database in
an older state and some in a newer state.

One solution is to make sure that any writes that are causally related
to each other are written to the same shard—but in some applications
that cannot be done efficiently. There are also algorithms that
explicitly keep track of causal dependencies, a topic that we will
return to in “The “happens-before” relation and concurrency”.

Solutions for Replication Lag

When working with an eventually consistent system, it is worth thinking
about how the application behaves if the replication lag increases to
several minutes or even hours. If the answer is “no problem,” that’s
great. However, if the result is a bad experience for users, it’s
important to design the system to provide a stronger guarantee, such as
read-after-write. Pretending that replication is synchronous when in
fact it is asynchronous is a recipe for problems down the line.

As discussed earlier, there are ways in which an application can provide
a stronger guarantee than the underlying database—for example, by
performing certain kinds of reads on the leader or a synchronously
updated follower. However, dealing with these issues in application code
is complex and easy to get wrong.

The simplest programming model for application developers is to choose a
database that provides a strong consistency guarantee for replicas such
as linearizability (see [Link to Come]), and ACID transactions (see
[Link to Come]). This allows you to mostly ignore the challenges that
arise from replication, and treat the database as if it had just a
single node. In the early 2010s the NoSQL movement promoted the view
that these features limited scalability, and that large-scale systems
would have to embrace eventual consistency.

However, since then, a number of databases started providing strong
consistency and transactions while also offering the fault tolerance,
high availability, and scalability advantages of a distributed database.
As mentioned in “Relational Model versus Document Model”, this trend is
known as NewSQL to contrast with NoSQL (although it’s less about SQL
specifically, and more about new approaches to scalable transaction
management).

Even though scalable, strongly consistent distributed databases are now
available, there are still good reasons why some applications choose to
use different forms of replication that offer weaker consistency
guarantees: they can offer stronger resilience in the face of network
interruptions, and have lower overheads compared to transactional
systems. We will explore such approaches in the rest of this chapter.

Multi-Leader Replication

So far in this chapter we have only considered replication architectures
using a single leader. Although that is a common approach, there are
interesting alternatives.

Single-leader replication has one major downside: all writes must go
through the one leader. If you can’t connect to the leader for any
reason, for example due to a network interruption between you and the
leader, you can’t write to the database.

A natural extension of the single-leader replication model is to allow
more than one node to accept writes. Replication still happens in the
same way: each node that processes a write must forward that data change
to all the other nodes. We call this a multi-leader configuration (also
known as active/active or bidirectional replication). In this setup,
each leader simultaneously acts as a follower to the other leaders.

As with single-leader replication, there is a choice between making it
synchronous or asynchronous. Let’s say you have two leaders, A and B,
and you’re trying to write to A. If writes are synchronously replicated
from A to B, and the network between the two nodes is interrupted, you
can’t write to A until the network comes back. Synchronous multi-leader
replication thus gives you a model that is very similar to single-leader
replication, i.e. if you had made B the leader and A simply forwards any
write requests to B to be executed.

For that reason, we won’t go further into synchronous multi-leader
replication, and simply treat it as equivalent to single-leader
replication. The rest of this section focusses on asynchronous
multi-leader replication, in which any leader can process writes even
when its connection to the other leaders is interrupted.

Geographically Distributed Operation

It rarely makes sense to use a multi-leader setup within a single
region, because the benefits rarely outweigh the added complexity.
However, there are some situations in which this configuration is
reasonable.

Imagine you have a database with replicas in several different regions
(perhaps so that you can tolerate the failure of an entire region, or
perhaps in order to be closer to your users). This is known as a
geographically distributed, geo-distributed or geo-replicated setup.
With single-leader replication, the leader has to be in one of the
regions, and all writes must go through that region.

In a multi-leader configuration, you can have a leader in each region.
Figure 6-6 shows what this architecture might look like. Within each
region, regular leader–follower replication is used (with followers
maybe in a different availability zone from the leader); between
regions, each region’s leader replicates its changes to the leaders in
other regions.

[ddia 0606]

Figure 6-6. Multi-leader replication across multiple regions.

Let’s compare how the single-leader and multi-leader configurations fare
in a multi-region deployment:

Performance

    In a single-leader configuration, every write must go over the
    internet to the region with the leader. This can add significant
    latency to writes and might contravene the purpose of having
    multiple regions in the first place. In a multi-leader
    configuration, every write can be processed in the local region and
    is replicated asynchronously to the other regions. Thus, the
    inter-region network delay is hidden from users, which means the
    perceived performance may be better.

Tolerance of regional outages

    In a single-leader configuration, if the region with the leader
    becomes unavailable, failover can promote a follower in another
    region to be leader. In a multi-leader configuration, each region
    can continue operating independently of the others, and replication
    catches up when the offline region comes back online.

Tolerance of network problems

    Even with dedicated connections, traffic between regions can be less
    reliable than traffic between zones in the same region or within a
    single zone. A single-leader configuration is very sensitive to
    problems in this inter-region link, because when a client in one
    region wants to write to a leader in another region, it has to send
    its request over that link and wait for the response before it can
    complete.

    A multi-leader configuration with asynchronous replication can
    tolerate network problems better: during a temporary network
    interruption, each region’s leader can continue independently
    processing writes.

Consistency

    A single-leader system can provide strong consistency guarantees,
    such as serializable transactions, which we will discuss in [Link to
    Come]. The biggest downside of multi-leader systems is that the
    consistency they can achieve is much weaker. For example, you can’t
    guarantee that a bank account won’t go negative or that a username
    is unique: it’s always possible for different leaders to process
    writes that are individually fine (paying out some of the money in
    an account, registering a particular username), but which violate
    the constraint when taken together with another write on another
    leader.

    This is simply a fundamental limitation of distributed systems [27].
    If you need to enforce such constraints, you’re therefore better off
    with a single-leader system. However, as we will see in “Dealing
    with Conflicting Writes”, multi-leader systems can still achieve
    consistency properties that are useful in a wide range of apps that
    don’t need such constraints.

Multi-leader replication is less common than single-leader replication,
but it is still supported by many databases, including MySQL, Oracle,
SQL Server, and YugabyteDB. In some cases it is an external add-on
feature, for example in Redis Enterprise, EDB Postgres Distributed, and
pglogical [28].

As multi-leader replication is a somewhat retrofitted feature in many
databases, there are often subtle configuration pitfalls and surprising
interactions with other database features. For example, autoincrementing
keys, triggers, and integrity constraints can be problematic. For this
reason, multi-leader replication is often considered dangerous territory
that should be avoided if possible [29].

Multi-leader replication topologies

A replication topology describes the communication paths along which
writes are propagated from one node to another. If you have two leaders,
like in Figure 6-9, there is only one plausible topology: leader 1 must
send all of its writes to leader 2, and vice versa. With more than two
leaders, various different topologies are possible. Some examples are
illustrated in Figure 6-7.

[ddia 0607]

Figure 6-7. Three example topologies in which multi-leader replication can be set up.

The most general topology is all-to-all, shown in Figure 6-7(c), in
which every leader sends its writes to every other leader. However, more
restricted topologies are also used: for example a circular topology in
which each node receives writes from one node and forwards those writes
(plus any writes of its own) to one other node. Another popular topology
has the shape of a star: one designated root node forwards writes to all
of the other nodes. The star topology can be generalized to a tree.

Note

Don’t confuse a star-shaped network topology with a star schema (see
“Stars and Snowflakes: Schemas for Analytics”), which describes the
structure of a data model.

In circular and star topologies, a write may need to pass through
several nodes before it reaches all replicas. Therefore, nodes need to
forward data changes they receive from other nodes. To prevent infinite
replication loops, each node is given a unique identifier, and in the
replication log, each write is tagged with the identifiers of all the
nodes it has passed through [30]. When a node receives a data change
that is tagged with its own identifier, that data change is ignored,
because the node knows that it has already been processed.

Problems with different topologies

A problem with circular and star topologies is that if just one node
fails, it can interrupt the flow of replication messages between other
nodes, leaving them unable to communicate until the node is fixed. The
topology could be reconfigured to work around the failed node, but in
most deployments such reconfiguration would have to be done manually.
The fault tolerance of a more densely connected topology (such as
all-to-all) is better because it allows messages to travel along
different paths, avoiding a single point of failure.

On the other hand, all-to-all topologies can have issues too. In
particular, some network links may be faster than others (e.g., due to
network congestion), with the result that some replication messages may
“overtake” others, as illustrated in Figure 6-8.

[ddia 0608]

Figure 6-8. With multi-leader replication, writes may arrive in the wrong order at some replicas.

In Figure 6-8, client A inserts a row into a table on leader 1, and
client B updates that row on leader 3. However, leader 2 may receive the
writes in a different order: it may first receive the update (which,
from its point of view, is an update to a row that does not exist in the
database) and only later receive the corresponding insert (which should
have preceded the update).

This is a problem of causality, similar to the one we saw in “Consistent
Prefix Reads”: the update depends on the prior insert, so we need to
make sure that all nodes process the insert first, and then the update.
Simply attaching a timestamp to every write is not sufficient, because
clocks cannot be trusted to be sufficiently in sync to correctly order
these events at leader 2 (see [Link to Come]).

To order these events correctly, a technique called version vectors can
be used, which we will discuss later in this chapter (see “Detecting
Concurrent Writes”). However, many multi-leader replication systems
don’t use good techniques for ordering updates, leaving them vulnerable
to issues like the one in Figure 6-8. If you are using multi-leader
replication, it is worth being aware of these issues, carefully reading
the documentation, and thoroughly testing your database to ensure that
it really does provide the guarantees you believe it to have.

Sync Engines and Local-First Software

Another situation in which multi-leader replication is appropriate is if
you have an application that needs to continue to work while it is
disconnected from the internet.

For example, consider the calendar apps on your mobile phone, your
laptop, and other devices. You need to be able to see your meetings
(make read requests) and enter new meetings (make write requests) at any
time, regardless of whether your device currently has an internet
connection. If you make any changes while you are offline, they need to
be synced with a server and your other devices when the device is next
online.

In this case, every device has a local database replica that acts as a
leader (it accepts write requests), and there is an asynchronous
multi-leader replication process (sync) between the replicas of your
calendar on all of your devices. The replication lag may be hours or
even days, depending on when you have internet access available.

From an architectural point of view, this setup is very similar to
multi-leader replication between regions, taken to the extreme: each
device is a “region,” and the network connection between them is
extremely unreliable.

Real-time collaboration, offline-first, and local-first apps

Moreover, many modern web apps offer real-time collaboration features,
such as Google Docs and Sheets for text documents and spreadsheets,
Figma for graphics, and Linear for project management. What makes these
apps so responsive is that user input is immediately reflected in the
user interface, without waiting for a network round-trip to the server,
and edits by one user are shown to their collaborators with low latency
[31, 32, 33].

This again results in a multi-leader architecture: each web browser tab
that has opened the shared file is a replica, and any updates that you
make to the file are asynchronously replicated to the devices of the
other users who have opened the same file. Even if the app does not
allow you to continue editing a file while offline, the fact that
multiple users can make edits without waiting for a response from the
server already makes it multi-leader.

Both offline editing and real-time collaboration require a similar
replication infrastructure: the application needs to capture any changes
that the user makes to a file, and either send them to collaborators
immediately (if online), or store them locally for sending later (if
offline). Additionally, the application needs to receive changes from
collaborators, merge them into the user’s local copy of the file, and
update the user interface to reflect the latest version. If multiple
users have changed the file concurrently, conflict resolution logic may
be needed to merge those changes.

A software library that supports this process is called a sync engine.
Although the idea has existed for a long time, the term has recently
gained attention [34, 35, 36]. An application that allows a user to
continue editing a file while offline (which may be implemented using a
sync engine) is called offline-first [37]. The term local-first software
refers to collaborative apps that are not only offline-first, but are
also designed to continue working even if the developer who made the
software shuts down all of their online services [38]. This can be
achieved by using a sync engine with an open standard sync protocol for
which multiple service providers are available [39]. For example, Git is
a local-first collaboration system (albeit one that doesn’t support
real-time collaboration) since you can sync via GitHub, GitLab, or any
other repository hosting service.

Pros and cons of sync engines

The dominant way of building web apps today is to keep very little
persistent state on the client, and to rely on making requests to a
server whenever a new piece of data needs to be displayed or some data
needs to be updated. In contrast, when using a sync engine, you have
persistent state on the client, and communication with the server is
moved into a background process. The sync engine approach has a number
of advantages:

-  Having the data locally means the user interface can be much faster
  to respond than if it had to wait for a service call to fetch some
  data. Some apps aim to respond to user input in the next frame of the
  graphics system, which means rendering within 16 ms on a display with
  a 60 Hz refresh rate.

- Allowing users to continue working while offline is valuable,
  especially on mobile devices with intermittent connectivity. With a
  sync engine, an app doesn’t need a separate offline mode: being
  offline is the same as having very large network delay.

-  A sync engine simplifies the programming model for frontend apps,
  compared to performing explicit service calls in application code.
  Every service call requires error handling, as discussed in “The
  problems with remote procedure calls (RPCs)”: for example, if a
  request to update data on a server fails, the user interface needs to
  somehow reflect that error. A sync engine allows the app to perform
  reads and writes on local data, which almost never fails, leading to a
  more declarative programming style [40].

-  In order to display edits from other users in real-time, you need to
  receive notifications of those edits and efficiently update the user
  interface accordingly. A sync engine combined with a reactive
  programming model is a good way of implementing this [41].

Sync engines work best when all the data that the user may need is
downloaded in advance and stored persistently on the client. This means
that the data is available for offline access when needed, but it also
means that sync engines are not suitable if the user has access to a
very large amount of data. For example, downloading all the files that
the user themselves created is probably fine (one user generally doesn’t
generate that much data), but downloading the entire catalog of an
e-commerce website probably doesn’t make sense.

The sync engine was pioneered by Lotus Notes in the 1980s [42] (without
using that term), and sync for specific apps such as calendars has also
existed for a long time. Today there are a number of general-purpose
sync engines, some of which use a proprietary backend service (e.g.,
Google Firestore, Realm, or Ditto), and some have an open source
backend, making them suitable for creating local-first software (e.g.,
PouchDB/CouchDB, Automerge, or Yjs).

Multiplayer video games have a similar need to respond immediately to
the user’s local actions, and reconcile them with other players’ actions
received asynchronously over the network. In game development jargon the
equivalent of a sync engine is called netcode. The techniques used in
netcode are quite specific to the requirements of games [43], and don’t
directly carry over to other types of software, so we won’t consider
them further in this book.

Dealing with Conflicting Writes

The biggest problem with multi-leader replication—both in a
geo-distributed server-side database and a local-first sync engine on
end user devices—is that concurrent writes on different leaders can lead
to conflicts that need to be resolved.

For example, consider a wiki page that is simultaneously being edited by
two users, as shown in Figure 6-9. User 1 changes the title of the page
from A to B, and user 2 independently changes the title from A to C.
Each user’s change is successfully applied to their local leader.
However, when the changes are asynchronously replicated, a conflict is
detected. This problem does not occur in a single-leader database.

[ddia 0609]

Figure 6-9. A write conflict caused by two leaders concurrently updating the same record.

Note

We say that the two writes in Figure 6-9 are concurrent because neither
was “aware” of the other at the time the write was originally made. It
doesn’t matter whether the writes literally happened at the same time;
indeed, if the writes were made while offline, they might have actually
happened some time apart. What matters is whether one write occurred in
a state where the other write has already taken effect.

In “Detecting Concurrent Writes” we will tackle the question of how a
database can determine whether two writes are concurrent. For now we
will assume that we can detect conflicts, and we want to figure out the
best way of resolving them.

Conflict avoidance

One strategy for conflicts is to avoid them occurring in the first
place. For example, if the application can ensure that all writes for a
particular record go through the same leader, then conflicts cannot
occur, even if the database as a whole is multi-leader. This approach is
not possible in the case of a sync engine client being updated offline,
but it is sometimes possible in geo-replicated server systems [29].

For example, in an application where a user can only edit their own
data, you can ensure that requests from a particular user are always
routed to the same region and use the leader in that region for reading
and writing. Different users may have different “home” regions (perhaps
picked based on geographic proximity to the user), but from any one
user’s point of view the configuration is essentially single-leader.

However, sometimes you might want to change the designated leader for a
record—perhaps because one region is unavailable and you need to reroute
traffic to another region, or perhaps because a user has moved to a
different location and is now closer to a different region. There is now
a risk that the user performs a write while the change of designated
leader is in progress, leading to a conflict that would have to be
resolved using one of the methods below. Thus, conflict avoidance breaks
down if you allow the leader to be changed.

Another example of conflict avoidance: imagine you want to insert new
records and generate unique IDs for them based on an auto-incrementing
counter. If you have two leaders, you could set them up so that one
leader only generates odd numbers and the other only generates even
numbers. That way you can be sure that the two leaders won’t
concurrently assign the same ID to different records. Alternatively, you
could use universally unique identifiers (UUIDs) or a distributed ID
generation scheme such as Snowflake [44].

Last write wins (discarding concurrent writes)

If conflicts can’t be avoided, the simplest way of resolving them is to
attach a timestamp to each write, and to always use the value with the
greatest timestamp. For example, in Figure 6-9, let’s say that the
timestamp of user 1’s write is greater than the timestamp of user 2’s
write. In that case, both leaders will determine that the new title of
the page should be B, and they discard the write that sets it to C. If
the writes coincidentally have the same timestamp, the winner can be
chosen by comparing the values (e.g., in the case of strings, taking the
one that’s earlier in the alphabet).

This approach is called last write wins (LWW) because the write with the
greatest timestamp can be considered the “last” one. The term is
misleading though, because when two writes are concurrent like in
Figure 6-9, which one is older and which is later is undefined, and so
the timestamp order of concurrent writes is essentially random.

Therefore the real meaning of LWW is: when the same record is
concurrently written on different leaders, one of those writes is
randomly chosen to be the winner, and the other writes are silently
discarded, even though they were successfully processed at their
respective leaders. This achieves the goal that eventually all replicas
end up in a consistent state, but at the cost of data loss.

If you can avoid conflicts—for example, by only inserting records with a
unique key such as a UUID or a Snowflake ID, and never updating
them—then LWW is no problem. But if you update existing records, or if
different leaders may insert records with the same key, then you have to
decide whether lost updates are a problem for your application. If lost
updates are not acceptable, you need to use one of the conflict
resolution approaches described below.

Another problem with LWW is that if a real-time clock (e.g. a Unix
timestamp) is used as timestamp for the writes, the system becomes very
sensitive to clock synchronization. If one node has a clock that is
ahead of the others, and you try to overwrite a value written by that
node, your write may be ignored as it may have a lower timestamp, even
though it clearly occurred later. This problem can be solved by using a
logical clock, which we will discuss in [Link to Come].

Manual conflict resolution

If randomly discarding some of your writes is not desirable, the next
option is to resolve the conflict manually. You may be familiar with
manual conflict resolution from Git and other version control systems:
if commits on two different branches edit the same lines of the same
file, and you try to merge those branches, you will get a merge conflict
that needs to be resolved before the merge is complete.

In a database, it would be impractical for a conflict to stop the entire
replication process until a human has resolved it. Instead, databases
typically store all the concurrently written values for a given
record—for example, both B and C in Figure 6-9. These values are
sometimes called siblings. The next time you query that record, the
database returns all those values, rather than just the latest one. You
can then resolve those values in whatever way you want, either
automatically in application code (for example, you could concatenate B
and C into “B/C”), or by asking the user. You then write back a new
value to the database to resolve the conflict.

This approach to conflict resolution is used in some systems, such as
CouchDB. However, it also suffers from a number of problems:

- The API of the database changes: for example, where previously the
  title of the wiki page was just a string, it now becomes a set of
  strings that usually contains one element, but may sometimes contain
  multiple elements if there is a conflict. This can make the data
  awkward to work with in application code.

- Asking the user to manually merge the siblings is a lot of work, both
  for the app developer (who needs to build the user interface for
  conflict resolution) and for the user (who may be confused about what
  they are being asked to do, and why). In many cases, it’s better to
  merge automatically than to bother the user.

- Merging siblings automatically can lead to surprising behavior if it
  is not done carefully. For example, the shopping cart on Amazon used
  to allow concurrent updates, which were then merged by keeping all the
  shopping cart items that appeared in any of the siblings (i.e., taking
  the set union of the carts). This meant that if the customer had
  removed an item from their cart in one sibling, but another sibling
  still contained that old item, the removed item would unexpectedly
  reappear in the customer’s cart [45]. Figure 6-10 shows an example
  where Device 1 removes Book from the shopping cart and concurrently
  Device 2 removes DVD, but after merging the conflict both items
  reappear.

- If multiple nodes observe the conflict and concurrently resolve it,
  the conflict resolution process can itself introduce a new conflict.
  Those resolutions could even be inconsistent: for example, one node
  may merge B and C into “B/C” and another may merge them into “C/B” if
  you are not careful to order them consistently. When the conflict
  between “B/C” and “C/B” is merged, it may result in “B/C/C/B” or
  something similarly surprising.

[ddia 0610]

Figure 6-10. Example of Amazon’s shopping cart anomaly: if conflicts on a shopping cart are merged by taking the union, deleted items may reappear.

Automatic conflict resolution

For many applications, the best way of handling conflicts is to use an
algorithm that automatically merges concurrent writes into a consistent
state. Automatic conflict resolution ensures that all replicas converge
to the same state—i.e., all replicas that have processed the same set of
writes have the same state, regardless of the order in which the writes
arrived.

LWW is a simple example of a conflict resolution algorithm. More
sophisticated merge algorithms have been developed for different types
of data, with the goal of preserving the intended effect of all updates
as much as possible, and hence avoiding data loss:

- If the data is text (e.g., the title or body of a wiki page), we can
  detect which characters have been inserted or deleted from one version
  to the next. The merged result then preserves all the insertions and
  deletions made in any of the siblings. If users concurrently insert
  text at the same position, it can be ordered deterministically so that
  all nodes get the same merged outcome.

- If the data is a collection of items (ordered like a to-do list, or
  unordered like a shopping cart), we can merge it similarly to text by
  tracking insertions and deletions. To avoid the shopping cart issue in
  Figure 6-10, the algorithms track the fact that Book and DVD were
  deleted, so the merged result is Cart = {Soap}.

- If the data is an integer representing a counter that can be
  incremented or decremented (e.g., the number of likes on a social
  media post), the merge algorithm can tell how many increments and
  decrements happened on each sibling, and add them together correctly
  so that the result does not double-count and does not drop updates.

- If the data is a key-value mapping, we can merge updates to the same
  key by applying one of the other conflict resolution algorithms to the
  values under that key. Updates to different keys can be handled
  independently from each other.

There are limits to what is possible with conflict resolution. For
example, if you want to enforce that a list contains no more than five
items, and multiple users concurrently add items to the list so that
there are more than five in total, your only option is to drop some of
the items. Nevertheless, automatic conflict resolution is sufficient to
build many useful apps. And if you start from the requirement of wanting
to build a collaborative offline-first or local-first app, then conflict
resolution is inevitable, and automating it is often the best approach.

CRDTs and Operational Transformation

Two families of algorithms are commonly used to implement automatic
conflict resolution: Conflict-free replicated datatypes (CRDTs) [46] and
Operational Transformation (OT) [47]. They have different design
philosophies and performance characteristics, but both are able to
perform automatic merges for all the aforementioned types of data.

Figure 6-11 shows an example of how OT and a CRDT merge concurrent
updates to a text. Assume you have two replicas that both start off with
the text “ice”. One replica prepends the letter “n” to make “nice”,
while concurrently the other replica appends an exclamation mark to make
“ice!”.

[ddia 0611]

Figure 6-11. How two concurrent insertions into a string are merged by OT and a CRDT respectively.

The merged result “nice!” is achieved differently by both types of
algorithms:

OT

    We record the index at which characters are inserted or deleted: “n”
    is inserted at index 0, and “!” at index 3. Next, the replicas
    exchange their operations. The insertion of “n” at 0 can be applied
    as-is, but if the insertion of “!” at 3 were applied to the state
    “nice” we would get “nic!e”, which is incorrect. We therefore need
    to transform the index of each operation to account for concurrent
    operations that have already been applied; in this case, the
    insertion of “!” is transformed to index 4 to account for the
    insertion of “n” at an earlier index.

CRDT

    Most CRDTs give each character a unique, immutable ID and use those
    to determine the positions of insertions/deletions, instead of
    indexes. For example, in Figure 6-11 we assign the ID 1A to “i”, the
    ID 2A to “c”, etc. When inserting the exclamation mark, we generate
    an operation containing the ID of the new character (4B) and the ID
    of the existing character after which we want to insert (3A). To
    insert at the beginning of the string we give “nil” as the preceding
    character ID. Concurrent insertions at the same position are ordered
    by the IDs of the characters. This ensures that replicas converge
    without performing any transformation.

There are many algorithms based on variations of these ideas.
Lists/arrays can be supported similarly, using list elements instead of
characters, and other datatypes such as key-value maps can be added
quite easily. There are some performance and functionality trade-offs
between OT and CRDTs, but it’s possible to combine the advantages of
CRDTs and OT in one algorithm [48].

OT is most often used for real-time collaborative editing of text, e.g.
in Google Docs [31], whereas CRDTs can be found in distributed databases
such as Redis Enterprise, Riak, and Azure Cosmos DB [49]. Sync engines
for JSON data can be implemented both with CRDTs (e.g., Automerge or
Yjs) and with OT (e.g., ShareDB).

What is a conflict?

Some kinds of conflict are obvious. In the example in Figure 6-9, two
writes concurrently modified the same field in the same record, setting
it to two different values. There is little doubt that this is a
conflict.

Other kinds of conflict can be more subtle to detect. For example,
consider a meeting room booking system: it tracks which room is booked
by which group of people at which time. This application needs to ensure
that each room is only booked by one group of people at any one time
(i.e., there must not be any overlapping bookings for the same room). In
this case, a conflict may arise if two different bookings are created
for the same room at the same time. Even if the application checks
availability before allowing a user to make a booking, there can be a
conflict if the two bookings are made on two different leaders.

There isn’t a quick ready-made answer, but in the following chapters we
will trace a path toward a good understanding of this problem. We will
see some more examples of conflicts in [Link to Come], and in [Link to
Come] we will discuss scalable approaches for detecting and resolving
conflicts in a replicated system.

Leaderless Replication

The replication approaches we have discussed so far in this
chapter—single-leader and multi-leader replication—are based on the idea
that a client sends a write request to one node (the leader), and the
database system takes care of copying that write to the other replicas.
A leader determines the order in which writes should be processed, and
followers apply the leader’s writes in the same order.

Some data storage systems take a different approach, abandoning the
concept of a leader and allowing any replica to directly accept writes
from clients. Some of the earliest replicated data systems were
leaderless [1, 50], but the idea was mostly forgotten during the era of
dominance of relational databases. It once again became a fashionable
architecture for databases after Amazon used it for its in-house Dynamo
system in 2007 [45]. Riak, Cassandra, and ScyllaDB are open source
datastores with leaderless replication models inspired by Dynamo, so
this kind of database is also known as Dynamo-style.

Note

The original Dynamo system was only described in a paper [45], but never
released outside of Amazon. The similarly-named DynamoDB is a more
recent cloud database from AWS, but it has a completely different
architecture: it uses single-leader replication based on the Multi-Paxos
consensus algorithm [5].

In some leaderless implementations, the client directly sends its writes
to several replicas, while in others, a coordinator node does this on
behalf of the client. However, unlike a leader database, that
coordinator does not enforce a particular ordering of writes. As we
shall see, this difference in design has profound consequences for the
way the database is used.

Writing to the Database When a Node Is Down

Imagine you have a database with three replicas, and one of the replicas
is currently unavailable—​perhaps it is being rebooted to install a
system update. In a single-leader configuration, if you want to continue
processing writes, you may need to perform a failover (see “Handling
Node Outages”).

On the other hand, in a leaderless configuration, failover does not
exist. Figure 6-12 shows what happens: the client (user 1234) sends the
write to all three replicas in parallel, and the two available replicas
accept the write but the unavailable replica misses it. Let’s say that
it’s sufficient for two out of three replicas to acknowledge the write:
after user 1234 has received two ok responses, we consider the write to
be successful. The client simply ignores the fact that one of the
replicas missed the write.

[ddia 0612]

Figure 6-12. A quorum write, quorum read, and read repair after a node outage.

Now imagine that the unavailable node comes back online, and clients
start reading from it. Any writes that happened while the node was down
are missing from that node. Thus, if you read from that node, you may
get stale (outdated) values as responses.

To solve that problem, when a client reads from the database, it doesn’t
just send its request to one replica: read requests are also sent to
several nodes in parallel. The client may get different responses from
different nodes; for example, the up-to-date value from one node and a
stale value from another.

In order to tell which responses are up-to-date and which are outdated,
every value that is written needs to be tagged with a version number or
timestamp, similarly to what we saw in “Last write wins (discarding
concurrent writes)”. When a client receives multiple values in response
to a read, it uses the one with the greatest timestamp (even if that
value was only returned by one replica, and several other replicas
returned older values). See “Detecting Concurrent Writes” for more
details.

Catching up on missed writes

The replication system should ensure that eventually all the data is
copied to every replica. After an unavailable node comes back online,
how does it catch up on the writes that it missed? Several mechanisms
are used in Dynamo-style datastores:

Read repair

     When a client makes a read from several nodes in parallel, it can
    detect any stale responses. For example, in Figure 6-12, user 2345
    gets a version 6 value from replica 3 and a version 7 value from
    replicas 1 and 2. The client sees that replica 3 has a stale value
    and writes the newer value back to that replica. This approach works
    well for values that are frequently read.

Hinted handoff

     If one replica is unavailable, another replica may store writes on
    its behalf in the form of hints. When the replica that was supposed
    to receive those writes comes back, the replica storing the hints
    sends them to the recovered replica, and then deletes the hints.
    This handoff process helps bring replicas up-to-date even for values
    that are never read, and therefore not handled by read repair.

Anti-entropy

     In addition, there is a background process that periodically looks
    for differences in the data between replicas and copies any missing
    data from one replica to another. Unlike the replication log in
    leader-based replication, this anti-entropy process does not copy
    writes in any particular order, and there may be a significant delay
    before data is copied.

Quorums for reading and writing

In the example of Figure 6-12, we considered the write to be successful
even though it was only processed on two out of three replicas. What if
only one out of three replicas accepted the write? How far can we push
this?

If we know that every successful write is guaranteed to be present on at
least two out of three replicas, that means at most one replica can be
stale. Thus, if we read from at least two replicas, we can be sure that
at least one of the two is up to date. If the third replica is down or
slow to respond, reads can nevertheless continue returning an up-to-date
value.

More generally, if there are n replicas, every write must be confirmed
by w nodes to be considered successful, and we must query at least r
nodes for each read. (In our example, n = 3, w = 2, r = 2.) As long as
w + r > n, we expect to get an up-to-date value when reading, because at
least one of the r nodes we’re reading from must be up to date. Reads
and writes that obey these r and w values are called quorum reads and
writes [50]. You can think of r and w as the minimum number of votes
required for the read or write to be valid.

In Dynamo-style databases, the parameters n, w, and r are typically
configurable. A common choice is to make n an odd number (typically 3 or
5) and to set w = r = (n + 1) / 2 (rounded up). However, you can vary
the numbers as you see fit. For example, a workload with few writes and
many reads may benefit from setting w = n and r = 1. This makes reads
faster, but has the disadvantage that just one failed node causes all
database writes to fail.

Note

There may be more than n nodes in the cluster, but any given value is
stored only on n nodes. This allows the dataset to be sharded,
supporting datasets that are larger than you can fit on one node. We
will return to sharding in Chapter 7.

The quorum condition, w + r > n, allows the system to tolerate
unavailable nodes as follows:

- If w < n, we can still process writes if a node is unavailable.

- If r < n, we can still process reads if a node is unavailable.

- With n = 3, w = 2, r = 2 we can tolerate one unavailable node, like in
  Figure 6-12.

- With n = 5, w = 3, r = 3 we can tolerate two unavailable nodes. This
  case is illustrated in Figure 6-13.

Normally, reads and writes are always sent to all n replicas in
parallel. The parameters w and r determine how many nodes we wait
for—i.e., how many of the n nodes need to report success before we
consider the read or write to be successful.

[ddia 0613]

Figure 6-13. If w + r > n, at least one of the r replicas you read from must have seen the most recent successful write.

If fewer than the required w or r nodes are available, writes or reads
return an error. A node could be unavailable for many reasons: because
the node is down (crashed, powered down), due to an error executing the
operation (can’t write because the disk is full), due to a network
interruption between the client and the node, or for any number of other
reasons. We only care whether the node returned a successful response
and don’t need to distinguish between different kinds of fault.

Limitations of Quorum Consistency

If you have n replicas, and you choose w and r such that w + r > n, you
can generally expect every read to return the most recent value written
for a key. This is the case because the set of nodes to which you’ve
written and the set of nodes from which you’ve read must overlap. That
is, among the nodes you read there must be at least one node with the
latest value (illustrated in Figure 6-13).

Often, r and w are chosen to be a majority (more than n/2) of nodes,
because that ensures w + r > n while still tolerating up to n/2 (rounded
down) node failures. But quorums are not necessarily majorities—it only
matters that the sets of nodes used by the read and write operations
overlap in at least one node. Other quorum assignments are possible,
which allows some flexibility in the design of distributed algorithms
[51].

You may also set w and r to smaller numbers, so that w + r ≤ n (i.e.,
the quorum condition is not satisfied). In this case, reads and writes
will still be sent to n nodes, but a smaller number of successful
responses is required for the operation to succeed.

With a smaller w and r you are more likely to read stale values, because
it’s more likely that your read didn’t include the node with the latest
value. On the upside, this configuration allows lower latency and higher
availability: if there is a network interruption and many replicas
become unreachable, there’s a higher chance that you can continue
processing reads and writes. Only after the number of reachable replicas
falls below w or r does the database become unavailable for writing or
reading, respectively.

However, even with w + r > n, there are edge cases in which the
consistency properties can be confusing. Some scenarios include:

- If a node carrying a new value fails, and its data is restored from a
  replica carrying an old value, the number of replicas storing the new
  value may fall below w, breaking the quorum condition.

- While a rebalancing is in progress, where some data is moved from one
  node to another (see Chapter 7), nodes may have inconsistent views of
  which nodes should be holding the n replicas for a particular value.
  This can result in the read and write quorums no longer overlapping.

- If a read is concurrent with a write operation, the read may or may
  not see the concurrently written value. In particular, it’s possible
  for one read to see the new value, and a subsequent read to see the
  old value, as we shall see in [Link to Come].

- If a write succeeded on some replicas but failed on others (for
  example because the disks on some nodes are full), and overall
  succeeded on fewer than w replicas, it is not rolled back on the
  replicas where it succeeded. This means that if a write was reported
  as failed, subsequent reads may or may not return the value from that
  write [52].

-  If the database uses timestamps from a real-time clock to determine
  which write is newer (as Cassandra and ScyllaDB do, for example),
  writes might be silently dropped if another node with a faster clock
  has written to the same key—an issue we previously saw in “Last write
  wins (discarding concurrent writes)”. We will discuss this in more
  detail in [Link to Come].

- If two writes occur concurrently, one of them might be processed first
  on one replica, and the other might be processed first on another
  replica. This leads to a conflict, similarly to what we saw for
  multi-leader replication (see “Dealing with Conflicting Writes”). We
  will return to this topic in “Detecting Concurrent Writes”.

Thus, although quorums appear to guarantee that a read returns the
latest written value, in practice it is not so simple. Dynamo-style
databases are generally optimized for use cases that can tolerate
eventual consistency. The parameters w and r allow you to adjust the
probability of stale values being read [53], but it’s wise to not take
them as absolute guarantees.

Monitoring staleness

From an operational perspective, it’s important to monitor whether your
databases are returning up-to-date results. Even if your application can
tolerate stale reads, you need to be aware of the health of your
replication. If it falls behind significantly, it should alert you so
that you can investigate the cause (for example, a problem in the
network or an overloaded node).

For leader-based replication, the database typically exposes metrics for
the replication lag, which you can feed into a monitoring system. This
is possible because writes are applied to the leader and to followers in
the same order, and each node has a position in the replication log (the
number of writes it has applied locally). By subtracting a follower’s
current position from the leader’s current position, you can measure the
amount of replication lag.

However, in systems with leaderless replication, there is no fixed order
in which writes are applied, which makes monitoring more difficult. The
number of hints that a replica stores for handoff can be one measure of
system health, but it’s difficult to interpret usefully [54]. Eventual
consistency is a deliberately vague guarantee, but for operability it’s
important to be able to quantify “eventual.”

Single-Leader vs. Leaderless Replication Performance

A replication system based on a single leader can provide strong
consistency guarantees that are difficult or impossible to achieve in a
leaderless system. However, as we have seen in “Problems with
Replication Lag”, reads in a leader-based replicated system can also
return stale values if you make them on an asynchronously updated
follower.

Reading from the leader ensures up-to-date responses, but it suffers
from performance problems:

-  Read throughput is limited by the leader’s capacity to handle
  requests (in contrast with read scaling, which distributes reads
  across asynchronously updated replicas that may return stale values).

- If the leader fails, you have to wait for the fault to be detected,
  and for the failover to complete before you can continue handling
  requests. Even if the failover process is very quick, users will
  notice it because of the temporarily increased response times; if
  failover takes a long time, the system is unavailable for its
  duration.

- The system is very sensitive to performance problems on the leader: if
  the leader is slow to respond, e.g. due to overload or some resource
  contention, the increased response times immediately affect users as
  well.

A big advantage of a leaderless architecture is that it is more
resilient against such issues. Because there is no failover, and
requests go to multiple replicas in parallel anyway, one replica
becoming slow or unavailable has very little impact on response times:
the client simply uses the responses from the other replicas that are
faster to respond. Using the fastest responses is called request
hedging, and it can significantly reduce tail latency [55]).

At its core, the resilience of a leaderless system comes from the fact
that it doesn’t distinguish between the normal case and the failure
case. This is especially helpful when handling so-called gray failures,
in which a node isn’t completely down, but running in a degraded state
where it is unusually slow to handle requests [56], or when a node is
simply overloaded (for example, if a node has been offline for a while,
recovery via hinted handoff can cause a lot of additional load). A
leader-based system has to decide whether the situation is bad enough to
warrant a failover (which can itself cause further disruption), whereas
in a leaderless system that question doesn’t even arise.

That said, leaderless systems can have performance problems as well:

- Even though the system doesn’t need to perform failover, one replica
  does need to detect when another replica is unavailable so that it can
  store hints about writes that the unavailable replica missed. When the
  unavailable replica comes back, the handoff process needs to send it
  those hints. This puts additional load on the replicas at a time when
  the system is already under strain [54].

- The more replicas you have, the bigger the size of your quorums, and
  the more responses you have to wait for before a request can complete.
  Even if you wait only for the fastest r or w replicas to respond, and
  even if you make the requests in parallel, a bigger r or w increases
  the chance that you hit a slow replica, increasing the overall
  response time (see “Use of Response Time Metrics”).

-  A large-scale network interruption that disconnects a client from a
  large number of replicas can make it impossible to form a quorum. Some
  leaderless databases offer a configuration option that allows any
  reachable replica to accept writes, even if it’s not one of the usual
  replicas for that key (Riak and Dynamo call this a sloppy quorum [45];
  Cassandra and ScyllaDB call it consistency level ANY). There is no
  guarantee that subsequent reads will see the written value, but
  depending on the application it may still be better than having the
  write fail.

Multi-leader replication can offer even greater resilience against
network interruptions than leaderless replication, since reads and
writes only require communication with one leader, which can be
co-located with the client. However, since a write on one leader is
propagated asynchronously to the others, reads can be arbitrarily
out-of-date. Quorum reads and writes provide a compromise: good fault
tolerance while also having a high likelihood of reading up-to-date
data.

Multi-region operation

We previously discussed cross-region replication as a use case for
multi-leader replication (see “Multi-Leader Replication”). Leaderless
replication is also suitable for multi-region operation, since it is
designed to tolerate conflicting concurrent writes, network
interruptions, and latency spikes.

Cassandra and ScyllaDB implement their multi-region support within the
normal leaderless model: the client sends its writes directly to the
replicas in all regions, and you can choose from a variety of
consistency levels that determine how many responses are required for a
request to be successful. For example, you can request a quorum across
the replicas in all the regions, a separate quorum in each of the
regions, or a quorum only in the client’s local region. A local quorum
avoids having to wait for slow requests to other regions, but it is also
more likely to return stale results.

Riak keeps all communication between clients and database nodes local to
one region, so n describes the number of replicas within one region.
Cross-region replication between database clusters happens
asynchronously in the background, in a style that is similar to
multi-leader replication.

Detecting Concurrent Writes

Like with multi-leader replication, leaderless databases allow
concurrent writes to the same key, resulting in conflicts that need to
be resolved. Such conflicts may occur as the writes happen, but not
always: they could also be detected later during read repair, hinted
handoff, or anti-entropy.

The problem is that events may arrive in a different order at different
nodes, due to variable network delays and partial failures. For example,
Figure 6-14 shows two clients, A and B, simultaneously writing to a key
X in a three-node datastore:

- Node 1 receives the write from A, but never receives the write from B
  due to a transient outage.

- Node 2 first receives the write from A, then the write from B.

- Node 3 first receives the write from B, then the write from A.

[ddia 0614]

Figure 6-14. Concurrent writes in a Dynamo-style datastore: there is no well-defined ordering.

If each node simply overwrote the value for a key whenever it received a
write request from a client, the nodes would become permanently
inconsistent, as shown by the final get request in Figure 6-14: node 2
thinks that the final value of X is B, whereas the other nodes think
that the value is A.

In order to become eventually consistent, the replicas should converge
toward the same value. For this, we can use any of the conflict
resolution mechanisms we previously discussed in “Dealing with
Conflicting Writes”, such as last-write-wins (used by Cassandra and
ScyllaDB), manual resolution, or CRDTs (described in “CRDTs and
Operational Transformation”, and used by Riak).

Last-write-wins is easy to implement: each write is tagged with a
timestamp, and a value with a higher timestamp always overwrites a value
with a lower timestamp. However, a timestamp doesn’t tell you whether
two values are actually conflicting (i.e., they were written
concurrently) or not (they were written one after another). If you want
to resolve conflicts explicitly, the system needs to take more care to
detect concurrent writes.

The “happens-before” relation and concurrency

How do we decide whether two operations are concurrent or not? To
develop an intuition, let’s look at some examples:

- In Figure 6-8, the two writes are not concurrent: A’s insert happens
  before B’s increment, because the value incremented by B is the value
  inserted by A. In other words, B’s operation builds upon A’s
  operation, so B’s operation must have happened later. We also say that
  B is causally dependent on A.

- On the other hand, the two writes in Figure 6-14 are concurrent: when
  each client starts the operation, it does not know that another client
  is also performing an operation on the same key. Thus, there is no
  causal dependency between the operations.

An operation A happens before another operation B if B knows about A, or
depends on A, or builds upon A in some way. Whether one operation
happens before another operation is the key to defining what concurrency
means. In fact, we can simply say that two operations are concurrent if
neither happens before the other (i.e., neither knows about the other)
[57].

Thus, whenever you have two operations A and B, there are three
possibilities: either A happened before B, or B happened before A, or A
and B are concurrent. What we need is an algorithm to tell us whether
two operations are concurrent or not. If one operation happened before
another, the later operation should overwrite the earlier operation, but
if the operations are concurrent, we have a conflict that needs to be
resolved.

Concurrency, Time, and Relativity

It may seem that two operations should be called concurrent if they
occur “at the same time”—but in fact, it is not important whether they
literally overlap in time. Because of problems with clocks in
distributed systems, it is actually quite difficult to tell whether two
things happened at exactly the same time—an issue we will discuss in
more detail in [Link to Come].

For defining concurrency, exact time doesn’t matter: we simply call two
operations concurrent if they are both unaware of each other, regardless
of the physical time at which they occurred. People sometimes make a
connection between this principle and the special theory of relativity
in physics [57], which introduced the idea that information cannot
travel faster than the speed of light. Consequently, two events that
occur some distance apart cannot possibly affect each other if the time
between the events is shorter than the time it takes light to travel the
distance between them.

In computer systems, two operations might be concurrent even though the
speed of light would in principle have allowed one operation to affect
the other. For example, if the network was slow or interrupted at the
time, two operations can occur some time apart and still be concurrent,
because the network problems prevented one operation from being able to
know about the other.

Capturing the happens-before relationship

Let’s look at an algorithm that determines whether two operations are
concurrent, or whether one happened before another. To keep things
simple, let’s start with a database that has only one replica. Once we
have worked out how to do this on a single replica, we can generalize
the approach to a leaderless database with multiple replicas.

Figure 6-15 shows two clients concurrently adding items to the same
shopping cart. (If that example strikes you as too inane, imagine
instead two air traffic controllers concurrently adding aircraft to the
sector they are tracking.) Initially, the cart is empty. Between them,
the clients make five writes to the database:

1.  Client 1 adds milk to the cart. This is the first write to that key,
    so the server successfully stores it and assigns it version 1. The
    server also echoes the value back to the client, along with the
    version number.

2.   Client 2 adds eggs to the cart, not knowing that client 1
    concurrently added milk (client 2 thought that its eggs were the
    only item in the cart). The server assigns version 2 to this write,
    and stores eggs and milk as two separate values (siblings). It then
    returns both values to the client, along with the version number of
    2.

3.  Client 1, oblivious to client 2’s write, wants to add flour to the
    cart, so it thinks the current cart contents should be
    [milk, flour]. It sends this value to the server, along with the
    version number 1 that the server gave client 1 previously. The
    server can tell from the version number that the write of
    [milk, flour] supersedes the prior value of [milk] but that it is
    concurrent with [eggs]. Thus, the server assigns version 3 to
    [milk, flour], overwrites the version 1 value [milk], but keeps the
    version 2 value [eggs] and returns both remaining values to the
    client.

4.  Meanwhile, client 2 wants to add ham to the cart, unaware that
    client 1 just added flour. Client 2 received the two values [milk]
    and [eggs] from the server in the last response, so the client now
    merges those values and adds ham to form a new value,
    [eggs, milk, ham]. It sends that value to the server, along with the
    previous version number 2. The server detects that version 2
    overwrites [eggs] but is concurrent with [milk, flour], so the two
    remaining values are [milk, flour] with version 3, and
    [eggs, milk, ham] with version 4.

5.  Finally, client 1 wants to add bacon. It previously received
    [milk, flour] and [eggs] from the server at version 3, so it merges
    those, adds bacon, and sends the final value
    [milk, flour, eggs, bacon] to the server, along with the version
    number 3. This overwrites [milk, flour] (note that [eggs] was
    already overwritten in the last step) but is concurrent with
    [eggs, milk, ham], so the server keeps those two concurrent values.

[ddia 0615]

Figure 6-15. Capturing causal dependencies between two clients concurrently editing a shopping cart.

The dataflow between the operations in Figure 6-15 is illustrated
graphically in Figure 6-16. The arrows indicate which operation happened
before which other operation, in the sense that the later operation knew
about or depended on the earlier one. In this example, the clients are
never fully up to date with the data on the server, since there is
always another operation going on concurrently. But old versions of the
value do get overwritten eventually, and no writes are lost.

[ddia 0616]

Figure 6-16. Graph of causal dependencies in Figure 6-15.

Note that the server can determine whether two operations are concurrent
by looking at the version numbers—it does not need to interpret the
value itself (so the value could be any data structure). The algorithm
works as follows:

- The server maintains a version number for every key, increments the
  version number every time that key is written, and stores the new
  version number along with the value written.

- When a client reads a key, the server returns all siblings, i.e., all
  values that have not been overwritten, as well as the latest version
  number. A client must read a key before writing.

-  When a client writes a key, it must include the version number from
  the prior read, and it must merge together all values that it received
  in the prior read, e.g. using a CRDT or by asking the user. The
  response from a write request is like a read, returning all siblings,
  which allows us to chain several writes like in the shopping cart
  example.

- When the server receives a write with a particular version number, it
  can overwrite all values with that version number or below (since it
  knows that they have been merged into the new value), but it must keep
  all values with a higher version number (because those values are
  concurrent with the incoming write).

When a write includes the version number from a prior read, that tells
us which previous state the write is based on. If you make a write
without including a version number, it is concurrent with all other
writes, so it will not overwrite anything—it will just be returned as
one of the values on subsequent reads.

Version vectors

The example in Figure 6-15 used only a single replica. How does the
algorithm change when there are multiple replicas, but no leader?

Figure 6-15 uses a single version number to capture dependencies between
operations, but that is not sufficient when there are multiple replicas
accepting writes concurrently. Instead, we need to use a version number
per replica as well as per key. Each replica increments its own version
number when processing a write, and also keeps track of the version
numbers it has seen from each of the other replicas. This information
indicates which values to overwrite and which values to keep as
siblings.

The collection of version numbers from all the replicas is called a
version vector [58]. A few variants of this idea are in use, but the
most interesting is probably the dotted version vector [59, 60], which
is used in Riak 2.0 [61, 62]. We won’t go into the details, but the way
it works is quite similar to what we saw in our cart example.

Like the version numbers in Figure 6-15, version vectors are sent from
the database replicas to clients when values are read, and need to be
sent back to the database when a value is subsequently written. (Riak
encodes the version vector as a string that it calls causal context.)
The version vector allows the database to distinguish between overwrites
and concurrent writes.

The version vector also ensures that it is safe to read from one replica
and subsequently write back to another replica. Doing so may result in
siblings being created, but no data is lost as long as siblings are
merged correctly.

Version vectors and vector clocks

A version vector is sometimes also called a vector clock, even though
they are not quite the same. The difference is subtle—please see the
references for details [60, 63, 64]. In brief, when comparing the state
of replicas, version vectors are the right data structure to use.

Summary

In this chapter we looked at the issue of replication. Replication can
serve several purposes:

High availability

    Keeping the system running, even when one machine (or several
    machines, a zone, or even an entire region) goes down

Disconnected operation

    Allowing an application to continue working when there is a network
    interruption

Latency

    Placing data geographically close to users, so that users can
    interact with it faster

Scalability

    Being able to handle a higher volume of reads than a single machine
    could handle, by performing reads on replicas

Despite being a simple goal—keeping a copy of the same data on several
machines—replication turns out to be a remarkably tricky problem. It
requires carefully thinking about concurrency and about all the things
that can go wrong, and dealing with the consequences of those faults. At
a minimum, we need to deal with unavailable nodes and network
interruptions (and that’s not even considering the more insidious kinds
of fault, such as silent data corruption due to software bugs or
hardware errors).

We discussed three main approaches to replication:

Single-leader replication

    Clients send all writes to a single node (the leader), which sends a
    stream of data change events to the other replicas (followers).
    Reads can be performed on any replica, but reads from followers
    might be stale.

Multi-leader replication

    Clients send each write to one of several leader nodes, any of which
    can accept writes. The leaders send streams of data change events to
    each other and to any follower nodes.

Leaderless replication

    Clients send each write to several nodes, and read from several
    nodes in parallel in order to detect and correct nodes with stale
    data.

Each approach has advantages and disadvantages. Single-leader
replication is popular because it is fairly easy to understand and it
offers strong consistency. Multi-leader and leaderless replication can
be more robust in the presence of faulty nodes, network interruptions,
and latency spikes—at the cost of requiring conflict resolution and
providing weaker consistency guarantees.

Replication can be synchronous or asynchronous, which has a profound
effect on the system behavior when there is a fault. Although
asynchronous replication can be fast when the system is running
smoothly, it’s important to figure out what happens when replication lag
increases and servers fail. If a leader fails and you promote an
asynchronously updated follower to be the new leader, recently committed
data may be lost.

We looked at some strange effects that can be caused by replication lag,
and we discussed a few consistency models which are helpful for deciding
how an application should behave under replication lag:

Read-after-write consistency

    Users should always see data that they submitted themselves.

Monotonic reads

    After users have seen the data at one point in time, they shouldn’t
    later see the data from some earlier point in time.

Consistent prefix reads

    Users should see the data in a state that makes causal sense: for
    example, seeing a question and its reply in the correct order.

Finally, we discussed how multi-leader and leaderless replication ensure
that all replicas eventually converge to a consistent state: by using a
version vector or similar algorithm to detect which writes are
concurrent, and by using a conflict resolution algorithm such as a CRDT
to merge the concurrently written values. Last-write-wins and manual
conflict resolution are also possible.

This chapter has assumed that every replica stores a full copy of the
whole database, which is unrealistic for large datasets. In the next
chapter we will look at sharding, which allows each machine to store
only a subset of the data.

Footnotes

References

[1] Bruce G. Lindsay, Patricia Griffiths Selinger, C. Galtieri, J.N.
Gray, R.A. Lorie, T.G. Price, F. Putzolu, I.L. Traiger, and B.W. Wade.
Notes on Distributed Databases. IBM Research, Research Report
RJ2571(33471), July 1979. Archived at perma.cc/EPZ3-MHDD

[2] Kenny Gryp. MySQL Terminology Updates. dev.mysql.com, July 2020.
Archived at perma.cc/S62G-6RJ2

[3] Oracle Corporation. Oracle (Active) Data Guard 19c: Real-Time Data
Protection and Availability. White Paper, oracle.com, March 2019.
Archived at perma.cc/P5ST-RPKE

[4] Microsoft. What is an Always On availability group?
learn.microsoft.com, September 2024. Archived at perma.cc/ABH6-3MXF

[5] Mostafa Elhemali, Niall Gallagher, Nicholas Gordon, Joseph Idziorek,
Richard Krog, Colin Lazier, Erben Mo, Akhilesh Mritunjai, Somu
Perianayagam, Tim Rath, Swami Sivasubramanian, James Christopher
Sorenson III, Sroaj Sosothikul, Doug Terry, and Akshat Vig. Amazon
DynamoDB: A Scalable, Predictably Performant, and Fully Managed NoSQL
Database Service. At USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC), July
2022.

[6] Rebecca Taft, Irfan Sharif, Andrei Matei, Nathan VanBenschoten,
Jordan Lewis, Tobias Grieger, Kai Niemi, Andy Woods, Anne Birzin,
Raphael Poss, Paul Bardea, Amruta Ranade, Ben Darnell, Bram Gruneir,
Justin Jaffray, Lucy Zhang, and Peter Mattis. CockroachDB: The Resilient
Geo-Distributed SQL Database. At ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages 1493–1509, June 2020.
doi:10.1145/3318464.3386134

[7] Dongxu Huang, Qi Liu, Qiu Cui, Zhuhe Fang, Xiaoyu Ma, Fei Xu, Li
Shen, Liu Tang, Yuxing Zhou, Menglong Huang, Wan Wei, Cong Liu, Jian
Zhang, Jianjun Li, Xuelian Wu, Lingyu Song, Ruoxi Sun, Shuaipeng Yu, Lei
Zhao, Nicholas Cameron, Liquan Pei, and Xin Tang. TiDB: a Raft-based
HTAP database. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 13, issue 12,
pages 3072–3084. doi:10.14778/3415478.3415535

[8] Mallory Knodel and Niels ten Oever. Terminology, Power, and
Inclusive Language in Internet-Drafts and RFCs. IETF Internet-Draft,
August 2023. Archived at perma.cc/5ZY9-725E

[9] Buck Hodges. Postmortem: VSTS 4 September 2018.
devblogs.microsoft.com, September 2018. Archived at perma.cc/ZF5R-DYZS

[10] Gunnar Morling. Leader Election With S3 Conditional Writes.
www.morling.dev, August 2024. Archived at perma.cc/7V2N-J78Y

[11] Stas Kelvich. Why does Neon use Paxos instead of Raft, and what’s
the difference?. neon.tech, August 2022. Archived at perma.cc/SEZ4-2GXU

[12] Dimitri Fontaine. An introduction to the pg_auto_failover project.
tapoueh.org, November 2021. Archived at perma.cc/3WH5-6BAF

[13] Jesse Newland. GitHub availability this week. github.blog,
September 2012. Archived at perma.cc/3YRF-FTFJ

[14] Mark Imbriaco. Downtime last Saturday. github.blog, December 2012.
Archived at perma.cc/M7X5-E8SQ

[15] John Hugg. ‘All In’ with Determinism for Performance and Testing in
Distributed Systems. At Strange Loop, September 2015.

[16] Hironobu Suzuki. The Internals of PostgreSQL. interdb.jp, 2017.

[17] Amit Kapila. WAL Internals of PostgreSQL. At PostgreSQL Conference
(PGCon), May 2012. Archived at perma.cc/6225-3SUX

[18] Amit Kapila. Evolution of Logical Replication.
amitkapila16.blogspot.com, September 2023. Archived at
perma.cc/F9VX-JLER

[19] Aru Petchimuthu. Upgrade your Amazon RDS for PostgreSQL or Amazon
Aurora PostgreSQL database, Part 2: Using the pglogical extension.
aws.amazon.com, August 2021. Archived at perma.cc/RXT8-FS2T

[20] Yogeshwer Sharma, Philippe Ajoux, Petchean Ang, David Callies,
Abhishek Choudhary, Laurent Demailly, Thomas Fersch, Liat Atsmon Guz,
Andrzej Kotulski, Sachin Kulkarni, Sanjeev Kumar, Harry Li, Jun Li,
Evgeniy Makeev, Kowshik Prakasam, Robbert van Renesse, Sabyasachi Roy,
Pratyush Seth, Yee Jiun Song, Benjamin Wester, Kaushik Veeraraghavan,
and Peter Xie. Wormhole: Reliable Pub-Sub to Support Geo-Replicated
Internet Services. At 12th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI), May 2015.

[21] Douglas B. Terry. Replicated Data Consistency Explained Through
Baseball. Microsoft Research, Technical Report MSR-TR-2011-137, October
2011. Archived at perma.cc/F4KZ-AR38

[22] Douglas B. Terry, Alan J. Demers, Karin Petersen, Mike J.
Spreitzer, Marvin M. Theher, and Brent B. Welch. Session Guarantees for
Weakly Consistent Replicated Data. At 3rd International Conference on
Parallel and Distributed Information Systems (PDIS), September 1994.
doi:10.1109/PDIS.1994.331722

[23] Werner Vogels. Eventually Consistent. ACM Queue, volume 6, issue 6,
pages 14–19, October 2008. doi:10.1145/1466443.1466448

[24] Simon Willison. Reply to: “My thoughts about Fly.io (so far) and
other newish technology I’m getting into”. news.ycombinator.com, May
2022. Archived at perma.cc/ZRV4-WWV8

[25] Nithin Tharakan. Scaling Bitbucket’s Database. atlassian.com,
October 2020. Archived at perma.cc/JAB7-9FGX

[26] Terry Pratchett. Reaper Man: A Discworld Novel. Victor Gollancz,
1991. ISBN: 978-0-575-04979-6

[27] Peter Bailis, Alan Fekete, Michael J. Franklin, Ali Ghodsi, Joseph
M. Hellerstein, and Ion Stoica. Coordination Avoidance in Database
Systems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 8, issue 3, pages
185–196, November 2014. doi:10.14778/2735508.2735509

[28] Yaser Raja and Peter Celentano. PostgreSQL bi-directional
replication using pglogical. aws.amazon.com, January 2022. Archived at
https://perma.cc/BUQ2-5QWN

[29] Robert Hodges. If You *Must* Deploy Multi-Master Replication, Read
This First. scale-out-blog.blogspot.com, April 2012. Archived at
perma.cc/C2JN-F6Y8

[30] Lars Hofhansl. HBASE-7709: Infinite Loop Possible in Master/Master
Replication. issues.apache.org, January 2013. Archived at
perma.cc/24G2-8NLC

[31] John Day-Richter. What’s Different About the New Google Docs:
Making Collaboration Fast. drive.googleblog.com, September 2010.
Archived at perma.cc/5TL8-TSJ2

[32] Evan Wallace. How Figma’s multiplayer technology works. figma.com,
October 2019. Archived at perma.cc/L49H-LY4D

[33] Tuomas Artman. Scaling the Linear Sync Engine. linear.app, June
2023.

[34] Amr Saafan. Why Sync Engines Might Be the Future of Web
Applications. nilebits.com, September 2024. Archived at
perma.cc/5N73-5M3V

[35] Isaac Hagoel. Are Sync Engines The Future of Web Applications?
dev.to, July 2024. Archived at perma.cc/R9HF-BKKL

[36] Sujay Jayakar. A Map of Sync. stack.convex.dev, October 2024.
Archived at perma.cc/82R3-H42A

[37] Alex Feyerke. Designing Offline-First Web Apps. alistapart.com,
December 2013. Archived at perma.cc/WH7R-S2DS

[38] Martin Kleppmann, Adam Wiggins, Peter van Hardenberg, and Mark
McGranaghan. Local-first software: You own your data, in spite of the
cloud. At ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on New Ideas, New
Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming and Software (Onward!),
October 2019, pages 154–178. doi:10.1145/3359591.3359737

[39] Martin Kleppmann. The past, present, and future of local-first. At
Local-First Conference, May 2024.

[40] Conrad Hofmeyr. API Calling is to Sync Engines as jQuery is to
React. powersync.com, November 2024. Archived at perma.cc/2FP9-7WJJ

[41] Peter van Hardenberg and Martin Kleppmann. PushPin: Towards
Production-Quality Peer-to-Peer Collaboration. At 7th Workshop on
Principles and Practice of Consistency for Distributed Data (PaPoC),
April 2020. doi:10.1145/3380787.3393683

[42] Leonard Kawell, Jr., Steven Beckhardt, Timothy Halvorsen, Raymond
Ozzie, and Irene Greif. Replicated document management in a group
communication system. At ACM Conference on Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW), September 1988. doi:10.1145/62266.1024798

[43] Ricky Pusch. Explaining how fighting games use delay-based and
rollback netcode. words.infil.net and arstechnica.com, October 2019.
Archived at perma.cc/DE7W-RDJ8

[44] Ryan King. Announcing Snowflake. blog.x.com, June 2010. Archived at
archive.org

[45] Giuseppe DeCandia, Deniz Hastorun, Madan Jampani, Gunavardhan
Kakulapati, Avinash Lakshman, Alex Pilchin, Swaminathan Sivasubramanian,
Peter Vosshall, and Werner Vogels. Dynamo: Amazon’s Highly Available
Key-Value Store. At 21st ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles
(SOSP), October 2007. doi:10.1145/1323293.1294281

[46] Marc Shapiro, Nuno Preguiça, Carlos Baquero, and Marek Zawirski. A
Comprehensive Study of Convergent and Commutative Replicated Data Types.
INRIA Research Report no. 7506, January 2011.

[47] Chengzheng Sun and Clarence Ellis. Operational Transformation in
Real-Time Group Editors: Issues, Algorithms, and Achievements. At ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), November 1998.
doi:10.1145/289444.289469

[48] Joseph Gentle and Martin Kleppmann. Collaborative Text Editing with
Eg-walker: Better, Faster, Smaller. At 20th European Conference on
Computer Systems (EuroSys), March 2025. doi:10.1145/3689031.3696076

[49] Dharma Shukla. Azure Cosmos DB: Pushing the frontier of globally
distributed databases. azure.microsoft.com, September 2018. Archived at
perma.cc/UT3B-HH6R

[50] David K. Gifford. Weighted Voting for Replicated Data. At 7th ACM
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP), December 1979.
doi:10.1145/800215.806583

[51] Heidi Howard, Dahlia Malkhi, and Alexander Spiegelman. Flexible
Paxos: Quorum Intersection Revisited. At 20th International Conference
on Principles of Distributed Systems (OPODIS), December 2016.
doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.OPODIS.2016.25

[52] Joseph Blomstedt. Bringing Consistency to Riak. At RICON West,
October 2012.

[53] Peter Bailis, Shivaram Venkataraman, Michael J. Franklin, Joseph M.
Hellerstein, and Ion Stoica. Quantifying eventual consistency with PBS.
The VLDB Journal, volume 23, pages 279–302, April 2014.
doi:10.1007/s00778-013-0330-1

[54] Colin Breck. Shared-Nothing Architectures for Server Replication
and Synchronization. blog.colinbreck.com, December 2019. Archived at
perma.cc/48P3-J6CJ

[55] Jeffrey Dean and Luiz André Barroso. The Tail at Scale.
Communications of the ACM, volume 56, issue 2, pages 74–80, February
2013. doi:10.1145/2408776.2408794

[56] Peng Huang, Chuanxiong Guo, Lidong Zhou, Jacob R. Lorch, Yingnong
Dang, Murali Chintalapati, and Randolph Yao. Gray Failure: The Achilles’
Heel of Cloud-Scale Systems. At 16th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating
Systems (HotOS), May 2017. doi:10.1145/3102980.3103005

[57] Leslie Lamport. Time, Clocks, and the Ordering of Events in a
Distributed System. Communications of the ACM, volume 21, issue 7, pages
558–565, July 1978. doi:10.1145/359545.359563

[58] D. Stott Parker Jr., Gerald J. Popek, Gerard Rudisin, Allen
Stoughton, Bruce J. Walker, Evelyn Walton, Johanna M. Chow, David
Edwards, Stephen Kiser, and Charles Kline. Detection of Mutual
Inconsistency in Distributed Systems. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, volume SE-9, issue 3, pages 240–247, May 1983.
doi:10.1109/TSE.1983.236733

[59] Nuno Preguiça, Carlos Baquero, Paulo Sérgio Almeida, Victor Fonte,
and Ricardo Gonçalves. Dotted Version Vectors: Logical Clocks for
Optimistic Replication. arXiv:1011.5808, November 2010.

[60] Giridhar Manepalli. Clocks and Causality - Ordering Events in
Distributed Systems. exhypothesi.com, November 2022. Archived at
perma.cc/8REU-KVLQ

[61] Sean Cribbs. A Brief History of Time in Riak. At RICON, October
2014. Archived at perma.cc/7U9P-6JFX

[62] Russell Brown. Vector Clocks Revisited Part 2: Dotted Version
Vectors. riak.com, November 2015. Archived at perma.cc/96QP-W98R

[63] Carlos Baquero. Version Vectors Are Not Vector Clocks.
haslab.wordpress.com, July 2011. Archived at perma.cc/7PNU-4AMG

[64] Reinhard Schwarz and Friedemann Mattern. Detecting Causal
Relationships in Distributed Computations: In Search of the Holy Grail.
Distributed Computing, volume 7, issue 3, pages 149–174, March 1994.
doi:10.1007/BF02277859

Chapter 7. Sharding

  Clearly, we must break away from the sequential and not limit the
  computers. We must state definitions and provide for priorities and
  descriptions of data. We must state relationships, not procedures.

  Grace Murray Hopper, Management and the Computer of the Future (1962)

A Note for Early Release Readers

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
advantage of these technologies long before the official release of
these titles.

This will be the 7th chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo for this
book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content and/or
examples in this book, or if you notice missing material within this
chapter, please reach out on GitHub.

A distributed database typically distributes data across nodes in two
ways:

1.  Having a copy of the same data on multiple nodes: this is
    replication, which we discussed in Chapter 6.

2.  If we don’t want every node to store all the data, we can split up a
    large amount of data into smaller shards or partitions, and store
    different shards on different nodes. We’ll discuss sharding in this
    chapter.

Normally, shards are defined in such a way that each piece of data (each
record, row, or document) belongs to exactly one shard. There are
various ways of achieving this, which we discuss in depth in this
chapter. In effect, each shard is a small database of its own, although
some database systems support operations that touch multiple shards at
the same time.

Sharding is usually combined with replication so that copies of each
shard are stored on multiple nodes. This means that, even though each
record belongs to exactly one shard, it may still be stored on several
different nodes for fault tolerance.

A node may store more than one shard. If a single-leader replication
model is used, the combination of sharding and replication can look like
Figure 7-1, for example. Each shard’s leader is assigned to one node,
and its followers are assigned to other nodes. Each node may be the
leader for some shards and a follower for other shards, but each shard
still only has one leader.

[ddia 0701]

Figure 7-1. Combining replication and sharding: each node acts as leader for some shards and follower for other shards.

Everything we discussed in Chapter 6 about replication of databases
applies equally to replication of shards. Since the choice of sharding
scheme is mostly independent of the choice of replication scheme, we
will ignore replication in this chapter for the sake of simplicity.

Sharding and Partitioning

What we call a shard in this chapter has many different names depending
on which software you’re using: it’s called a partition in Kafka, a
range in CockroachDB, a region in HBase and TiDB, a tablet in Bigtable
and YugabyteDB, a vnode in Cassandra, ScyllaDB, and Riak, and a vBucket
in Couchbase, to name just a few.

Some databases treat partitions and shards as two distinct concepts. For
example, in PostgreSQL, partitioning is a way of splitting a large table
into several files that are stored on the same machine (which has
several advantages, such as making it very fast to delete an entire
partition), whereas sharding splits a dataset across multiple machines
[1, 2]. In many other systems, partitioning is just another word for
sharding.

While partitioning is quite descriptive, the term sharding is perhaps
surprising. According to one theory, the term arose from the online
role-play game Ultima Online, in which a magic crystal was shattered
into pieces, and each of those shards refracted a copy of the game world
[3]. The term shard thus came to mean one of a set of parallel game
servers, and later was carried over to databases. Another theory is that
shard was originally an acronym of System for Highly Available
Replicated Data—reportedly a 1980s database, details of which are lost
to history.

By the way, partitioning has nothing to do with network partitions
(netsplits), a type of fault in the network between nodes. We will
discuss such faults in [Link to Come].

Pros and Cons of Sharding

The primary reason for sharding a database is scalability: it’s a
solution if the volume of data or the write throughput has become too
great for a single node to handle, as it allows you to spread that data
and those writes across multiple nodes. (If read throughput is the
problem, you don’t necessarily need sharding—you can use read scaling as
discussed in Chapter 6.)

In fact, sharding is one of the main tools we have for achieving
horizontal scaling (a scale-out architecture), as discussed in
“Shared-Memory, Shared-Disk, and Shared-Nothing Architecture”: that is,
allowing a system to grow its capacity not by moving to a bigger
machine, but by adding more (smaller) machines. If you can divide the
workload such that each shard handles a roughly equal share, you can
then assign those shards to different machines in order to process their
data and queries in parallel.

While replication is useful at both small and large scale, because it
enables fault tolerance and offline operation, sharding is a heavyweight
solution that is mostly relevant at large scale. If your data volume and
write throughput are such that you can process them on a single machine
(and a single machine can do a lot nowadays!), it’s often better to
avoid sharding and stick with a single-shard database.

The reason for this recommendation is that sharding often adds
complexity: you typically have to decide which records to put in which
shard by choosing a partition key; all records with the same partition
key are placed in the same shard [4]. This choice matters because
accessing a record is fast if you know which shard it’s in, but if you
don’t know the shard you have to do an inefficient search across all
shards, and the sharding scheme is difficult to change.

Thus, sharding often works well for key-value data, where you can easily
shard by key, but it’s harder with relational data where you may want to
search by a secondary index, or join records that may be distributed
across different shards. We will discuss this further in “Sharding and
Secondary Indexes”.

Another problem with sharding is that a write may need to update related
records in several different shards. While transactions on a single node
are quite common (see [Link to Come]), ensuring consistency across
multiple shards requires a distributed transaction. As we shall see in
[Link to Come], distributed transactions are available in some
databases, but they are usually much slower than single-node
transactions, may become a bottleneck for the system as a whole, and
some systems don’t support them at all.

Some systems use sharding even on a single machine, typically running
one single-threaded process per CPU core to make use of the parallelism
in the CPU, or to take advantage of a nonuniform memory access (NUMA)
architecture in which some banks of memory are closer to one CPU than to
others [5]. For example, Redis, VoltDB, and FoundationDB use one process
per core, and rely on sharding to spread load across CPU cores in the
same machine [6].

Sharding for Multitenancy

Software as a Service (SaaS) products and cloud services are often
multitenant, where each tenant is a customer. Multiple users may have
logins on the same tenant, but each tenant has a self-contained dataset
that is separate from other tenants. For example, in an email marketing
service, each business that signs up is typically a separate tenant,
since one business’s newsletter signups, delivery data etc. are separate
from those of other businesses.

Sometimes sharding is used to implement multitenant systems: either each
tenant is given a separate shard, or multiple small tenants may be
grouped together into a larger shard. These shards might be physically
separate databases (which we previously touched on in “Embedded storage
engines”), or separately manageable portions of a larger logical
database [7]. Using sharding for multitenancy has several advantages:

Resource isolation

     If one tenant performs a computationally expensive operation, it is
    less likely that other tenants’ performance will be affected if they
    are running on different shards.

Permission isolation

     If there is a bug in your access control logic, it’s less likely
    that you will accidentally give one tenant access to another
    tenant’s data if those tenants’ datasets are stored physically
    separately from each other.

Cell-based architecture

     You can apply sharding not only at the data storage level, but also
    for the services running your application code. In a cell-based
    architecture, the services and storage for a particular set of
    tenants are grouped into a self-contained cell, and different cells
    are set up such that they can run largely independently from each
    other. This approach provides fault isolation: that is, a fault in
    one cell remains limited to that cell, and tenants in other cells
    are not affected [8].

Per-tenant backup and restore

     Backing up each tenant’s shard separately makes it possible to
    restore a tenant’s state from a backup without affecting other
    tenants, which can be useful in case the tenant accidentally deletes
    or overwrites important data [9].

Regulatory compliance

     Data privacy regulation such as the GDPR gives individuals the
    right to access and delete all data stored about them. If each
    person’s data is stored in a separate shard, this translates into
    simple data export and deletion operations on their shard [10].

Data residence

     If a particular tenant’s data needs to be stored in a particular
    jurisdiction in order to comply with data residency laws, a
    region-aware database can allow you to assign that tenant’s shard to
    a particular region.

Gradual schema rollout

     Schema migrations (previously discussed in “Schema flexibility in
    the document model”) can be rolled out gradually, one tenant at a
    time. This reduces risk, as you can detect problems before they
    affect all tenants, but it can be difficult to do transactionally
    [11].

The main challenges around using sharding for multitenancy are:

- It assumes that each individual tenant is small enough to fit on a
  single node. If that is not the case, and you have a single tenant
  that’s too big for one machine, you would need to additionally perform
  sharding within a single tenant, which brings us back to the topic of
  sharding for scalability [12].

- If you have many small tenants, then creating a separate shard for
  each one may incur too much overhead. You could group several small
  tenants together into a bigger shard, but then you have the problem of
  how you move tenants from one shard to another as they grow.

- If you ever need to support features that connect data across multiple
  tenants, these become harder to implement if you need to join data
  across multiple shards.

Sharding of Key-Value Data

Say you have a large amount of data, and you want to shard it. How do
you decide which records to store on which nodes?

Our goal with sharding is to spread the data and the query load evenly
across nodes. If every node takes a fair share, then—in theory—10 nodes
should be able to handle 10 times as much data and 10 times the read and
write throughput of a single node (ignoring replication). Moreover, if
we add or remove a node, we want to be able to rebalance the load so
that it is evenly distributed across the 11 (when adding) or the
remaining 9 (when removing) nodes.

If the sharding is unfair, so that some shards have more data or queries
than others, we call it skewed. The presence of skew makes sharding much
less effective. In an extreme case, all the load could end up on one
shard, so 9 out of 10 nodes are idle and your bottleneck is the single
busy node. A shard with disproportionately high load is called a hot
shard or hot spot. If there’s one key with a particularly high load
(e.g., a celebrity in a social network), we call it a hot key.

Therefore we need an algorithm that takes as input the partition key of
a record, and tells us which shard that record is in. In a key-value
store the partition key is usually the key, or the first part of the
key. In a relational model the partition key might be some column of a
table (not necessarily its primary key). That algorithm needs to be
amenable to rebalancing in order to relieve hot spots.

Sharding by Key Range

One way of sharding is to assign a contiguous range of partition keys
(from some minimum to some maximum) to each shard, like the volumes of a
paper encyclopedia, as illustrated in Figure 7-2. In this example, an
entry’s partition key is its title. If you want to look up the entry for
a particular title, you can easily determine which shard contains that
entry by finding the volume whose key range contains the title you’re
looking for, and thus pick the correct book off the shelf.

[ddia 0702]

Figure 7-2. A print encyclopedia is sharded by key range.

The ranges of keys are not necessarily evenly spaced, because your data
may not be evenly distributed. For example, in Figure 7-2, volume 1
contains words starting with A and B, but volume 12 contains words
starting with T, U, V, W, X, Y, and Z. Simply having one volume per two
letters of the alphabet would lead to some volumes being much bigger
than others. In order to distribute the data evenly, the shard
boundaries need to adapt to the data.

The shard boundaries might be chosen manually by an administrator, or
the database can choose them automatically. Manual key-range sharding is
used by Vitess (a sharding layer for MySQL), for example; the automatic
variant is used by Bigtable, its open source equivalent HBase, the
range-based sharding option in MongoDB, CockroachDB, RethinkDB, and
FoundationDB []. YugabyteDB offers both manual and automatic tablet
splitting.

Within each shard, keys are stored in sorted order (e.g., in a B-tree or
SSTables, as discussed in Chapter 4). This has the advantage that range
scans are easy, and you can treat the key as a concatenated index in
order to fetch several related records in one query (see
“Multidimensional and Full-Text Indexes”). For example, consider an
application that stores data from a network of sensors, where the key is
the timestamp of the measurement. Range scans are very useful in this
case, because they let you easily fetch, say, all the readings from a
particular month.

A downside of key range sharding is that you can easily get a hot shard
if there are a lot of writes to nearby keys. For example, if the key is
a timestamp, then the shards correspond to ranges of time—e.g., one
shard per month. Unfortunately, if you write data from the sensors to
the database as the measurements happen, all the writes end up going to
the same shard (the one for this month), so that shard can be overloaded
with writes while others sit idle [13].

To avoid this problem in the sensor database, you need to use something
other than the timestamp as the first element of the key. For example,
you could prefix each timestamp with the sensor ID so that the key
ordering is first by sensor ID and then by timestamp. Assuming you have
many sensors active at the same time, the write load will end up more
evenly spread across the shards. The downside is that when you want to
fetch the values of multiple sensors within a time range, you now need
to perform a separate range query for each sensor.

Rebalancing key-range sharded data

When you first set up your database, there are no key ranges to split
into shards. Some databases, such as HBase and MongoDB, allow you to
configure an initial set of shards on an empty database, which is called
pre-splitting. This requires that you already have some idea of what the
key distribution is going to look like, so that you can choose
appropriate key range boundaries [14].

Later on, as your data volume and write throughput grow, a system with
key-range sharding grows by splitting an existing shard into two or more
smaller shards, each of which holds a contiguous sub-range of the
original shard’s key range. The resulting smaller shards can then be
distributed across multiple nodes. If large amounts of data are deleted,
you may also need to merge several adjacent shards that have become
small into one bigger one. This process is similar to what happens at
the top level of a B-tree (see “B-Trees”).

With databases that manage shard boundaries automatically, a shard split
is typically triggered by:

- the shard reaching a configured size (for example, on HBase, the
  default is 10 GB), or

- in some systems, the write throughput being persistently above some
  threshold. Thus, a hot shard may be split even if it is not storing a
  lot of data, so that its write load can be distributed more uniformly.

An advantage of key-range sharding is that the number of shards adapts
to the data volume. If there is only a small amount of data, a small
number of shards is sufficient, so overheads are small; if there is a
huge amount of data, the size of each individual shard is limited to a
configurable maximum [15].

A downside of this approach is that splitting a shard is an expensive
operation, since it requires all of its data to be rewritten into new
files, similarly to a compaction in a log-structured storage engine. A
shard that needs splitting is often also one that is under high load,
and the cost of splitting can exacerbate that load, risking it becoming
overloaded.

Sharding by Hash of Key

Key-range sharding is useful if you want records with nearby (but
different) partition keys to be grouped into the same shard; for
example, this might be the case with timestamps. If you don’t care
whether partition keys are near each other (e.g., if they are tenant IDs
in a multitenant application), a common approach is to first hash the
partition key before mapping it to a shard.

A good hash function takes skewed data and makes it uniformly
distributed. Say you have a 32-bit hash function that takes a string.
Whenever you give it a new string, it returns a seemingly random number
between 0 and 2³² − 1. Even if the input strings are very similar, their
hashes are evenly distributed across that range of numbers (but the same
input always produces the same output).

For sharding purposes, the hash function need not be cryptographically
strong: for example, MongoDB uses MD5, whereas Cassandra and ScyllaDB
use Murmur3. Many programming languages have simple hash functions built
in (as they are used for hash tables), but they may not be suitable for
sharding: for example, in Java’s Object.hashCode() and Ruby’s
Object#hash, the same key may have a different hash value in different
processes, making them unsuitable for sharding [16].

Hash modulo number of nodes

Once you have hashed the key, how do you choose which shard to store it
in? Maybe your first thought is to take the hash value modulo the number
of nodes in the system (using the % operator in many programming
languages). For example, hash(key) % 10 would return a number between 0
and 9 (if we write the hash as a decimal number, the hash % 10 would be
the last digit). If we have 10 nodes, numbered 0 to 9, that seems like
an easy way of assigning each key to a node.

The problem with the mod N approach is that if the number of nodes N
changes, most of the keys have to be moved from one node to another.
Figure 7-3 shows what happens when you have three nodes and add a
fourth. Before the rebalancing, node 0 stored the keys whose hashes are
0, 3, 6, 9, and so on. After adding the fourth node, the key with hash 3
has moved to node 3, the key with hash 6 has moved to node 2, the key
with hash 9 has moved to node 1, and so on.

[ddia 0703]

Figure 7-3. Assigning keys to nodes by hashing the key and taking it modulo the number of nodes. Changing the number of nodes results in many keys moving from one node to another.

The mod N function is easy to compute, but it leads to very inefficient
rebalancing because there is a lot of unnecessary movement of records
from one node to another. We need an approach that doesn’t move data
around more than necessary.

Fixed number of shards

One simple but widely-used solution is to create many more shards than
there are nodes, and to assign several shards to each node. For example,
a database running on a cluster of 10 nodes may be split into 1,000
shards from the outset so that 100 shards are assigned to each node. A
key is then stored in shard number hash(key) % 1,000, and the system
separately keeps track of which shard is stored on which node.

Now, if a node is added to the cluster, the system can reassign some of
the shards from existing nodes to the new node until they are fairly
distributed once again. This process is illustrated in Figure 7-4. If a
node is removed from the cluster, the same happens in reverse.

[ddia 0704]

Figure 7-4. Adding a new node to a database cluster with multiple shards per node.

In this model, only entire shards are moved between nodes, which is
cheaper than splitting shards. The number of shards does not change, nor
does the assignment of keys to shards. The only thing that changes is
the assignment of shards to nodes. This change of assignment is not
immediate—it takes some time to transfer a large amount of data over the
network—so the old assignment of shards is used for any reads and writes
that happen while the transfer is in progress.

It’s common to choose the number of shards to be a number that is
divisible by many factors, so that the dataset can be evenly split
across various different numbers of nodes—not requiring the number of
nodes to be a power of 2, for example [4]. You can even account for
mismatched hardware in your cluster: by assigning more shards to nodes
that are more powerful, you can make those nodes take a greater share of
the load.

This approach to sharding is used in Citus (a sharding layer for
PostgreSQL), Riak, Elasticsearch, and Couchbase, among others. It works
well as long as you have a good estimate of how many shards you will
need when you first create the database. You can then add or remove
nodes easily, subject to the limitation that you can’t have more nodes
than you have shards.

If you find the originally configured number of shards to be wrong—for
example, if you have reached a scale where you need more nodes than you
have shards—then an expensive resharding operation is required. It needs
to split each shard and write it out to new files, using a lot of
additional disk space in the process. Some systems don’t allow
resharding while concurrently writing to the database, which makes it
difficult to change the number of shards without downtime.

Choosing the right number of shards is difficult if the total size of
the dataset is highly variable (for example, if it starts small but may
grow much larger over time). Since each shard contains a fixed fraction
of the total data, the size of each shard grows proportionally to the
total amount of data in the cluster. If shards are very large,
rebalancing and recovery from node failures become expensive. But if
shards are too small, they incur too much overhead. The best performance
is achieved when the size of shards is “just right,” neither too big nor
too small, which can be hard to achieve if the number of shards is fixed
but the dataset size varies.

Sharding by hash range

If the required number of shards can’t be predicted in advance, it’s
better to use a scheme in which the number of shards can adapt easily to
the workload. The aforementioned key-range sharding scheme has this
property, but it has a risk of hot spots when there are a lot of writes
to nearby keys. One solution is to combine key-range sharding with a
hash function so that each shard contains a range of hash values rather
than a range of keys.

Figure 7-5 shows an example using a 16-bit hash function that returns a
number between 0 and 65,535 = 2¹⁶ − 1 (in reality, the hash is usually
32 bits or more). Even if the input keys are very similar (e.g.,
consecutive timestamps), their hashes are uniformly distributed across
that range. We can then assign a range of hash values to each shard: for
example, values between 0 and 16,383 to shard 0, values between 16,384
and 32,767 to shard 1, and so on.

[ddia 0705]

Figure 7-5. Assigning a contiguous range of hash values to each shard.

Like with key-range sharding, a shard in hash-range sharding can be
split when it becomes too big or too heavily loaded. This is still an
expensive operation, but it can happen as needed, so the number of
shards adapts to the volume of data rather than being fixed in advance.

The downside compared to key-range sharding is that range queries over
the partition key are not efficient, as keys in the range are now
scattered across all the shards. However, if keys consist of two or more
columns, and the partition key is only the first of these columns, you
can still perform efficient range queries over the second and later
columns: as long as all records in the range query have the same
partition key, they will be in the same shard.

Partitioning and Range Queries in Data Warehouses

Data warehouses such as BigQuery, Snowflake, and Delta Lake support a
similar indexing approach, though the terminology differs. In BigQuery,
for example, the partition key determines which partition a record
resides in while “cluster columns” determine how records are sorted
within the partition. Snowflake assigns records to “micro-partitions”
automatically, but allows users to define cluster keys for a table.
Delta Lake supports both manual and automatic partition assignment, and
supports cluster keys. Clustering data not only improves range scan
performance, but can improve compression and filtering performance as
well.

Hash-range sharding is used in YugabyteDB and DynamoDB [17], and is an
option in MongoDB. Cassandra and ScyllaDB use a variant of this approach
that is illustrated in Figure 7-6: the space of hash values is split
into a number of ranges proportional to the number of nodes (3 ranges
per node in Figure 7-6, but actual numbers are 8 per node in Cassandra
by default, and 256 per node in ScyllaDB), with random boundaries
between those ranges. This means some ranges are bigger than others, but
by having multiple ranges per node those imbalances tend to even out
[15, 18].

[ddia 0706]

Figure 7-6. Cassandra and ScyllaDB split the range of possible hash values (here 0–1023) into contiguous ranges with random boundaries, and assign several ranges to each node.

When nodes are added or removed, range boundaries are added and removed,
and shards are split or merged accordingly [19]. In the example of
Figure 7-6, when node 3 is added, node 1 transfers parts of two of its
ranges to node 3, and node 2 transfers part of one of its ranges to node
3. This has the effect of giving the new node an approximately fair
share of the dataset, without transferring more data than necessary from
one node to another.

Consistent hashing

A consistent hashing algorithm is a hash function that maps keys to a
specified number of shards in a way that satisfies two properties:

1.  the number of keys mapped to eash shard is roughly equal, and

2.  when the number of shards changes, as few keys as possible are moved
    from one shard to another.

Note that consistent here has nothing to do with replica consistency
(see Chapter 6) or ACID consistency (see [Link to Come]), but rather
describes the tendency of a key to stay in the same shard as much as
possible.

The sharding algorithm used by Cassandra and ScyllaDB is similar to the
original definition of consistent hashing [20], but several other
consistent hashing algorithms have also been proposed [21], such as
highest random weight, also known as rendezvous hashing [22], and jump
consistent hash [23]. With Cassandra’s algorithm, if one node is added,
a small number of existing shards are split into sub-ranges; on the
other hand, with rendezvous and jump consistent hashes, the new node is
assigned individual keys that were previously scattered across all of
the other nodes. Which one is preferable depends on the application.

Skewed Workloads and Relieving Hot Spots

Consistent hashing ensures that keys are uniformly distributed across
nodes, but that doesn’t mean that the actual load is uniformly
distributed. If the workload is highly skewed—that is, the amount of
data under some partition keys is much greater than other keys, or if
the rate of requests to some keys is much higher than to others—you can
still end up with some servers being overloaded while others sit almost
idle.

For example, on a social media site, a celebrity user with millions of
followers may cause a storm of activity when they do something [24].
This event can result in a large volume of reads and writes to the same
key (where the partition key is perhaps the user ID of the celebrity, or
the ID of the action that people are commenting on).

In such situations, a more flexible sharding policy is required [25,
26]. A system that defines shards based on ranges of keys (or ranges of
hashes) makes it possible to put an individual hot key in a shard by its
own, and perhaps even assigning it a dedicated machine [27].

It’s also possible to compensate for skew at the application level. For
example, if one key is known to be very hot, a simple technique is to
add a random number to the beginning or end of the key. Just a two-digit
decimal random number would split the writes to the key evenly across
100 different keys, allowing those keys to be distributed to different
shards.

However, having split the writes across different keys, any reads now
have to do additional work, as they have to read the data from all 100
keys and combine it. The volume of reads to each shard of the hot key is
not reduced; only the write load is split. This technique also requires
additional bookkeeping: it only makes sense to append the random number
for the small number of hot keys; for the vast majority of keys with low
write throughput this would be unnecessary overhead. Thus, you also need
some way of keeping track of which keys are being split, and a process
for converting a regular key into a specially-managed hot key.

The problem is further compounded by change of load over time: for
example, a particular social media post that has gone viral may
experience high load for a couple of days, but thereafter it’s likely to
calm down again. Moreover, some keys may be hot for writes while others
are hot for reads, necessitating different strategies for handling them.

Some systems (especially cloud services designed for large scale) have
automated approaches for dealing with hot shards; for example, Amazon
calls it heat management [28] or adaptive capacity [17]. The details of
how these systems work go beyond the scope of this book.

Operations: Automatic or Manual Rebalancing

There is one important question with regard to rebalancing that we have
glossed over: does the splitting of shards and rebalancing happen
automatically or manually?

Some systems automatically decide when to split shards and when to move
them from one node to another, without any human interaction, while
others leave sharding to be explicitly configured by an administrator.
There is also a middle ground: for example, Couchbase and Riak generate
a suggested shard assignment automatically, but require an administrator
to commit it before it takes effect.

Fully automated rebalancing can be convenient, because there is less
operational work to do for normal maintenance, and such systems can even
auto-scale to adapt to changes in workload. Cloud databases such as
DynamoDB are promoted as being able to automatically add and remove
shards to adapt to big increases or decreases of load within a matter of
minutes [17, 29].

However, automatic shard management can also be unpredictable.
Rebalancing is an expensive operation, because it requires rerouting
requests and moving a large amount of data from one node to another. If
it is not done carefully, this process can overload the network or the
nodes, and it might harm the performance of other requests. The system
must continue processing writes while the rebalancing is in progress; if
a system is near its maximum write throughput, the shard-splitting
process might not even be able to keep up with the rate of incoming
writes [29].

Such automation can be dangerous in combination with automatic failure
detection. For example, say one node is overloaded and is temporarily
slow to respond to requests. The other nodes conclude that the
overloaded node is dead, and automatically rebalance the cluster to move
load away from it. This puts additional load on other nodes and the
network, making the situation worse. There is a risk of causing a
cascading failure where other nodes become overloaded and are also
falsely suspected of being down.

For that reason, it can be a good thing to have a human in the loop for
rebalancing. It’s slower than a fully automatic process, but it can help
prevent operational surprises.

Request Routing

We have discussed how to shard a dataset across multiple nodes, and how
to rebalance those shards as nodes are added or removed. Now let’s move
on to the question: if you want to read or write a particular key, how
do you know which node—i.e., which IP address and port number—you need
to connect to?

We call this problem request routing, and it’s very similar to service
discovery, which we previously discussed in “Load balancers, service
discovery, and service meshes”. The biggest difference between the two
is that with services running application code, each instance is usually
stateless, and a load balancer can send a request to any of the
instances. With sharded databases, a request for a key can only be
handled by a node that is a replica for the shard containing that key.

This means that request routing has to be aware of the assignment from
keys to shards, and from shards to nodes. On a high level, there are a
few different approaches to this problem (illustrated in Figure 7-7):

1.  Allow clients to contact any node (e.g., via a round-robin load
    balancer). If that node coincidentally owns the shard to which the
    request applies, it can handle the request directly; otherwise, it
    forwards the request to the appropriate node, receives the reply,
    and passes the reply along to the client.

2.  Send all requests from clients to a routing tier first, which
    determines the node that should handle each request and forwards it
    accordingly. This routing tier does not itself handle any requests;
    it only acts as a shard-aware load balancer.

3.   Require that clients be aware of the sharding and the assignment of
    shards to nodes. In this case, a client can connect directly to the
    appropriate node, without any intermediary.

[ddia 0707]

Figure 7-7. Three different ways of routing a request to the right node.

In all cases, there are some key problems:

-  Who decides which shard should live on which node? It’s simplest to
  have a single coordinator making that decision, but in that case how
  do you make it fault-tolerant in case the node running the coordinator
  goes down? And if the coordinator role can failover to another node,
  how do you prevent a split-brain situation (see “Handling Node
  Outages”) where two different coordinators make contradictory shard
  assignments?

- How does the component performing the routing (which may be one of the
  nodes, or the routing tier, or the client) learn about changes in the
  assignment of shards to nodes?

- While a shard is being moved from one node to another, there is a
  cutover period during which the new node has taken over, but requests
  to the old node may still be in flight. How do you handle those?

Many distributed data systems rely on a separate coordination service
such as ZooKeeper or etcd to keep track of shard assignments, as
illustrated in Figure 7-8. They use consensus algorithms (see [Link to
Come]) to provide fault tolerance and protection against split-brain.
Each node registers itself in ZooKeeper, and ZooKeeper maintains the
authoritative mapping of shards to nodes. Other actors, such as the
routing tier or the sharding-aware client, can subscribe to this
information in ZooKeeper. Whenever a shard changes ownership, or a node
is added or removed, ZooKeeper notifies the routing tier so that it can
keep its routing information up to date.

[ddia 0708]

Figure 7-8. Using ZooKeeper to keep track of assignment of shards to nodes.

For example, HBase and SolrCloud use ZooKeeper to manage shard
assignment, and Kubernetes uses etcd to keep track of which service
instance is running where. MongoDB has a similar architecture, but it
relies on its own config server implementation and mongos daemons as the
routing tier. Kafka, YugabyteDB, and TiDB use built-in implementations
of the Raft consensus protocol to perform this coordination function.

Cassandra, ScyllaDB, and Riak take a different approach: they use a
gossip protocol among the nodes to disseminate any changes in cluster
state. This provides much weaker consistency than a consensus protocol;
it is possible to have split brain, in which different parts of the
cluster have different node assignments for the same shard. Leaderless
databases can tolerate this because they generally make weak consistency
guarantees anyway (see “Limitations of Quorum Consistency”).

When using a routing tier or when sending requests to a random node,
clients still need to find the IP addresses to connect to. These are not
as fast-changing as the assignment of shards to nodes, so it is often
sufficient to use DNS for this purpose.

This discussion of request routing has focused on finding the shard for
an individual key, which is most relevant for sharded OLTP databases.
Analytic databases often use sharding as well, but they typically have a
very different kind of query execution: rather than executing in a
single shard, a query typically needs to aggregate and join data from
many different shards in parallel. We will discuss techniques for such
parallel query execution in [Link to Come].

Sharding and Secondary Indexes

The sharding schemes we have discussed so far rely on the client knowing
the partition key for any record it wants to access. This is most easily
done in a key-value data model, where the partition key is the first
part of the primary key (or the entire primary key), and so we can use
the partition key to determine the shard, and thus route reads and
writes to the node that is responsible for that key.

The situation becomes more complicated if secondary indexes are involved
(see also “Multi-Column and Secondary Indexes”). A secondary index
usually doesn’t identify a record uniquely but rather is a way of
searching for occurrences of a particular value: find all actions by
user 123, find all articles containing the word hogwash, find all cars
whose color is red, and so on.

Key-value stores often don’t have secondary indexes, but they are the
bread and butter of relational databases, they are common in document
databases too, and they are the raison d’être of full-text search
engines such as Solr and Elasticsearch. The problem with secondary
indexes is that they don’t map neatly to shards. There are two main
approaches to sharding a database with secondary indexes: local and
global indexes.

Local Secondary Indexes

For example, imagine you are operating a website for selling used cars
(illustrated in Figure 7-9). Each listing has a unique ID, and you use
that ID as partition key for sharding (for example, IDs 0 to 499 in
shard 0, IDs 500 to 999 in shard 1, etc.).

If you want to let users search for cars, allowing them to filter by
color and by make, you need a secondary index on color and make (in a
document database these would be fields; in a relational database they
would be columns). If you have declared the index, the database can
perform the indexing automatically. For example, whenever a red car is
added to the database, the database shard automatically adds its ID to
the list of IDs for the index entry color:red. As discussed in
Chapter 4, that list of IDs is also called a postings list.

[ddia 0709]

Figure 7-9. Local secondary indexes: each shard indexes only the records within its own shard.

Warning

If your database only supports a key-value model, you might be tempted
to implement a secondary index yourself by creating a mapping from
values to IDs in application code. If you go down this route, you need
to take great care to ensure your indexes remain consistent with the
underlying data. Race conditions and intermittent write failures (where
some changes were saved but others weren’t) can very easily cause the
data to go out of sync—see [Link to Come].

In this indexing approach, each shard is completely separate: each shard
maintains its own secondary indexes, covering only the records in that
shard. It doesn’t care what data is stored in other shards. Whenever you
write to the database—to add, remove, or update a records—you only need
to deal with the shard that contains the record that you are writing.
For that reason, this type of secondary index is known as a local index.
In an information retrieval context it is also known as a
document-partitioned index [30].

When reading from a local secondary index, if you already know the
partition key of the record you’re looking for, you can just perform the
search on the appropriate shard. Moreover, if you only want some
results, and you don’t need all, you can send the request to any shard.

However, if you want all the results and don’t know their partition key
in advance, you need to send the query to all shards, and combine the
results you get back, because the matching records might be scattered
across all the shards. In Figure 7-9, red cars appear in both shard 0
and shard 1.

This approach to querying a sharded database can make read queries on
secondary indexes quite expensive. Even if you query the shards in
parallel, it is prone to tail latency amplification (see “Use of
Response Time Metrics”). It also limits the scalability of your
application: adding more shards lets you store more data, but it doesn’t
increase your query throughput if every shard has to process every query
anyway.

Nevertheless, local secondary indexes are widely used [31]: for example,
MongoDB, Riak, Cassandra [32], Elasticsearch [33], SolrCloud, and VoltDB
[34] all use local secondary indexes.

Global Secondary Indexes

Rather than each shard having its own, local secondary index, we can
construct a global index that covers data in all shards. However, we
can’t just store that index on one node, since it would likely become a
bottleneck and defeat the purpose of sharding. A global index must also
be sharded, but it can be sharded differently from the primary key
index.

Figure 7-10 illustrates what this could look like: the IDs of red cars
from all shards appear under color:red in the index, but the index is
sharded so that colors starting with the letters a to r appear in shard
0 and colors starting with s to z appear in shard 1. The index on the
make of car is partitioned similarly (with the shard boundary being
between f and h).

[ddia 0710]

Figure 7-10. A global secondary index reflects data from all shards, and is itself sharded by the indexed value.

This kind of index is also called term-partitioned [30]: recall from
“Full-Text Search” that in full-text search, a term is a keyword in a
text that you can search for. Here we generalise it to mean any value
that you can search for in the secondary index.

The global index uses the term as partition key, so that when you’re
looking for a particular term or value, you can figure out which shard
you need to query. As before, a shard can contain a contiguous range of
terms (as in Figure 7-10), or you can assign terms to shards based on a
hash of the term.

Global indexes have the advantage that a query with a single condition
(such as color = red) only needs to read from a single shard to fetch
the postings list. However, if you want to fetch records and not just
IDs, you still have to read from all the shards that are responsible for
those IDs.

If you have multiple search conditions or terms (e.g., searching for
cars of a certain color and a certain make, or searching for multiple
words occurring in the same text), it’s likely that those terms will be
assigned to different shards. To compute the logical AND of the two
conditions, the system needs to find all the IDs that occur in both of
the postings lists. That’s no problem if the postings lists are short,
but if they are long, it can be slow to send them over the network to
compute their intersection [30].

Another challenge with global secondary indexes is that writes are more
complicated than with local indexes, because writing a single record
might affect multiple shards of the index (every term in the document
might be on a different shard). This makes it harder to keep the
secondary index in sync with the underlying data. One option is to use a
distributed transaction to atomically update the shards storing the
primary record and its secondary indexes (see [Link to Come] and [Link
to Come]).

Global secondary indexes are used by CockroachDB, TiDB, and YugabyteDB;
DynamoDB supports both local and global secondary indexes. In the case
of DynamoDB, writes are asynchronously reflected in global indexes, so
reads from a global index may be stale (similarly to replication lag, as
in “Problems with Replication Lag”). Nevertheless, global indexes are
useful if read throughput is higher than write throughput, and if the
postings lists are not too long.

Summary

In this chapter we explored different ways of sharding a large dataset
into smaller subsets. Sharding is necessary when you have so much data
that storing and processing it on a single machine is no longer
feasible.

The goal of sharding is to spread the data and query load evenly across
multiple machines, avoiding hot spots (nodes with disproportionately
high load). This requires choosing a sharding scheme that is appropriate
to your data, and rebalancing the shards when nodes are added to or
removed from the cluster.

We discussed two main approaches to sharding:

-  Key range sharding, where keys are sorted, and a shard owns all the
  keys from some minimum up to some maximum. Sorting has the advantage
  that efficient range queries are possible, but there is a risk of hot
  spots if the application often accesses keys that are close together
  in the sorted order.

  In this approach, shards are typically rebalanced by splitting the
  range into two subranges when a shard gets too big.

-  Hash sharding, where a hash function is applied to each key, and a
  shard owns a range of hash values (or another consistent hashing
  algorithm may be used to map hashes to shards). This method destroys
  the ordering of keys, making range queries inefficient, but it may
  distribute load more evenly.

  When sharding by hash, it is common to create a fixed number of shards
  in advance, to assign several shards to each node, and to move entire
  shards from one node to another when nodes are added or removed.
  Splitting shards, like with key ranges, is also possible.

It is common to use the first part of the key as the partition key
(i.e., to identify the shard), and to sort records within that shard by
the rest of the key. That way you can still have efficient range queries
among the records with the same partition key.

We also discussed the interaction between sharding and secondary
indexes. A secondary index also needs to be sharded, and there are two
methods:

-  Local secondary indexes, where the secondary indexes are stored in
  the same shard as the primary key and value. This means that only a
  single shard needs to be updated on write, but a lookup of the
  secondary index requires reading from all shards.

-  Global secondary indexes, which are sharded separately based on the
  indexed values. An entry in the secondary index may refer to records
  from all shards of the primary key. When a record is written, several
  secondary index shards may need to be updated; however, a read of the
  postings list can be served from a single shard (fetching the actual
  records still requires reading from multiple shards).

Finally, we discussed techniques for routing queries to the appropriate
shard, and how a coordination service is often used to keep track of the
assigment of shards to nodes.

By design, every shard operates mostly independently—that’s what allows
a sharded database to scale to multiple machines. However, operations
that need to write to several shards can be problematic: for example,
what happens if the write to one shard succeeds, but another fails? We
will address that question in the following chapters.

Footnotes

References

[1] Claire Giordano. Understanding partitioning and sharding in Postgres
and Citus. citusdata.com, August 2023. Archived at perma.cc/8BTK-8959

[2] Brandur Leach. Partitioning in Postgres, 2022 edition. brandur.org,
October 2022. Archived at perma.cc/Z5LE-6AKX

[3] Raph Koster. Database “sharding” came from UO? raphkoster.com,
January 2009. Archived at perma.cc/4N9U-5KYF

[4] Garrett Fidalgo. Herding elephants: Lessons learned from sharding
Postgres at Notion. notion.com, October 2021. Archived at
perma.cc/5J5V-W2VX

[5] Ulrich Drepper. What Every Programmer Should Know About Memory.
akkadia.org, November 2007. Archived at perma.cc/NU6Q-DRXZ

[6] Jingyu Zhou, Meng Xu, Alexander Shraer, Bala Namasivayam, Alex
Miller, Evan Tschannen, Steve Atherton, Andrew J. Beamon, Rusty Sears,
John Leach, Dave Rosenthal, Xin Dong, Will Wilson, Ben Collins, David
Scherer, Alec Grieser, Young Liu, Alvin Moore, Bhaskar Muppana, Xiaoge
Su, and Vishesh Yadav. FoundationDB: A Distributed Unbundled
Transactional Key Value Store. At ACM International Conference on
Management of Data (SIGMOD), June 2021. doi:10.1145/3448016.3457559

[7] Marco Slot. Citus 12: Schema-based sharding for PostgreSQL.
citusdata.com, July 2023. Archived at perma.cc/R874-EC9W

[8] Robisson Oliveira. Reducing the Scope of Impact with Cell-Based
Architecture. AWS Well-Architected white paper, Amazon Web Services,
September 2023. Archived at perma.cc/4KWW-47NR

[9] Gwen Shapira. Things DBs Don’t Do - But Should. thenile.dev,
February 2023. Archived at perma.cc/C3J4-JSFW

[10] Malte Schwarzkopf, Eddie Kohler, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Robert
Morris. Position: GDPR Compliance by Construction. At Towards Polystores
that manage multiple Databases, Privacy, Security and/or Policy Issues
for Heterogenous Data (Poly), August 2019.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-33752-0_3

[11] Gwen Shapira. Introducing pg_karnak: Transactional schema migration
across tenant databases. thenile.dev, November 2024. Archived at
perma.cc/R5RD-8HR9

[12] Arka Ganguli, Guido Iaquinti, Maggie Zhou, and Rafael Chacón.
Scaling Datastores at Slack with Vitess. slack.engineering, December
2020. Archived at perma.cc/UW8F-ALJK

[13] Ikai Lan. App Engine Datastore Tip: Monotonically Increasing Values
Are Bad. ikaisays.com, January 2011. Archived at perma.cc/BPX8-RPJB

[14] Enis Soztutar. Apache HBase Region Splitting and Merging.
blog.cloudera.com, February 2013. Archived at perma.cc/S9HS-2X2C

[15] Eric Evans. Rethinking Topology in Cassandra. At Cassandra Summit,
June 2013. Archived at perma.cc/2DKM-F438

[16] Martin Kleppmann. Java’s hashCode Is Not Safe for Distributed
Systems. martin.kleppmann.com, June 2012. Archived at perma.cc/LK5U-VZSN

[17] Mostafa Elhemali, Niall Gallagher, Nicholas Gordon, Joseph
Idziorek, Richard Krog, Colin Lazier, Erben Mo, Akhilesh Mritunjai, Somu
Perianayagam, Tim Rath, Swami Sivasubramanian, James Christopher
Sorenson III, Sroaj Sosothikul, Doug Terry, and Akshat Vig. Amazon
DynamoDB: A Scalable, Predictably Performant, and Fully Managed NoSQL
Database Service. At USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC), July
2022.

[18] Brandon Williams. Virtual Nodes in Cassandra 1.2. datastax.com,
December 2012. Archived at perma.cc/N385-EQXV

[19] Branimir Lambov. New Token Allocation Algorithm in Cassandra 3.0.
datastax.com, January 2016. Archived at perma.cc/2BG7-LDWY

[20] David Karger, Eric Lehman, Tom Leighton, Rina Panigrahy, Matthew
Levine, and Daniel Lewin. Consistent Hashing and Random Trees:
Distributed Caching Protocols for Relieving Hot Spots on the World Wide
Web. At 29th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), May
1997. doi:10.1145/258533.258660

[21] Damian Gryski. Consistent Hashing: Algorithmic Tradeoffs.
dgryski.medium.com, April 2018. Archived at perma.cc/B2WF-TYQ8

[22] David G. Thaler and Chinya V. Ravishankar. Using name-based
mappings to increase hit rates. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking,
volume 6, issue 1, pages 1–14, February 1998. doi:10.1109/90.663936

[23] John Lamping and Eric Veach. A Fast, Minimal Memory, Consistent
Hash Algorithm. arxiv.org, June 2014.

[24] Samuel Axon. 3% of Twitter’s Servers Dedicated to Justin Bieber.
mashable.com, September 2010. Archived at perma.cc/F35N-CGVX

[25] Gerald Guo and Thawan Kooburat. Scaling services with Shard
Manager. engineering.fb.com, August 2020. Archived at perma.cc/EFS3-XQYT

[26] Sangmin Lee, Zhenhua Guo, Omer Sunercan, Jun Ying, Thawan Kooburat,
Suryadeep Biswal, Jun Chen, Kun Huang, Yatpang Cheung, Yiding Zhou,
Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Biren Damani, Pol Mauri Ruiz, Vikas Mehta, and
Chunqiang Tang. Shard Manager: A Generic Shard Management Framework for
Geo-distributed Applications. 28th ACM SIGOPS Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles (SOSP), pages 553–569, October 2021.
doi:10.1145/3477132.3483546

[27] Scott Lystig Fritchie. A Critique of Resizable Hash Tables: Riak
Core & Random Slicing. infoq.com, August 2018. Archived at
perma.cc/RPX7-7BLN

[28] Andy Warfield. Building and operating a pretty big storage system
called S3. allthingsdistributed.com, July 2023. Archived at
perma.cc/6S7P-GLM4

[29] Rich Houlihan. DynamoDB adaptive capacity: smooth performance for
chaotic workloads (DAT327). At AWS re:Invent, November 2017.

[30] Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze.
Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
ISBN: 978-0-521-86571-5, available online at nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book

[31] Michael Busch, Krishna Gade, Brian Larson, Patrick Lok, Samuel
Luckenbill, and Jimmy Lin. Earlybird: Real-Time Search at Twitter. At
28th IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), April
2012. doi:10.1109/ICDE.2012.149

[32] Nadav Har’El. Indexing in Cassandra 3. github.com, April 2017.
Archived at perma.cc/3ENV-8T9P

[33] Zachary Tong. Customizing Your Document Routing. elastic.co, June
2013. Archived at perma.cc/97VM-MREN

[34] Andrew Pavlo. H-Store Frequently Asked Questions.
hstore.cs.brown.edu, October 2013. Archived at perma.cc/X3ZA-DW6Z

About the Authors

Martin Kleppmann is a researcher in distributed systems at the
University of Cambridge, UK. Previously he was a software engineer and
entrepreneur at internet companies including LinkedIn and Rapportive,
where he worked on large-scale data infrastructure. In the process he
learned a few things the hard way, and he hopes this book will save you
from repeating the same mistakes.

Martin is a regular conference speaker, blogger, and open source
contributor. He believes that profound technical ideas should be
accessible to everyone, and that deeper understanding will help us
develop better software.

Chris Riccomini is a software engineer, startup investor, and author
with 15+ years of experience at PayPal, LinkedIn, and WePay. He runs
Materialized View Capital, where he invests in infrastructure startups.
He is also the cocreator of Apache Samza and SlateDB, and coauthor of
The Missing README: A Guide for the New Software Engineer.
