[]

[]

Praise for Fundamentals of Software Architecture

  Mark and Neal have done it again—this revised and expanded second
  edition of their bestseller is an indispensable resource for exploring
  modern software architecture through a contemporary lens. With a
  nuanced understanding of what software architecture truly involves,
  this comprehensive guide starts with the critical importance of
  trade-off analysis, then delves into a wide range of architectural
  styles and the philosophies that underpin them, along with detailed
  examinations of data and team topologies. Whether you are an
  “accidental” architect stepping into the role or a seasoned veteran
  seeking to refine your skills, this book offers the tools and
  knowledge you need to excel in your craft.

  Raju Gandhi, Author of Head First Git and Coauthor of Head First
  Software Architecture

  Neal and Mark aren’t just outstanding software architects; they are
  also exceptional teachers. With Fundamentals of Software Architecture,
  they have managed to condense the sprawling topic of architecture into
  a concise work that reflects their decades of experience. Whether
  you’re new to the role or you’ve been a practicing architect for many
  years, the updated edition of this book will help you be better at
  your job. I only wish they’d have written it earlier in my career.
  I’ve now used both editions with my architecture graduate students,
  and will continue to recommend it widely in this expanded form.

  Nathaniel Schutta, Coauthor of Fundamentals of Software Engineering

  Mark and Neal set out to achieve a formidable goal—to elucidate the
  many, layered fundamentals required to excel in software
  architecture—and they have once again completed their quest. The
  software architecture field continuously evolves, and the role
  requires a daunting breadth and depth of knowledge and skills. This
  updated book will serve as a guide for many as they navigate their
  journey to software architecture mastery.

  Rebecca J. Parsons, Technology Advisor and Former CTO/CTO Emerita,
  Thoughtworks

  Mark and Neal truly capture real-world advice for technologists to
  drive architecture excellence. They achieve this by identifying common
  architecture characteristics and the trade-offs that are necessary to
  drive success.

  Cassie Shum, Technical Director, Thoughtworks

Fundamentals of Software Architecture

by Mark Richards and Neal Ford

Copyright © 2025 Mark Richards and Neal Ford. All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America.

Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North,
Sebastopol, CA 95472.

O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles
(http://oreilly.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.

- Acquisitions Editor: Louise Corrigan
- Development Editor: Sarah Grey
- Production Editor: Christopher Faucher
- Copyeditor: Sonia Saruba
- Proofreader: Piper Content Partners
- Indexer: WordCo Indexing Services, Inc.
- Interior Designer: David Futato
- Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
- Illustrator: Kate Dullea

- January 2020: First Edition
- March 2025: Second Edition

Revision History for the Second Edition

- 2025-03-12: First Release

See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781098175511 for release
details.

The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Fundamentals of Software Architecture, the cover image, and related
trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.

The views expressed in this work are those of the authors and do not
represent the publisher’s views. While the publisher and the authors
have used good faith efforts to ensure that the information and
instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and the
authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including
without limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of
or reliance on this work. Use of the information and instructions
contained in this work is at your own risk. If any code samples or other
technology this work contains or describes is subject to open source
licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such
licenses and/or rights.

978-1-098-17551-1

[LSI]

Preface

Preface to the Second Edition

“Wow, there’s a lot there!”

When we set out to write the second edition of Fundamentals of Software
Architecture, we had a few ideas of things we wanted to flesh out and
improve from the first edition, but like a lot of software projects, it
kept growing.

One of our met goals was to make the styles sections more consistent,
making them more useful for comparisons. We also made some changes to
our star ratings to add sections and a few new categories, and added new
sections on cloud considerations, data topologies, team topologies, and
governance for each architectural style. Along the way we made major
additions to a number of chapters on popular topics, such as Chapters 15
and 18, and added a new chapter (Chapter 11) on the modular monolith
architectural style.

We also added several entirely new chapters covering architectural
patterns in Chapter 20, the intersections of architecture in Chapter 26,
and revisiting our laws of software architecture (of which there is a
new corollary and a new law) in Chapter 27.

Preface to the First Edition

  

  Axiom

      A statement or proposition that is regarded as being established,
      accepted, or self-evidently true.

Mathematicians create theories based on axioms—assumptions for things
indisputably true. Software architects also build theories atop axioms,
but the software world is, well, softer than mathematics: fundamental
things continue to change at a rapid pace, including the axioms we base
our theories upon.

The software development ecosystem exists in a constant state of dynamic
equilibrium: while it exists in a balanced state at any given point in
time, it exhibits dynamic behavior over the long term. A great modern
example of the nature of this ecosystem follows the ascension of
containerization and the attendant changes: tools like Kubernetes didn’t
exist a decade ago, yet now entire software conferences exist to service
its users. The software ecosystem changes chaotically: one small change
causes another small change; when repeated hundreds of times, it
generates a new ecosystem.

Architects have an important responsibility to question assumptions and
axioms left over from previous eras. Many of the books about software
architecture were written in an era that only barely resembles the
current world. In fact, the authors believe that we must question
fundamental axioms on a regular basis, in light of improved engineering
practices, operational ecosystems, software development
processes—​everything that makes up the messy, dynamic equilibrium where
architects and developers work each day.

Careful observers of software architecture over time witnessed an
evolution of capabilities. Starting with the engineering practices of
Extreme Programming, continuing with continuous delivery, the DevOps
revolution, microservices, containerization, and now cloud-based
resources, all of these innovations led to new capabilities and
trade-offs. As capabilities changed, so did architects’ perspectives on
the industry. For many years, the tongue-in-cheek definition of software
architecture was “the stuff that’s hard to change later.” Later, the
microservices architecture style appeared, where change is a first-class
design consideration.

Each new era requires new practices, tools, measurements, patterns, and
a host of other changes. This book looks at software architecture in a
modern light, taking into account all the innovations from the last
decade, along with some new metrics and measures suited to today’s new
structures and perspectives.

The subtitle of our book is “A Modern Engineering Approach.” Developers
have long wished to change software development from a craft, where
skilled artisans can create one-off works, to an engineering discipline,
which implies repeatability, rigor, and effective analysis. While
software engineering still lags behind other types of engineering
disciplines by many orders of magnitude (to be fair, software is a very
young discipline compared to most other types of engineering),
architects have made huge improvements, which we’ll discuss. In
particular, modern Agile engineering practices have allowed great
strides in the types of systems that architects design.

We also address the critically important issue of trade-off analysis. As
a software developer, it’s easy to become enamored with a particular
technology or approach. But architects must always soberly assess the
good, bad, and ugly of every choice, and virtually nothing in the real
world offers convenient binary choices—​everything is a trade-off. Given
this pragmatic perspective, we strive to eliminate value judgments about
technology and instead focus on analyzing trade-offs to equip our
readers with an analytic eye toward technology choices.

This book won’t make someone a software architect overnight—​it’s a
nuanced field with many facets. We want to provide existing and
burgeoning architects a good modern overview of software architecture
and its many aspects, from structure to soft skills. While this book
covers well-known patterns, we take a new approach, leaning on lessons
learned, tools, engineering practices, and other input. We take many
existing axioms in software architecture and rethink them in light of
the current ecosystem, and design architectures, taking the modern
landscape into account.

Conventions Used in This Book

The following typographical conventions are used in this book:

Italic

    Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file
    extensions.

Constant width

    Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to
    program elements such as variable or function names, databases, data
    types, environment variables, statements, and keywords.

Tip

This element signifies a tip or suggestion.

Note

This element signifies a general note.

Warning

This element indicates a warning or caution.

Supplemental Material

Visit http://fundamentalsofsoftwarearchitecture.com to access the
supplemental resources for this book.

If you have a technical question or a problem using the code examples,
please send email to bookquestions@oreilly.com.

This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, if example
code is offered with this book, you may use it in your programs and
documentation. You do not need to contact us for permission unless
you’re reproducing a significant portion of the code. For example,
writing a program that uses several chunks of code from this book does
not require permission. Selling or distributing examples from O’Reilly
books does require permission. Answering a question by citing this book
and quoting example code does not require permission. Incorporating a
significant amount of example code from this book into your product’s
documentation does require permission.

We appreciate, but generally do not require, attribution. An attribution
usually includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example:
“Fundamentals of Software Architecture, Second Edition, by Mark Richards
and Neal Ford (O’Reilly). Copyright 2025 Mark Richards and Neal Ford,
978-1-098-17551-1.”

If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the
permission given above, feel free to contact us at
permissions@oreilly.com.

O’Reilly Online Learning

Note

For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technology and
business training, knowledge, and insight to help companies succeed.

Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and
expertise through books, articles, and our online learning platform.
O’Reilly’s online learning platform gives you on-demand access to live
training courses, in-depth learning paths, interactive coding
environments, and a vast collection of text and video from O’Reilly and
200+ other publishers. For more information, please visit
http://oreilly.com.

How to Contact Us

Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the
publisher:

- O’Reilly Media, Inc.
- 1005 Gravenstein Highway North
- Sebastopol, CA 95472
- 800-889-8969 (in the United States or Canada)
- 707-827-7019 (international or local)
- 707-829-0104 (fax)
- support@oreilly.com
- https://oreilly.com/about/contact.html

We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and
any additional information. You can access this page at
https://oreil.ly/fundamentals-of-software-architecture-2e.

For news and information about our books and courses, visit
https://oreilly.com.

Find us on LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/company/oreilly-media.

Watch us on YouTube: https://youtube.com/oreillymedia.

Acknowledgments

Mark and Neal would like to thank all the people who attended our
classes, workshops, conference sessions, and user group meetings, as
well as all the people who listened to versions of this material and
provided invaluable feedback. We would also like to thank the publishing
team at O’Reilly, who made this as painless an experience as writing a
book can be. In particular, we would like to thank our first edition
editors, Alicia Young and Virginia Wilson, and our second edition
editor, Sarah Grey.

Acknowledgments from Mark Richards

In addition to the preceding acknowledgments, I would like to thank my
lovely wife, Rebecca. Taking everything else on at home and sacrificing
the opportunity to work on your own book allowed me to do additional
consulting gigs and speak at more conferences and training classes,
giving me the opportunity to practice and hone the material for this
book. You are the best.

Acknowledgments from Neal Ford

I would like to thank my extended family, Thoughtworks as a collective,
and Rebecca Parsons and Martin Fowler as individual parts of it.
Thoughtworks is an extraordinary group of people who manage to produce
value for customers while keeping a keen eye toward why things work so
we can improve them. Thoughtworks supported this book in many ways and
continues to grow Thoughtworkers who challenge and inspire every day. I
would also like to thank our neighborhood cocktail club for a regular
escape from routine. Lastly, I would like to thank my wife, Candy, whose
tolerance for things like book writing and conference speaking
apparently knows no bounds. For decades she’s kept me grounded and sane
enough to function, and I hope she will for decades more as the love of
my life.

Chapter 1. Introduction

So you’re interested in software architecture. Perhaps you’re a
developer who wants to move to the next career step, or perhaps you are
a project manager who wants to understand what happens when software
architectures work. You may also be an “accidental architect”: someone
who makes architecture decisions (defined below) but doesn’t have the
title of “software architect"…yet.

Why delve into the realm of software architecture? Perhaps you have
experience with lots of projects and want to understand more deeply how
the larger parts of systems fit together, along with the numerous
trade-offs. If so, software architecture is an obvious next career step.

This book is designed for all of you. It provides an overview of the
extremely multifaceted job of “software architect.”

Software architects must understand and analyze software systems deeply,
in all their complexity, and must make important trade-off decisions,
sometimes with incomplete information. Many software developers worried
that generative AI might slowly replace them are considering moving to
software architecture, a role much harder to replace. Software
architects make exactly the kinds of decisions that AI cannot,
evaluating trade-offs within complex, changing contexts.

Architecture, like much art, can only be understood in context.
Architects base their decisions on the realities of their environment.
For example, one of the major goals of late-20th-century software
architecture was to use shared infrastructure and resources as
efficiently as possible, because operating systems, application servers,
database servers, and so on were all commercial and very expensive.

In 2002, trying to build an architecture like microservices would have
been inconceivably expensive. Imagine strolling into a 2002 data center
and telling the head of operations, “Hey, I have a great idea for a
revolutionary style of architecture, where each service runs on its own
isolated machinery with its own dedicated database. I’ll need 50 Windows
licenses, another 30 application-server licenses, and at least 50
database server licenses.” We can only build such architectures today
because of the advent of open source and the updated engineering
practices of the DevOps revolution. All architectures are products of
their context—keep that in mind as you read this book.

Defining Software Architecture

So what is software architecture? Figure 1-1 illustrates how we like to
think about software architecture. This definition has four dimensions.
The software architecture of a system consists of an architecture style
as the starting point, combined with the architecture characteristics it
must support, the logical components to implement its behavior, and
finally the architecture decisions justifying it all. The system’s
structure is denoted by the heavy black lines supporting the
architecture. We’ll walk quickly through these dimensions in the order
in which architects analyze them, and subsequent chapters will provide
more details.

[Defining software architecture]

Figure 1-1. Architecture consists of the system’s structure, combined with architecture characteristics (“-ilities”), logical components, architecture styles, and decisions

Architecture characteristics (see Figure 1-2) define the capabilities of
a system (commonly abbreviated as “-ilities”) and the criteria for its
success: in short, what the system should do. Architecture
characteristics are so important that we’ve devoted several chapters in
this book to understanding and defining them.

[Software architecture characteristics]

Figure 1-2. “Architecture characteristics” refer to the “-ilities” that the system must support

While architectural characteristics define a system’s capabilities,
logical components define its behavior. Designing logical components is
one of the key structural activities for architects. In Figure 1-3, the
logical components form the domains, entities, and workflows of the
application.

[Logical components structure the behavior of the system.]

Figure 1-3. Logical components structure the behavior of the system

Once an architect has analyzed the architectural characteristics and
logical components the system needs (both described in detail later),
they know enough to choose an appropriate architecture style as a
starting point for implementing their solution Figure 1-4.

[The architectural style choice opts for the easiest implementation path
for a given set of requirements. ]

Figure 1-4. Choosing an architectural style involves finding the easiest implementation path for a given set of requirements

The fourth dimension that defines software architecture is architecture
decisions, which define the rules for how a system should be
constructed. For example, an architect might make a decision that only
the Business and Services layers within a layered architecture can
access the database (see Figure 1-5), restricting the Presentation layer
from making direct database calls. Architecture decisions form the
constraints of the system and direct the development teams on what is
and what isn’t allowed.

[Architecture decisions]

Figure 1-5. Architecture decisions are rules for constructing systems

We discuss architecture decisions and how to document them concisely in
Chapter 21.

Laws of Software Architecture

As your two authors set out to write the first edition of this book, we
had an ambitious goal: we hoped to find things that seemed universally
true about software architecture and codify them as “laws” of software
architecture. As we wrote, we kept our eyes peeled for things we could
capture; we had hoped to find maybe 10 or 15. To our surprise, we ended
up identifying just two laws in the first edition, and uncovered one
more while writing the second edition. True to our original intent,
these three laws seem pretty universal and inform many important
perspectives for working software architects.

We learned the First Law of Software Architecture by constantly
stumbling across it, and we think it gets to the heart of why these
universal truths seem so elusive:

  Everything in software architecture is a trade-off.

  First Law of Software Architecture

Nothing exists on a nice, clean spectrum. Every decision a software
architect makes must account for a large number of variables that take
on different values depending on the circumstances. Trade-offs are the
essence of software architecture decisions.

  If you think you’ve discovered something that isn’t a trade-off, more
  likely you just haven’t identified the trade-off…yet.

  Corollary 1

  You can’t just do trade-off analysis once and be done with it.

  Corollary 2

Teams love standards, and it would be nice if architects could just do
One Big Trade-off Jamboree to decide on our defaults for which
architecture styles to use, how parts of the architecture should
communicate, how to manage shared functionality, and a host of other
sticky decisions. But we can’t, because every situation requires us to
re-evaluate all those trade-offs. (We’ve seen teams try to do this—for
example, attempting to default to using only choreography in distributed
workflows, only to discover that it works sometimes and is a spectacular
disaster at other times. See “Choreography and Orchestration” for our
discussion.)

Architecture is broader than just the combination of structural
elements, which is why our dimensional definition incorporates
principles, characteristics, and so on. This is reflected in our Second
Law of Software Architecture:

  Why is more important than how.

  Second Law of Software Architecture

As an experienced architect, if someone shows me an architecture I’ve
never seen before, I can understand how it works, but I might struggle
with why the previous architect or team made certain decisions.
Architects make decisions within extremely specific contexts, making
sweeping and generic decisions difficult. Why an architect made a
particular decision includes the trade-offs they considered, adding to
the context of why this decision versus another. It turns out that one
of the defining characteristics of software architecture decisions is
they are rarely binary. This brings us to the Third Law of Software
Architecture:

  Most architecture decisions aren’t binary but rather exist on a
  spectrum between extremes.

  Third Law of Software Architecture

Throughout the book, we highlight why architects make certain decisions
along with trade-offs. We also highlight good techniques for capturing
important decisions in Chapter 21.

Readers will recognize these laws at work throughout the book, and we
recommend keeping them in mind when evaluating software architecture
decisions. We come back to these laws in Chapter 27 with some additional
examples.

With a working definition of software architecture in place, let’s move
into the role itself.

Expectations of an Architect

The role of a software architect can range from acting as an expert
programmer to defining an entire company’s strategic technical
direction. This makes trying to define it a fool’s errand, but what we
can tell you more readily is what’s expected of a software architect.
We’ve identified eight core expectations for any software architect,
irrespective of their role, title, or job description:

- Make architecture decisions

- Continually analyze the architecture

- Keep current with latest trends

- Ensure compliance with decisions

- Understand diverse technologies, frameworks, platforms, and
  environments

- Know the business domain

- Lead a team and possess interpersonal skills

- Understand and navigate organizational politics

Succeeding as a software architect depends on understanding and living
up to each of these expectations. This section looks at all eight in
turn.

Make Architecture Decisions

An architect is expected to define the architecture decisions and design
principles used to guide technology decisions within the team, within
the department, or across the enterprise.

Guide is the key word in this first expectation: architects should guide
technology choices rather than specify them. For example, deciding to
use React.js for frontend development is a technical decision rather
than an architectural decision. Instead of making this decision, the
architect should instruct the development teams to use a reactive-based
framework for frontend web development, guiding them to choose Angular,
Elm, React.js, Vue, or any of the other reactive-based web frameworks.
The key is asking whether the architecture decision will guide teams in
making the right technical choices or make the choice for them. That
said, there are some occasions where architects need to make specific
technology decisions in order to preserve a particular architectural
characteristic, such as scalability, performance, or availability.
Architects often struggle with finding this balance, so Chapter 21 is
entirely about architecture decisions.

Continually Analyze the Architecture

An architect is expected to continually analyze the architecture and the
current technology environment and recommend solutions for improvement.

Architecture vitality assesses how viable an architecture that was
defined three or more years ago is today, given changes in both business
and technology. In our experience, not enough architects focus their
energies on continually analyzing existing architectures. As a result,
most architectures experience elements of structural decay, which occurs
when developers make coding or design changes that impact the required
architectural characteristics, such as performance, availability, and
scalability.

Other frequently forgotten aspects of this expectation are testing and
release environments. Being able to modify code quickly is a kind of
agility with obvious benefits, but if it takes weeks to test the changes
and months to release, the overall architecture cannot achieve agility.

Architects must holistically analyze changes in the technology and the
problem domain to determine the ongoing soundness of the architecture.
This kind of consideration is what keeps applications relevant, even if
it rarely appears in job postings.

Keep Current with Latest Trends

An architect is expected to keep current with the latest technology and
industry trends.

Developers must keep up to date on the latest technologies, as well as
those they use on a daily basis, to remain relevant (and to retain a
job!). It’s even more critical for architects to keep current on the
latest technical and industry trends. Architects’ decisions tend to be
long-lasting and difficult to change. Understanding trends helps
architects make decisions that will remain relevant into the future. For
example, architects in recent years have needed to learn about
cloud-based storage and deployment, and as we write this second edition,
generative AI is having a massive impact on many parts of the
development ecosystem.

Tracking trends and keeping current with those trends is hard,
particularly for a software architect. In Chapter 2, we discuss some
techniques and resources for how to do this.

Ensure Compliance with Decisions

An architect is expected to ensure compliance with architecture
decisions and design principles.

Ensuring compliance means continually verifying that the development
teams are following the decisions and design principles defined,
documented, and communicated by the architect.

Imagine that you, as an architect, make a decision to restrict access to
the database in a layered architecture to only the Business and Services
layers (not the Presentation layer). This (as you’ll see in Chapter 10)
means that the Presentation layer must go through all layers of the
architecture to make even the simplest of database calls. However, a
user interface (UI) developer disagrees with this decision and gives the
Presentation layer direct access to the database for performance
reasons. You made that architecture decision for a specific reason: so
that changes to the database changes would not affect the Presentation
layer. If you aren’t ensuring compliance with your architecture
decisions, violations like this can occur. The result can be that the
architecture fails to provide the required characteristics, and the
application or system does not work as expected. In Chapter 6, we talk
about measuring compliance using automated fitness functions and other
tools.

Understand Diverse Technologies

An architect is expected to have exposure to multiple and diverse
technologies, frameworks, platforms, and environments.

Every architect isn’t expected to be an expert in every framework,
platform, and language, but they should at least be familiar with a
variety of technologies. Most environments these days are heterogeneous,
so at a minimum, architects should know how to interface with multiple
systems and services, whatever their language, platform, or technology.

One of the best ways to meet this expectation is to stretch outside your
comfort zone, aggressively seeking out opportunities to gain experience
in multiple languages, platforms, and technologies. Architects should
focus on technical breadth rather than technical depth. Technical
breadth includes the stuff you know about, but not at a detailed level,
combined with the stuff you know a lot about. For example, it’s far more
valuable for an architect to be familiar with the pros and cons of 10
different caching products than to be an expert in only one of them.

Know the Business Domain

An architect is expected to have a certain level of business-domain
expertise.

Effective software architects understand the business problem, goals,
and requirements the architecture is intended to solve, collectively
known as the business domain of a problem space. It’s difficult to
design an effective architecture if you don’t understand the
requirements of the business. Imagine being an architect at a major bank
and not understanding common financial terms like average directional
index, aleatory contracts, rates rally, or even nonpriority debt. You
wouldn’t be able to communicate with stakeholders and business users and
would quickly lose credibility.

The most successful architects we know have broad, hands-on technical
knowledge and a strong knowledge of a particular domain. They can
communicate with C-level executives and business users in language these
stakeholders know and understand, creating confidence that they know
what they’re doing and are competent to create an effective and correct
architecture.

Possess Interpersonal Skills

An architect is expected to possess exceptional interpersonal skills,
including teamwork, facilitation, and leadership.

As technologists, developers and architects tend to prefer solving
technical problems, not people problems, so exceptional leadership and
interpersonal skills are a difficult expectation. However, as Gerald
Weinberg was famous for saying, “No matter what they tell you, it’s
always a people problem.” The guidance that architects provide is not
only technical—it includes leading the development teams through
implementing the architecture. Leadership skills are at least half of
what it takes to become an effective software architect, regardless of
role or title.

The industry is flooded with software architects, all competing for a
limited number of positions. Those with strong leadership and
interpersonal skills stand out from the crowd. Conversely, we’ve known
many software architects who are excellent technologists but struggle to
lead teams, coach and mentor developers, or communicate ideas and
architecture decisions and principles. Needless to say, those architects
have difficulties holding down a job.

Understand and Navigate Politics

An architect is expected to understand the political climate of the
enterprise and be able to navigate its politics.

It might seem strange to talk about office politics in a book about
software architecture, but negotiation skills are crucial to the role.
To illustrate, consider two scenarios.

In the first scenario, a developer decides to leverage a particular
design pattern to reduce the complexity of a particular piece of
convoluted code. That’s a fine decision, and the developer does not need
to seek approval for it. Programming aspects such as code structure,
class design, design-pattern selection, and sometimes even language
choice are all part of the art of programming.

In the second scenario, the architect responsible for a large customer
relationship management (CRM) system is having difficulty controlling
database access from other systems, securing certain customer data, and
making changes to the database schema. All of these problems stem from
too many other systems using the CRM database. The architect therefore
decides to create application silos, where each application database is
only accessible from the application that owns that database. This
decision will give the architect better control over the customer data,
security, and changes.

However, unlike the developer’s decision in the first scenario, the
architect can expect almost everyone in the company to challenge their
decision (with the possible exception of the CRM application team).
Other applications need the CRM data, and if they can no longer access
the database directly, they must ask the CRM system for the data via
remote access calls. Product owners, project managers, and business
stakeholders may object to increases in their costs or effort, while
developers may feel their approach is better. Almost every decision an
architect makes will be challenged.

Whatever the objections, the architect must navigate organizational
politics and apply negotiation skills to get most decisions approved.
This can be very frustrating; most software architects started as
developers and got used to making decisions without approval or even
review. As architects, they’re now finally able to make broad and
important decisions, but they must justify and fight for almost every
one. Negotiation skills, like leadership skills, are so necessary that
we’ve dedicated an entire chapter to them (Chapter 25).

Roadmap

This book consists of three parts:

Part I: Foundations

    Part I defines the key components of software architecture, focusing
    on the two key elements of architectural structure: architectural
    characteristics and logical components. Analyzing each of these
    requires different techniques, which we cover in depth. The outputs
    of these activities provide the software architect with enough
    information to choose an appropriate architectural style to provide
    a scaffolding for the general philosophy of the implementation.

Part II: Architecture Styles

    Part II provides a catalog of architectural styles, the named
    topologies of software architecture. We show the structural and
    communication differences in each style, and provide a basis for
    comparison along a wide spectrum, including data topologies, teams,
    and physical architectures.

Part III: Techniques and Soft Skills

    Parts I and II focus on technical aspects of the job, but a major
    part of the role of software architect involves what are
    traditionally called soft skills: skills that involve other people
    instead of technology. Ironically, soft skills are often the most
    difficult for burgeoning architects to acquire, because the main
    pathways to the software architect role typically involve more
    technical than interpersonal brilliance. However, once on the job,
    architects discover that these skills are vitally important. Thus,
    Part III of our book covers some critical soft skills to help you
    succeed in the role.

Part I. Foundations

To understand important trade-offs in architecture, developers must
understand some basic concepts and terminology concerning components,
modularity, coupling, and connascence.

Chapter 2. Architectural Thinking

Architectural thinking is about seeing things with an architect’s eye—​in
other words, from an architectural point of view. Understanding how a
particular change might impact overall scalability, paying attention to
how different parts of a system interact, and knowing which third-party
libraries and frameworks would be most appropriate for a given situation
are all examples of thinking architecturally.

Being able to think like an architect first involves understanding what
software architecture is and the differences between architecture and
design. It then involves having a wide breadth of knowledge to see
solutions and possibilities that others do not see; understanding the
importance of business drivers and how they translate to architectural
concerns; and understanding, analyzing, and reconciling trade-offs
between various solutions and technologies.

In this chapter, we explore these aspects of thinking like an architect.

Architecture Versus Design

Take a moment and picture your dream house in your mind. How many floors
does it have? Is the roof flat or peaked? Is it a big sprawling,
single-story ranch house or a multistory contemporary house? How many
bedrooms does it have? All of these things define the overall structure
of the house—​in other words, its architecture. Now take a moment to
picture the inside of the house. Does it have carpeting or hardwood
floors? What color are the walls? Are there floor lamps or lights
hanging from the ceiling? All of these things relate to the design of
the house.

Similarly, software architecture is less about a system’s appearance and
more about its structure, whereas design is more about a system’s
appearance and less about its structure. For example, the choice to use
microservices defines the structure and shape of the system (its
architecture), whereas the look and feel of the user interface (UI)
screen define the design of the system.

But what about decisions such as whether to break apart a service into
smaller parts or deciding on a UI framework? Unfortunately, most
decisions such as these fall somewhere on a spectrum between
architecture and design, making it difficult to determine what should be
considered architecture.

Leveraging the following criteria can help determine whether something
is more about architecture or more about design:

- Is it more strategic in nature or more tactical?

- How much effort will it take to change or construct?

- How significant are the trade-offs?

These factors are shown in Figure 2-1, illustrating the spectrum between
architecture and design to help determine where a decision lies and who
should have the responsibility for it.

[Spectrum Between Architecture and Design]

Figure 2-1. The spectrum between architecture and design

Strategic Versus Tactical Decisions

The more strategic a decision, the more architectural it becomes.
Conversely, the more tactical a decision, the more it’s likely to be
about design. Strategic decisions are generally long-term, whereas
tactical decisions are generally short-term and usually independent of
other actions or decisions.

One good way to determine whether a decision is more strategic or
tactical is to consider the following questions:

How much thought and planning is involved in the decision?

    A decision that takes a couple of minutes is more likely to be
    tactical and hence more about design, whereas a decision requiring
    weeks of planning is likely to be more strategic and hence more
    about architecture.

How many people are involved in the decision?

    A decision made alone or with a colleague is likely more tactical
    and on the design side of the spectrum, whereas a decision requiring
    lots of meetings with many different stakeholders is likely more
    strategic and on the architectural side of the spectrum.

Is the decision a long-term vision or a short-term action?

    A decision that is likely to change soon is usually tactical in
    nature and would be more about design, whereas one that will last a
    very long time is typically more strategic and more about
    architecture.

While these questions are a bit subjective, they nevertheless help in
determining whether something is strategic or tactical, and thus more
about architecture or design.

Level of Effort

In his famous paper “Who Needs an Architect?”, software architect Martin
Fowler writes that architecture is “the stuff that’s hard to change.”
The harder something is to change, generally, the more effort is
required, placing that decision or activity toward the architectural
side of the spectrum. Conversely, something that requires minimal effort
to implement or change places it more on the design side of the
spectrum.

For example, moving from a monolithic layered architecture to
microservices would require significant effort, so it would be more
about architecture. Rearranging fields on a screen would require minimal
effort, and therefore be more about design.

The Significance of Trade-Offs

Analyzing the trade-offs of a particular decision can help a lot in
determining whether it is more about architecture or design. The more
significant the trade-offs are, the more architectural the decision
tends to be. For example, choosing to use the microservices architecture
style provides better scalability, agility, elasticity, and fault
tolerance. However, this architecture is highly complex, is very
expensive, has poor data consistency, and doesn’t perform well due to
service coupling. These are some pretty significant trade-offs. We can
conclude that this decision is more on the architectural side of the
spectrum than design.

Even design decisions have trade-offs. For example, breaking apart a
class file provides better maintainability and readability—at the cost
of managing more classes. These trade-offs are not overly significant
(especially compared to microservices’ trade-offs), so this decision is
more on the design side of the spectrum.

Technical Breadth

Unlike developers, who must have a significant amount of technical depth
to perform their jobs, software architects must have a significant
amount of technical breadth to see things from an architectural point of
view. Technical depth is all about having deep knowledge of a particular
programming language, platform, framework, product, and so on, whereas
technical breadth is all about knowing a little bit about a lot of
things.

To better understand the difference, consider the knowledge pyramid
shown in Figure 2-2. It encapsulates all the technical knowledge in the
world, which can be broken down into three levels: stuff you know, stuff
you know you don’t know, and stuff you don’t know you don’t know.

[Knowledge Pyramid1]

Figure 2-2. The pyramid representing all knowledge

Stuff you know includes the technologies, frameworks, languages, and
tools technologists use on a daily basis to perform their jobs (such as
a Java programmer knowing Java). They’re good, or even expert, at all
these things. Notice that this level of knowledge (represented by the
top part of the pyramid) is the smallest and contains the fewest things.
This is because most technologists have to pick and choose the areas in
which to develop expertise—​no one can be an expert at everything.

Stuff you know you don’t know (the middle part of the pyramid) includes
things a technologist knows a little about or has heard of but in which
they have little or no experience or expertise. For example, most
technologists have heard of Clojure and know it’s a programming language
based on Lisp, but can’t write source code in Clojure. This level of
knowledge is much bigger than the top level. This is because people can
become familiar with many more things than they can develop expertise
in.

Stuff you don’t know you don’t know is the largest part of the knowledge
pyramid. It includes the entire host of technologies, tools, frameworks,
and languages that would be the perfect solution to a problem, if only
the technologist trying to solve the problem knew that these solutions
exist. The goal in any individual’s career should be to move things from
the stuff you don’t know you don’t know into the second area of the
pyramid, the stuff you know you don’t know—and, when expertise becomes
necessary, to move things from the middle part of the pyramid to the
top: the stuff you know.

Early on in a developer’s career, expanding the top of the pyramid
(Figure 2-3) means gaining valuable expertise. However, the stuff you
know is also stuff you must maintain—nothing is static in the software
world. If a developer becomes an expert in Ruby on Rails, that expertise
won’t last if they ignore Ruby on Rails for a year or two. Keeping
things at the top of the pyramid requires a time investment to maintain
expertise. This top part represents the individual’s technical depth:
the things they know really well.

[Knowledge Pyramid2]

Figure 2-3. Developers must maintain expertise to retain it

However, the nature of knowledge changes as developers transition into
the architect role. A large part of the value of an architect is that
they have a broad understanding of technology and how to use it to solve
particular problems. For example, it’s better for an architect to know
that five solutions exist for a particular problem than to have singular
expertise in only one. The most important parts of the pyramid for
architects are the top and middle sections; how far the middle section
penetrates into the bottom section represents an architect’s technical
breadth, as shown in Figure 2-4.

[Knowledge Pyramid3]

Figure 2-4. How much someone knows about a topic is technical depth, and how many topics someone knows is technical breadth

For an architect, breadth is more important than depth. Because
architects must make decisions that match capabilities to technical
constraints, a broad understanding of a wide variety of solutions is
valuable. Thus, for an architect, the wise course of action is to
sacrifice some hard-won expertise and use that time to broaden their
portfolio, as shown in Figure 2-5. Some areas of expertise will remain,
probably in particularly enjoyable technology areas, while others
usefully atrophy.

[Knowledge Pyramid4]

Figure 2-5. Enhanced breadth and shrinking depth for the architect role

Our knowledge pyramid illustrates how fundamentally different the roles
of architect and developer are. Developers spend their whole careers
honing expertise. Transitioning to the architect role means a shift in
that perspective, which many individuals find difficult. This in turn
leads to two common dysfunctions: first, an architect tries to maintain
expertise in a wide variety of areas, succeeding in none of them and
working themselves ragged in the process. Second, it manifests as stale
expertise—the mistaken sensation that your outdated information is still
cutting edge. We see this often in large companies where the developers
who founded the company have moved into leadership roles, yet still make
technology decisions using ancient criteria (see “Frozen Caveman
Antipattern”).

Frozen Caveman Antipattern

An antipattern is what programmer Andrew Koenig defines as something
that seems like a good idea when you begin, but leads you into trouble.
A behavioral antipattern commonly observed in the wild, the Frozen
Caveman antipattern, describes architects who revert to their pet
irrational concern for every architecture. For example, one of Neal’s
colleagues worked on a system that featured a centralized architecture.
Each time they delivered the design to the client architects, the
persistent question was: “But what if we lose Italy?” Several years
before, a freak communication problem had prevented the client’s
headquarters from communicating with its stores in Italy, causing great
inconvenience. While the chances of this recurring were extremely small,
the architects had become obsessed with this particular architectural
characteristic.

Generally, this antipattern manifests in architects who have been burned
in the past by a poor decision or unexpected occurrence, making them
particularly cautious about anything related. While risk assessment is
important, it should be realistic as well. Understanding the difference
between genuine and perceived technical risk is part of the ongoing
learning process. Thinking like an architect requires overcoming these
Frozen Caveman ideas and experiences, seeing other solutions, and asking
more relevant questions.

Architects should focus on technical breadth so that they have a larger
quiver from which to draw arrows. Developers transitioning to the
architect role may have to change the way they view knowledge
acquisition. Balancing the depth and the breadth of their portfolio of
knowledge is something every developer should consider throughout their
career. But how does an architect gain technical breadth? The next
sections provide a few techniques that will help you uncover the “stuff
you don’t know that you don’t know.”

The 20-Minute Rule

As illustrated in Figure 2-5, technical breadth is more important to
architects than technical depth. But how do you stay current on all the
latest trends and buzzwords while also working full-time, developing
your career, spending time with friends, and taking care of your family?

One technique we use is the 20-minute rule. The idea is to devote at
least 20 minutes a day to learning something new or diving deeper into a
specific topic. Figure 2-6 illustrates some good places to spend your 20
minutes, such as InfoQ, DZone Refcardz, and the Thoughtworks Technology
Radar. You can learn more about unfamiliar buzzwords by looking them up
on the internet, promoting that knowledge from “the stuff you don’t know
you don’t know” into the “stuff you know you don’t know.” You could even
spend that time reading a book like this one. The point is to carve some
time out of your busy day to focus on developing your technical breadth
and thus your career.

[20 Minute Rule]

Figure 2-6. The 20-minute rule

Many technologists, when they first embrace this concept, plan their 20
minutes for lunch or after work; however, in our experience, these time
periods rarely work. It’s easy to start using lunchtimes to catch up on
work rather than take a break, and evenings are even worse, with social
plans, family time, and more after a long day. Instead, we strongly
recommend taking your 20 minutes first thing in the morning—right after
grabbing a cup of coffee or tea and, importantly, before you check your
email. Once you check email, your morning is over and your day has
started. Get your 20 minutes in while your mind is fresh and before
distractions take over.

Following the 20-minute rule will increase your technical breadth and
help you develop and maintain the knowledge that will make you an
effective software architect.

Developing a Personal Radar

For most of the ’90s and the beginning of the ’00s, one of your authors
was the CTO of a small training and consulting company. When he started
there, the primary platform was Clipper, a rapid-application development
tool for building DOS applications atop dBASE files. Until one day it
vanished. The company had noticed the rise of Windows, but the business
market was still DOS…until it abruptly wasn’t. One coworker lamented
that they couldn’t take their enormous body of now-useless Clipper
knowledge and replace it with something else. Has any group in history,
the coworker wondered, learned and thrown away so much detailed
knowledge within their lifetimes as software developers do? The
experience left a lasting impression: ignore the march of technology at
your peril.

It also taught us an important lesson about technology bubbles. When
developers, architects, and other technologists become heavily invested
in a specific technology, pouring our work and thought into it, we tend
to live in a memetic bubble. Inside the bubble, which also serves as an
echo chamber, everyone knows and cares about that technology as much as
we do. We might not even see honest appraisals from outside the bubble,
especially if the bubble was created by a technology vendor in the first
place. And when the bubble begins to collapse, there’s no warning until
it’s too late.

What we lack in our bubble is a technology radar: a living document to
help us assess the risks and rewards of existing and nascent
technologies. The radar concept comes from Thoughtworks, where Neal
serves as a director and software architect. In this section, we’ll
describe how this concept came to be and then show you how to create a
personal radar.

The Thoughtworks Technology Radar

The Technology Advisory Board (TAB) is a group of senior technology
leaders within Thoughtworks that assists the CTO in making decisions
about technology directions and strategies for the company and its
clients. To stay current, this group began producing what’s now a
biannual Technology Radar.

This had unexpected side effects. When Neal spoke at conferences,
attendees began seeking him out to thank him for helping produce the
Radar, often adding that their company had started producing its own
version. Neal also realized that this was the answer to a question
constantly asked at conference speaker panels: “How do you keep up with
technology? How do you figure out what to pursue next?” The answer, of
course, is that the speakers all have some form of internal radar.

Parts

The Thoughtworks Radar consists of four quadrants that attempt to cover
most of the software-development landscape:

Tools

    Everything from development tools like IDEs to enterprise-grade
    integration tools

Languages and frameworks

    Computer languages, libraries, and frameworks, typically open source

Techniques

    Any practice that assists software development overall, including
    processes, engineering practices, and advice

Platforms

    Technology platforms, including databases, cloud vendors, and
    operating systems

Rings

The Radar has four rings, listed here from outer to inner:

Hold

    The original meaning of the Hold ring was “hold off for now,” to
    represent technologies that were too new to reasonably assess
    yet—​technologies that were getting lots of buzz but weren’t yet
    proven. The Hold ring has evolved, and now indicates something more
    like “don’t start anything new with this technology.” There’s no
    harm in using it on existing projects, but think twice about using
    it for new development.

Assess

    The Assess ring indicates that a technology is worth exploring (such
    as through development spikes, research projects, or conference
    sessions) to see how it will affect the organization. For example,
    when mobile browsers became prominent, many large companies visibly
    went through this phase when formulating a mobile strategy.

Trial

    The Trial ring is for technologies worth pursuing. If a capability
    is in this ring, it is important to understand how to build it. Now
    is the time to pilot a low-risk project.

Adopt

    Thoughtworks feels strongly that the industry should adopt the items
    listed in the Adopt ring.

In the example view of the Radar in Figure 2-7, each “blip” represents a
different technology or technique. While Thoughtworks uses the radar to
broadcast its collective opinions about the software world, many
developers and architects also use it as a way of structuring their
technology assessment process and organizing their thinking about what
to invest time in. For personal use, we suggest altering the meanings of
the quadrants to the following:

Hold

    This can include not only technologies and techniques to avoid, but
    also habits you are trying to break. For example, if you’re an
    architect from the .NET world, you might be accustomed to reading
    the latest news and gossip on forums about team internals. While
    entertaining, this may be a low-value information stream. Placing it
    in the Hold ring serves as a reminder of what you want to avoid.

Assess

    Use the Assess ring for promising technologies that you’ve heard
    good things about but haven’t had time to assess for yourself yet.
    This ring forms a staging area for more serious future research.

Trial

    The Trial ring indicates active research and development, such as
    performing spike experiments within a larger code base. These are
    technologies worth spending time on to understand more deeply so
    that you can include them effectively in trade-off analysis.

Adopt

    Your personal Adopt ring represents the new things you’re most
    excited about and best practices for solving particular problems.

[Thoughtworks Technology Radar]

Figure 2-7. A sample Thoughtworks Technology Radar

Most technologists pick technologies on a more or less ad hoc basis,
based on what’s cool or what their employers are using—but it’s
dangerous to your career to adopt a laissez-faire attitude toward your
technology portfolio. Creating a technology radar helps you formalize
your thinking about technology and balance opposing decision criteria.
(For example, it might be harder to get a new job focused on the
“cooler” technology, whereas a more established technology might have a
huge job market but offer less interesting work.)

Treat your technology portfolio like a financial portfolio: diversify!
Choose some technologies and/or skills that are widely in demand, and
track that demand. But you might also want to try some technology
gambits, like generative AI or embedded IOT devices. Anecdotes abound
about developers who freed themselves from cubicle-dwelling servitude by
working late at night on open source projects that became popular and,
eventually, purchasable. This is yet another reason to focus on breadth
rather than depth.

Building a personal radar provides a good scaffolding for broadening
your technology portfolio—but ultimately, the exercise is more important
than the outcome. Creating the radar visualization gives you an excuse
to carve out time from your busy schedule to think about these things,
which is often the only way to accomplish this kind of thinking.

While the most important part of building your personal radar is the
conversations it generates, it also produces some very useful
visualizations. After much popular demand from technologists building
their own radar visualizations, Thoughtworks released a tool called
Build Your Own Radar. With a Google spreadsheet as input, it generates
radar visualization showing your personal radar. We encourage every
technologist to leverage it.

Analyzing Trade-Offs

Thinking like an architect is about seeing trade-offs in every solution,
technical or otherwise, and analyzing those trade-offs to determine the
best solution. The reason this is one of the critical activities of an
architect (and hence part of architectural thinking) is exemplified
through the following quote by Mark (one of your authors):

  Architecture is the stuff you can’t Google or ask an LLM about.

  Mark Richards

Everything in architecture is a trade-off, which is why the famous
answer to every architecture question in the universe is “It depends.”
While this answer might be annoying, it is unfortunately true. You
cannot Google the answer or ask an AI engine or large language model
(LLM) whether REST or messaging would be better for your system or
whether microservices is the right architecture style for your new
product, because the answer does depend. It depends on the deployment
environment, business drivers, company culture, budgets, time frames,
developer skill set, and dozens of other factors. Everyone’s
environment, situation, and problem will be different. That’s why
architecture is so hard. To quote Neal, your other author:

  There are no right or wrong answers in architecture—only trade-offs.

  Neal Ford

For example, consider an item auction system (Figure 2-8) where online
bidders bid on items up for auction. The Bid Producer service generates
a bid from the bidder and then sends that bid amount to the Bid Capture,
Bid Tracking, and Bid Analytics services.

[Bidding Example]

Figure 2-8. Auction system example of a trade-off—queues or topics?

For the asynchronous behavior in this system, an architect could use
queues in a point-to-point messaging fashion, or use a topic in a
publish-and-subscribe messaging fashion. Which one should they choose?
They can’t Google the answer. Architectural thinking requires them to
analyze the trade-offs associated with each option and select the best
(or least worst) option given the specific situation.

The two messaging options for the item auction system are shown in
Figure 2-9, which illustrates using topics in a publish-and-subscribe
messaging model, and Figure 2-10, which depicts using queues in a
point-to-point messaging model.

[Bidding Example Using Topic]

Figure 2-9. Using a topic for communication between services

[Bidding Example Using Queues]

Figure 2-10. Using queues for communication between services

The clear advantage (and seemingly obvious solution) to this problem in
Figure 2-9 is architectural extensibility. The Bid Producer service only
requires a single connection to a topic. Compare that to the queue
solution in Figure 2-10, where the Bid Producer needs to connect to
three different queues. If a new service called Bid History were to be
added to this system (to provide each bidder with a history of all of
their bids), no changes would be needed to the existing services or
infrastructure. The new Bid History service could simply subscribe to
the topic that already contains the bid information.

However, with the queue option shown in Figure 2-10, the Bid History
service would require a new queue, and the Bid Producer would need to be
modified to add an additional connection to the new queue. The point
here is that using queues means that adding new bidding functionality
requires significant changes to the services and infrastructure, whereas
with the topic approach, no changes to the existing infrastructure are
needed. Also, the Bid Producer is less coupled in the topic option,
where the Bid Producer doesn’t know how the bidding information will be
used or by which services. In the queue option, the Bid Producer knows
exactly how the bidding information will be used (and by whom), and
hence is more coupled to the system.

So far, this trade-off analysis seems to make it clear that the topic
approach using the publish-and-subscribe messaging model is the obvious
and best choice. However, to quote Rich Hickey, the creator of the
Clojure programming language:

  Programmers know the benefits of everything and the trade-offs of
  nothing. Architects need to understand both.

  Rich Hickey

Thinking architecturally means not only looking at the benefits of a
given solution, but also analyzing the associated negatives, or
trade-offs. Continuing with the auction system example, a software
architect would analyze the negatives of the topic solution as well as
the positives. In Figure 2-9, you can see that with a topic, anyone can
access bidding data, which introduces a possible issue with data access
and data security. However, in the queue model illustrated in
Figure 2-10, the data sent to the queue can only be accessed by the
specific consumer receiving that message. If a rogue service was to
listen in on a queue, the corresponding service would not receive those
bids, and a notification would immediately be sent about the loss of
data (and possible security breach). In other words, it is very easy to
wiretap a topic, but not a queue.

In addition to the security issue, the topic solution in Figure 2-9 only
supports homogeneous contracts. All services that receive the bidding
data must accept the same data contract and set of bidding data. In the
queue option, each consumer can have its own contract, specific to the
data it needs. For example, suppose the new Bid History service requires
the current asking price along with the bid, but no other service needs
that information. In this case, the contract would need to be modified,
impacting all other services using that data. In the queue model, this
would be a separate channel, and thus a separate contract that does not
impact any other service.

Another disadvantage of the topic model is that it does not support
monitoring the number of messages in the topic, so it can’t support
autoscaling capabilities. However, with the queue option, each queue can
be monitored individually and programmatic load balancing can be applied
to each bidding consumer so that each can be automatically scaled
independently. Note that this trade-off is technology specific: the
Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) can support programmatic load
balancing and monitoring because of the separation between an exchange
(what the producer sends to) and a queue (what the consumer listens to).

Given this fuller trade-off analysis, which is the better option?

It depends! Table 2-1 summarizes these trade-offs.

  Topic advantages              Topic disadvantages
  ----------------------------- -----------------------------------------
  Architectural extensibility   Data access and data security concerns
  Service decoupling            No heterogeneous contracts
                                Monitoring and programmatic scalability

  : Table 2-1. Trade-offs for topics {#trade-off-table}

Again, everything in software architecture has trade-offs: advantages
and disadvantages. Thinking like an architect means analyzing these
trade-offs, then asking questions like: “Which is more important:
extensibility or security?” An architect’s choice will always depend on
the business drivers, environment, and a host of other factors.

Understanding Business Drivers

Thinking like an architect also means understanding the business drivers
required for the success of the system and translating those
requirements into architecture characteristics such as scalability,
performance, and availability. This is a challenging task that requires
the architect to have some business-domain knowledge and healthy,
collaborative relationships with key business stakeholders. We’ve
devoted four chapters in the book to this specific topic: in Chapter 4,
we define various architecture characteristics. In Chapter 5, we
describe ways to identify and qualify architecture characteristics. In
Chapter 6, we describe how to measure each characteristic to ensure the
business needs of the system are met. And finally, in Chapter 7 we
discuss the scope of architectural characteristics and how they relate
to coupling.

Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding

One of the difficult tasks an architect faces is how to balance hands-on
coding with software architecture. We firmly believe that every
architect should code and should maintain a certain level of technical
depth (see “Technical Breadth”). While this may seem like an easy task,
it is sometimes rather difficult to accomplish.

Our first tip for anyone striving to balance hands-on coding with being
a software architect is avoiding the Bottleneck Trap. The Bottleneck
Trap antipattern occurs when an architect takes ownership of code within
the critical path of a system (usually the underlying framework code or
some of the more complicated parts) and becomes a bottleneck to the
team. This happens because the architect is not a full-time developer
and therefore must balance development work (like writing and testing
source code) with the architect role (drawing diagrams, attending
meetings, and well, attending more meetings).

One way to avoid the Bottleneck Trap is for the architect to delegate
the critical parts of the system to others on the development team and
then focus on coding a minor piece of business functionality (such as a
service or UI screen) one to three iterations down the road. This has
three positive effects. First, the architect gains hands-on experience
by writing production code while avoiding becoming a bottleneck on the
team. Second, the critical path and framework code are distributed to
the development team (where they belong), giving the team ownership and
a better understanding of the harder parts of the system. Third, and
perhaps most important, the architect is writing the same
business-related source code as the development team. This helps them
better identify with the development team’s pain points around
processes, procedures, and the development environment (and hopefully
work to improve those things).

Suppose, however, that the architect can’t develop code with the
development team. How can they still remain hands-on and maintain some
level of technical depth? The following are some tips and techniques for
architects who want to continue deepening their technical abilities:

Frequent proofs-of-concept

    Doing frequent proofs-of-concept (POCs) requires the architect to
    write source code; it also helps validate an architecture decision
    by taking the implementation details into account. For example,
    suppose an architect gets stuck trying to choose between two caching
    solutions. One effective way to help make this decision is to
    develop a working example in each caching product and compare the
    results. This allows the architect to see firsthand the
    implementation details and the amount of effort required to develop
    the full solution. It also allows them to better compare
    architectural characteristics between the different caching
    solutions, such as scalability, performance, and overall fault
    tolerance.

    Whenever possible, the architect should write the best
    production-quality code they can. We recommend this practice for two
    reasons. First, quite often, “throwaway” proof-of-concept code goes
    into the source code repository and becomes the reference
    architecture or guiding example for others to follow. The last thing
    any architect would want is for their sloppy throwaway code to be
    treated as representing their typical quality of work. Second,
    writing production-quality proof-of-concept code means getting
    practice at writing quality, well-structured code, rather than
    continually developing bad coding practices by creating quick,
    sloppy POCs.

Tackle technical debt

    Another way architects can remain hands-on is to tackle some
    technical debt, freeing the development team to work on the critical
    functional user stories. Tech debt is usually low priority, so if
    the architect doesn’t get the chance to complete a technical debt
    task within a given iteration, it’s not the end of the world and
    generally won’t impact the success of the iteration.

Fix bugs

    Similarly, working on bug fixes within an iteration is another way
    of maintaining hands-on coding skills while helping the development
    team. While certainly not glamorous, this technique allows the
    architect to identify issues and weaknesses within the code base and
    possibly the architecture.

Automate

    Leveraging automation by creating simple command-line tools and
    analyzers to help the development team with their day-to-day tasks
    is another great way to maintain hands-on coding skills while making
    the development team more effective. Look for repetitive tasks the
    development team performs and automate them. They’ll be grateful for
    the automation. Some examples are automated source validators to
    help check for specific coding standards not found in other lint
    tests, automated checklists, and repetitive manual code-refactoring
    tasks.

    Automation in the form of architectural analysis and fitness
    functions to ensure the vitality and compliance of the architecture
    is another great way to stay hands-on. For example, an architect can
    write Java code in ArchUnit in the Java platform to automate
    architectural compliance, or custom fitness functions to ensure
    architectural compliance while gaining hands-on experience. We talk
    about these techniques in Chapter 6.

Do code reviews

    A final technique to remain hands-on as an architect is to do
    frequent code reviews. While the architect is not actually writing
    code, this at least keeps them involved in the source code. Further
    benefits of code reviews include ensuring compliance with the
    architecture and identifying mentoring and coaching opportunities on
    the team.

There’s More to Architectural Thinking

This chapter forms the foundational aspects of beginning to think like
an architect. However, there’s much more to thinking like an architect
than what is described in this chapter. Thinking like an architect
involves understanding the overall structure of a system (we cover that
topic next in Chapter 3), understanding business concerns and
translating those concerns to architectural characteristics (we have
four chapters on that topic), and finally, seeing a system through its
logical components—​the building blocks of a system (we discuss that
topic in Chapter 8).

Chapter 3. Modularity

Architects and developers have struggled with the concept of modularity
for quite some time, as is evident in this quote from
Composite/Structured Design (Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1978):

  95% of the words [written about software architecture] are spent
  extolling the benefits of “modularity” and little, if anything, is
  said about how to achieve it.

  Glenford J. Myers

Different platforms offer different reuse mechanisms for code, but all
support some way of grouping related code together into modules. While
this concept is universal in software architecture, it has proven
slippery to define. A casual internet search yields dozens of
definitions, with no consistency (and some contradictions). This isn’t a
new problem. However, because no recognized definition exists, we must
jump into the fray and provide our own definitions for the sake of
consistency throughout the book.

Understanding modularity and its many incarnations in the development
platform of choice is critical for architects. Many of the tools we have
to analyze architecture (such as metrics, fitness functions, and
visualizations) rely on modularity and related concepts. Modularity is
an organizing principle. If an architect designs a system without paying
attention to how the pieces wire together, that system will present
myriad difficulties. To use a physics analogy, software systems model
complex systems, which tend toward entropy (or disorder). In a physical
system, energy must be added to preserve order. The same is true for
software systems: architects must constantly expend energy to ensure
structural soundness, which won’t happen by accident.

Preserving good modularity exemplifies our definition of an implicit
architecture characteristic: virtually no project requirements
explicitly ask the architect to ensure good modular distinction and
communication, but sustainable code bases do require the order and
consistency that this brings.

Modularity Versus Granularity

Developers and architects often use the terms modularity and granularity
interchangeably, yet their meanings are very different. Modularity is
about breaking systems apart into smaller pieces, such as moving from a
monolithic architecture style (like the traditional n-tiered layered
architecture) to a highly distributed architecture style, like
microservices. Granularity, on the other hand, is about the size of
those pieces—how big a particular part of the system (or service) should
be. However, as stated in the following quote by one of your authors,
it’s with granularity where architects and developers get into trouble:

  Embrace modularity, but beware of granularity.

  Mark Richards

Granularity causes services or components to be coupled to one another,
creating complex, hard-to-maintain architecture antipatterns like
Spaghetti Architecture, Distributed Monoliths, and the famous Big Ball
of Distributed Mud. The trick to avoiding these architectural
antipatterns is to pay attention to granularity and the overall level of
coupling between services and components.

Defining Modularity

Merriam-Webster defines a module as “each of a set of standardized parts
or independent units that can be used to construct a more complex
structure.” By contrast, in this book, we use modularity to describe a
logical grouping of related code, which could be a group of classes in
an object-oriented language or a group of functions in a structured or
functional language. Developers typically use modules as a way to group
related code together. For example, the com.mycompany.customer package
in Java should contain things related to customers. Most languages
provide mechanisms for modularity (package in Java, namespace in .NET,
and so on).

Modern programming languages feature a wide variety of packaging
mechanisms, and many developers find it difficult to choose between
them. For example, in many modern languages, developers can define
behavior in functions/methods, classes, or packages/namespaces, each
with different visibility and scoping rules. Some languages complicate
this further by adding programming constructs, such as the metaobject
protocol, to provide even more extension mechanisms.

Architects must be aware of how developers package things, because
packaging has important implications in architecture. For example, if
several packages are tightly coupled, reusing one of them for related
work becomes more difficult.

Modular Reuse Before Classes

Developers who trained in the days before object-oriented languages may
puzzle over why there are so many different separation schemes. Much of
the reason has to do with backward compatibility—not of code, but of how
developers think about things.

In March 1968, the journal Communications of the Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM) published a paper from computer scientist
Edsger Dijkstra entitled “Go To Statement Considered Harmful.” He
denigrated the common use of the GOTO statement, common in programming
languages at the time, because it allowed nonlinear leaping around
within code, making reasoning and debugging difficult.

Dijkstra’s paper helped usher in the era of structured programming
languages in the mid-1970s, exemplified by Pascal and C, which encourage
deeper thinking about how things fit together. Developers quickly
realized that most programming languages offered no good way to group
like things together logically. Thus, the short era of modular languages
was born in the mid-1980s, such as Modula (Pascal creator Niklaus
Wirth’s next language) and Ada. These languages embraced the programming
construct of the module, much as we think about packages or namespaces
today (but without the classes).

However, the modular programming era of the mid-1980s was short-lived
because object-oriented languages became popular and offered new ways to
encapsulate and reuse code. Still, language designers realized the
utility of modules and retained them in the form of packages and
namespaces. Many languages still contain compatibility features that
seem odd today but were introduced to support these different paradigms.
For example, Java supports modular paradigms (via packages and
package-level initialization using static initializers), as well as
object-oriented and functional paradigms, each with its own scoping
rules and quirks.

In this book’s discussions about architecture, we use modularity as a
general term to denote a related grouping of code: classes, functions,
or any other grouping. This doesn’t imply a physical separation, merely
a logical one. (The difference is sometimes important.) For example,
lumping a large number of classes together in a monolithic application
may be convenient; however, when it comes time to restructure the
architecture, the coupling encouraged by loose partitioning can impede
efforts to break the monolith apart. That’s why it’s useful to talk
about modularity as a concept, separate from the physical separation
that a particular platform forces or implies.

It is worth discussing the general concept of a namespace, which is
separate from the technical implementation in the .NET platform that is
also called a namespace. Developers often need precise, fully qualified
names for different software assets (components, classes, and so on) to
separate them from each other. The most obvious example that people use
every day is the internet, which relies on unique, global identifiers
tied to IP addresses.

Most languages have some modularity mechanism that doubles as a
namespace to organize things like variables, functions, or methods.
Sometimes the module structure is reflected physically: Java package
structures, for example, must reflect the directory structure of the
physical class files.

A Language with No Name Conflicts: Java 1.0

The original designers of Java had extensive experience dealing with
name conflicts and clashes, which were common in programming platforms
at the time. Java 1.0 used a clever hack to avoid ambiguity when two
classes had the same name—such as if the problem domain included a
catalog order and an installation order, both named order but with very
different connotations (and classes). The Java designers’ solution was
to create the package namespace mechanism, along with a requirement that
the physical directory structure must match the package name. Because
filesystems won’t allow two files with the same name to reside in the
same directory, this leveraged the operating system’s inherent features
to ambiguity and name conflicts. Thus, the original classpath in Java
contained only directories.

However, as the language designers discovered, forcing every project to
have a fully formed directory structure was cumbersome, especially as
projects became larger. Plus, building reusable assets was difficult:
frameworks and libraries had to be “exploded” into the directory
structure. In the second major release of Java (1.2, but called Java 2),
designers added the jar mechanism, which allows an archive file to act
as a directory structure on a classpath. For the next decade, Java
developers struggled with getting the classpath exactly right, as a
combination of directories and JAR files. Their original intent had been
broken: now two JAR files could create conflicting names on a classpath.
This is why Java developers of that era tend to have numerous war
stories about debugging class loaders.

Measuring Modularity

Since modularity is so important, architects need tools to help them
better understand it. Fortunately, researchers have created a variety of
language-agnostic metrics for this purpose. We’ll focus here on three
key concepts: cohesion, coupling, and connascence.

Cohesion

Cohesion refers to the extent to which a module’s parts should be
contained within the same module. In other words, it measures how
related the parts are to one another. An ideal cohesive module is one
where all parts are packaged together; breaking them into smaller pieces
would require coupling the parts together via calls between modules to
achieve useful results. The cautionary tale of modularity as it relates
to cohesion is exemplified in the following quote from the book
Structured Design (Pearson, 2008):

  Attempting to divide a cohesive module would only result in increased
  coupling and decreased readability.

  Larry Constantine

Computer scientists have defined a range of cohesion, measured from best
to worst:

Functional cohesion

    Every part of the module is related to the other, and the module
    contains everything essential it needs to function.

Sequential cohesion

    Two modules interact: one outputs data that becomes the input for
    the other.

Communicational cohesion

    Two modules form a communication chain in which each operates on
    information and/or contributes to some output. For example, one adds
    a record to the database and the other generates an email based on
    that information.

Procedural cohesion

    Two modules must execute code in a particular order.

Temporal cohesion

    Modules are related based on timing dependencies. For example, many
    systems have a list of seemingly unrelated things that must be
    initialized at system startup; these different tasks are temporally
    cohesive.

Logical cohesion

    The data within modules is related logically but not functionally.
    For example, consider a module that converts information from text,
    serialized objects, or streams into some other format. Its
    operations are related, but the functions are quite different. A
    common example of this type of cohesion exists in virtually every
    Java project in the form of the StringUtils package, a group of
    static methods that operate on String but are otherwise unrelated.

Coincidental cohesion

    The elements in a module are unrelated other than being in the same
    source file. This represents the most negative form of cohesion.

Despite its many variants, cohesion is a less precise metric than
coupling. Often, a particular module’s degree of cohesion is determined
at the discretion of a particular architect. Consider this module
definition:

Customer Maintenance

    - add customer

    - update customer

    - get customer

    - notify customer

    - get customer orders

    - cancel customer orders

Should the last two entries reside in this module? Or should the
developer create two separate modules? Here’s what that would look like:

Customer Maintenance

    - add customer

    - update customer

    - get customer

    - notify customer

Order Maintenance

    - get customer orders

    - cancel customer orders

Which is the correct structure? As always, it depends:

- Are these the only two operations for Order Maintenance? If so, it may
  make sense to collapse those operations back into
  Customer Maintenance.

- Is Customer Maintenance expected to grow much larger? If so, perhaps
  developers should look for opportunities to extract behavior into a
  different (or new) module.

- Does Order Maintenance require so much knowledge of Customer
  information that separating the two modules would require a high
  degree of coupling to make it functional? (This relates back to the
  prior Larry Constantine quote.)

These questions represent the kind of trade-off analysis that lies at
the heart of a software architect’s job.

Computer scientists have developed a good structural metric to determine
cohesion—specifically, Lack of Cohesion (which is a bit surprising,
given how subjective this characteristic is). A well-known set of
metrics named the Chidamber and Kemerer Object-Oriented Metrics Suite
measures particular aspects of object-oriented software systems. It
includes many common code metrics, such as Cyclomatic Complexity (see
“Cyclomatic Complexity”) and several important coupling metrics,
discussed in “Coupling”.

Chidamber and Kemerer have also developed a Lack of Cohesion in Methods
(LCOM) metric, which measures the structural cohesion of a module. The
initial version appears in Equation 3-1.

Equation 3-1. LCOM, version 1

$$LCOM = \begin{cases}
\left| P \middle| - \middle| Q \middle| , \right. & {\text{if}\mspace{720mu}\left| P \middle| > \middle| Q \right|} \\
{0,} & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}$$

In this equation, P increases by 1 for any method that doesn’t access a
particular shared field; Q decreases by 1 for methods that do share a
particular shared field. If you find this formulation confusing, we
sympathize—and it’s gradually become even more elaborate. The second
variation, introduced in 1996 (thus the name LCOM96B), appears in
Equation 3-2.

Equation 3-2. LCOM96B

$$LCOM96b = \frac{1}{a}\sum\limits_{j = 1}^{a}\frac{m - \mu(Aj)}{m}$$

We won’t bother untangling the variables and operators in Equation 3-2
because the following written explanation is clearer. Basically, the
LCOM metric exposes incidental coupling within classes. A better
definition of LCOM would be “the sum of sets of methods not shared via
sharing fields.”

Consider a class with private fields a and b. Many of the methods only
access a, and many other methods only access b. The sum of the sets of
methods not shared via sharing fields (a and b) is high; therefore, this
class incurs a high LCOM score, indicating a significant lack of
cohesion in methods.

Consider the three classes shown in Figure 3-1. Here, fields appear as
single letters inside octagons, and methods appear as blocks. In Class
X, the LCOM score is low, indicating good structural cohesion. Class Y,
however, lacks cohesion; each of the field/method pairs in Class Y could
appear in its own class without affecting the system’s behavior. Class Z
shows mixed cohesion; the last field/method combination could be
refactored into its own class.

[LCOM Modularity]

Figure 3-1. The LCOM metric, where fields are octagons, and methods are squares

The LCOM metric is useful to architects who are analyzing code bases in
order to assist in restructuring, migrating, or understanding a code
base. Shared utility classes are a common headache when moving
architectures. Using the LCOM metric can help architects find classes
that are incidentally coupled and should never have been a single class
to begin with.

Many software metrics have serious deficiencies, and LCOM is not immune.
All this metric can find is structural lack of cohesion; it has no way
to determine if particular pieces fit together logically. This reflects
back on our Second Law of Software Architecture: why is more important
than how.

Coupling

Fortunately, we have better tools to analyze coupling in code bases.
These are based in part on graph theory: because the method calls and
returns form a call graph, it can be analyzed mathematically. Edward
Yourdon and Larry Constantine’s book Structured Design: Fundamentals of
a Discipline of Computer Program and Systems Design (Prentice-Hall,
1979), which defined many core concepts, including the metrics afferent
coupling and efferent coupling. Afferent coupling measures the number of
incoming connections to a code artifact (component, class, function, and
so on). Efferent coupling measures the outgoing connections to other
code artifacts. There are tools for virtually every platform that allow
architects to analyze the coupling characteristics of code.

Why Such Similar Names for Coupling Metrics?

Why are two critical metrics in the architecture world that represent
opposite concepts named virtually the same thing, differing in only the
vowels that sound the most alike? These terms originate from the book
Structured Design. Borrowing concepts from mathematics, Yourdon and
Constantine coined the now-common terms afferent and efferent coupling.
They should really have been called incoming and outgoing coupling, but
the authors leaned toward mathematical symmetry rather than clarity.
Developers have come up with several mnemonics to help out. For
instance, a appears before e in the English alphabet, just as incoming
appears before outgoing. The letter e in efferent matches the initial
letter in exit, which helps in remembering that it represents outgoing
connections.

Core Metrics

While component coupling has raw value to architects, several other
derived metrics allow for deeper evaluation. The metrics discussed in
this section were created by software engineer Robert C. Martin, and
apply widely to most object-oriented languages.

Abstractness is the ratio of abstract artifacts (abstract classes,
interfaces, and so on) to concrete artifacts (implementations). The
Abstractness metric measures a code base’s degree of abstractness versus
implementation. For example, on one end of the scale would be a code
base with no abstractions, just a huge, single function of code (as in a
single main() method). The other end of the scale would be a code base
with too many abstractions, making it difficult for developers to
understand how things wire together. (For example, it takes developers a
while to figure out what to do with an AbstractSingletonProxyFactoryBean
abstract class, given its many layers of abstraction and ambiguous
name.)

The formula for Abstractness appears in Equation 3-3.

Equation 3-3. Abstractness

$$A = \frac{\sum m^{a}}{\sum m^{c} + \sum m^{a}}$$

Architects calculate Abstractness by calculating the ratio of the sum of
abstract artifacts to the sum of the concrete and abstract ones. In the
equation, m^(a) represents abstract elements (interfaces or abstract
classes) with the module, and m^(c) represents concrete elements
(nonabstract classes). This metric looks for the same criteria. The
easiest way to visualize this metric is to consider an application with
5,000 lines of code, all in one main() method. Its Abstractness
numerator would be 1, while the denominator would be 5,000, yielding an
Abstractness score of almost 0. That’s how this metric measures the
ratio of abstractions in code.

Another derived metric, Instability, is defined as the ratio of efferent
coupling to the sum of both efferent and afferent coupling, as shown in
Equation 3-4.

Equation 3-4. Instability

$$I = \frac{C^{e}}{C^{e} + C^{a}}$$

In the equation, c^(e) represents efferent (or outgoing) coupling, and
c^(a) represents afferent (or incoming) coupling.

The Instability metric determines the volatility of a code base. A code
base that exhibits high degrees of instability breaks more easily when
changed because of high coupling. For example, if a class calls too many
other classes to delegate work, the calling class will show high
susceptibility to breakage if one or more of the called methods changes.

Distance from the Main Sequence

One of the few holistic metrics architects have for architectural
structure is Distance from the Main Sequence, a derived metric based on
Instability and Abstractness, shown in Equation 3-5.

Equation 3-5. Distance from the Main Sequence

D = |A + I − 1|

In the equation, A = Abstractness and I = Instability.

Note that both Abstractness and Instability are fractions whose results
will always fall between 0 and 1 (except in some extreme cases). Thus,
graphing the relationship produces the graph in Figure 3-2.

[]

Figure 3-2. The main sequence defines the ideal relationship between Abstractness and Instability

The Distance metric imagines an ideal relationship between Abstractness
and Instability; classes that fall near this idealized line exhibit a
healthy mixture of these two competing concerns. For example, graphing a
particular class allows developers to calculate the Distance from the
Main Sequence metric, illustrated in Figure 3-3.

[]

Figure 3-3. Normalized Distance from the Main Sequence for a particular class

The Figure 3-3 metric graphs the candidate class, then measures its
distance from the idealized line. The closer to the line, the better
balanced the class. Classes that fall too far into the upper righthand
corner enter what architects call the Zone of Uselessness: code that is
too abstract becomes difficult to use. Conversely, code that falls into
the lower lefthand corner, as illustrated in Figure 3-4, enters the Zone
of Pain: code with too much implementation and not enough abstraction
becomes brittle and hard to maintain.

[]

Figure 3-4. The Zones of Uselessness and Pain

Many platforms provide tools to calculate these measures, which assist
architects when analyzing code bases to get familiar with them, prepare
for a migration, or assess technical debt.

The Limitations of Metrics

While the industry has a few code-level metrics that provide valuable
insight, our tools are extremely blunt compared to analysis tools in
other engineering disciplines. Even metrics derived directly from the
structure of code require interpretation. For example, Cyclomatic
Complexity (see “Cyclomatic Complexity”) measures complexity in code
bases, but this metric cannot distinguish between essential complexity
(the code is complex because the underlying problem is complex) and
accidental complexity (the code is more complex than it should be).
Virtually all code-level metrics require interpretation, but it is still
useful to establish baselines for critical metrics such as Cyclomatic
Complexity so that architects can assess which type the code base
exhibits. We discuss setting up just such tests in “Governance and
Fitness Functions”.

Yourdon and Constantine’s Structured Design, published in 1979, predates
the popularity of object-oriented languages. It focuses instead on
structured programming constructs, such as functions (not methods). It
also defines other types of coupling that are outdated because of modern
program language design. Object-oriented programming introduced
additional concepts that overlay afferent and efferent coupling,
including a more refined vocabulary to describe coupling called
connascence.

Connascence

Meilir Page-Jones’s book What Every Programmer Should Know about
Object-Oriented Design (Dorset House, 1996) created a more precise
language to describe different types of coupling in object-oriented
languages. Connascence isn’t a coupling metric like afferent and
efferent coupling—​rather, it represents a language that helps architects
describe different types of coupling more precisely (and understand some
common consequences of types of coupling).

Two components are connascent if a change in one would require the other
to be modified in order to maintain the overall correctness of the
system. Page-Jones distinguishes two types of connascence: static and
dynamic.

Static connascence

Static connascence refers to source-code-level coupling (as opposed to
execution-time coupling, covered in “Dynamic connascence”). Architects
view static connascence as the degree to which something is coupled via
either afferent or efferent coupling. There are several types of static
connascence:

Connascence of Name

    Multiple components must agree on the name of an entity.

    Method names and method parameters are the most common way that code
    bases are coupled and the most desirable, especially in light of
    modern refactoring tools that make system-wide name changes trivial
    to implement. For example, developers no longer change the name of a
    method in an active code base but rather refactor the method name
    using modern tools, affecting the change throughout the code base.

Connascence of Type

    Multiple components must agree on the type of an entity.

    This type of connascence refers to the common tendency in many
    statically typed languages to limit variables and parameters to
    specific types. However, this capability isn’t purely for statically
    typed languages—​some dynamically typed languages also offer
    selective typing, notably Clojure and Clojure Spec.

Connascence of Meaning

    Multiple components must agree on the meaning of particular values.
    It is also called Connascence of Convention.

    The most common obvious case for this type of connascence in code
    bases is hardcoded numbers rather than constants. For example, it is
    common in some languages to consider defining somewhere that
    int TRUE = 1; int FALSE = 0. Imagine the problems that would arise
    if someone flipped those values.

Connascence of Position

    Multiple components must agree on the order of values.

    This is an issue with parameter values for method and function
    calls, even in languages that feature static typing. For example, if
    a developer creates a method
    void updateSeat(String name, String seatLocation) and calls it with
    the values updateSeat("14D", "Ford, N"), the semantics aren’t
    correct, even if the types are.

Connascence of Algorithm

    Multiple components must agree on a particular algorithm.

    A common case for Connascence of Algorithm occurs when a developer
    defines a security hashing algorithm that must run and produce
    identical results on both the server and client to authenticate the
    user. Obviously, this represents a high degree of coupling—​if any
    details of either algorithm change, the handshake will no longer
    work.

Dynamic connascence

The other type of connascence Page-Jones defines is dynamic connascence,
which analyzes calls at runtime. The types of dynamic connascence
include:

Connascence of Execution

    The order of execution of multiple components is important.

    Consider this code:

        email = new Email();
        email.setRecipient("foo@example.com");
        email.setSender("me@me.com");
        email.send();
        email.setSubject("whoops");

    It won’t work correctly because certain properties must be set in a
    specific order.

Connascence of Timing

    The timing of the execution of multiple components is important.

    The common case for this type of connascence is a race condition
    caused by two threads executing at the same time, affecting the
    outcome of the joint operation.

Connascence of Values

    Several values depend on one another and must change together.

    Consider a case where a developer has defined a rectangle by
    defining four points to represent its corners. To maintain the
    integrity of the data structure, the developer cannot randomly
    change one of the points without considering the impact on the other
    points to preserve the shape of the rectangle.

    A more common and problematic case involves transactions, especially
    in distributed systems. In a system designed with separate
    databases, when someone needs to update a single value across all of
    the databases, the values must either all change together or not
    change at all.

Connascence of Identity

    Multiple components must reference the same entity.

    A common example of Connascence of Identity involves two independent
    components that must share and update a common data structure, such
    as a distributed queue.

Connascence properties

Connascence is an analysis framework for architects and developers, and
some of its properties help ensure that we use it wisely. These
connascence properties include:

Strength

    Architects determine the strength of a system’s connascence by the
    ease with which a developer can refactor its coupling. Some types of
    connascence are demonstrably more desirable than others, as shown in
    Figure 3-5. Refactoring toward better types of connascence can
    improve the coupling characteristics of a code base.

    Architects should prefer static connascence to dynamic because
    developers can determine it by simple source-code analysis, and
    because modern tools make it trivial to improve static connascence.
    For example, Connascence of Meaning could be improved by refactoring
    to Connascence of Name, creating a named constant rather than a
    magic value.

[]

Figure 3-5. Connascence strength can be a good refactoring guide

Locality

    The locality of a system’s connascence measures how proximal (close)
    its modules are to each other in the code base. Proximal code (code
    in the same module) typically has more and higher forms of
    connascence than more separated code (in separate modules or code
    bases). In other words, forms of connascence that would indicate
    poor coupling when the components are far apart are fine when the
    components are closer together. For example, if two classes in the
    same module have Connascence of Meaning, it is less damaging to the
    code base than if those classes were in different modules.

    Architects were largely unaware of the importance of this
    observation when the author first published it. In modern terms, he
    is suggesting that architects should limit the scope of
    implementation details (high coupling) as narrowly as practical,
    which is the same advice derived from domain-driven design’s (DDD)
    bounded context idea. The architectural observation is the
    same—​limit implementation coupling. Meilir-Page described a good
    design principle that was reintroduced more fully via DDD (see
    “Domain-Driven Design’s Bounded Context” in Chapter 7).

    It’s a good idea to consider strength and locality together.
    Stronger forms of connascence within the same module represent less
    “code smell” than the same connascence spread apart.

Degree

    The degree of connascence relates to the size of the impact of
    changing a class in a particular module—​does that change impact a
    few classes or many? Lesser degrees of connascence require fewer
    changes to other classes and modules and hence damage code bases
    less. In other words, having high dynamic connascence isn’t terrible
    if an architect only has a few modules. However, code bases tend to
    grow, making a small problem correspondingly bigger in terms of
    change.

In What Every Programmer Should Know about Object-Oriented Design,
Page-Jones offers three guidelines for using connascence to improve
system modularity:

- Minimize overall connascence by breaking the system into encapsulated
  elements.

- Minimize any remaining connascence that crosses encapsulation
  boundaries.

- Maximize connascence within encapsulation boundaries.

The legendary software architecture innovator Jim Weirich, who
repopularized the concept of connascence, offers two great rules from
his talk on “Connescence Examined” during the Emerging Technologies for
the Enterprise conference in 2012:

  Rule of Degree: Convert strong forms of connascence into weaker forms
  of connascence.

  Rule of Locality: As the distance between software elements increases,
  use weaker forms of connascence.

Architects benefit from learning about connascence for the same reason
it’s beneficial to learn about design patterns: connascence provides
more precise language to describe different types of coupling. For
example, an architect can tell someone, “We need a service and there can
only be one instance,” or they can tell someone, “We need a Singleton
service.” The Singleton design pattern nicely encapsulates the context
and solution to a common problem with a simple name.

Similarly, when performing a code review, an architect can instruct a
developer, “Don’t add a magic string constant in the middle of a method
declaration. Extract it as a constant instead.” Or they could say, “You
have Connascence of Meaning; refactor it to Connascence of Name."

From Modules to Components

We use the term module throughout this book as a generic name for
bundles of related code. However, most architects refer to modules as
components, the key building blocks for software architecture. This
concept of a component, and the corresponding analysis of logical or
physical separation, has existed since the earliest days of computer
science, yet developers and architects still struggle to achieve good
outcomes.

We’ll discuss deriving components from problem domains in Chapter 8, but
we must first discuss another fundamental aspect of software
architecture: architectural characteristics and their scope.

Chapter 4. Architectural Characteristics Defined

We now delve into the details of structural design, one of the key roles
for software architects. This primarily consists of two activities:
architectural characteristics analysis, covered in this chapter, and
logical component design, covered in Chapter 8. Architects may perform
these two activities in any order (or even in parallel), but they come
together at a critical join point.

When a company decides to solve a particular problem using software, it
gathers a list of requirements for that system (there are many
techniques for eliciting them, as covered in Chapter 8). We’ll refer to
these requirements as the problem domain (or just the domain) throughout
the book. You learned in Chapter 1 that architecture characteristics are
the important aspects of a system that are independent from the problem
domain and important to the system’s success. In this chapter we’ll dive
deeper into defining that term, as well as specific architectural
characteristics.

Architects often collaborate on defining the domain, but must also
define, discover, and otherwise analyze all the things the software must
do that isn’t directly related to the domain functionality:
architectural characteristics. Architects’ role in defining
architectural characteristics is part of what distinguishes software
architecture from coding and design. They must also consider many other
factors in designing a software solution, as illustrated in Figure 4-1.

[Requirements]

Figure 4-1. A software solution consists of both domain requirements and architectural characteristics

The Longevity of the Term “Non-Functional Requirements”

Many organizations describe architectural characteristics with a variety
of terms, including non-functional requirements, a term created to
distinguish architectural characteristics from functional requirements.
We dislike that term because it is self-denigrating and has a negative
impact from a language standpoint: how do you convince teams to pay
enough attention to something that’s “non-functional”? Another popular
term is quality attributes, which we dislike because it implies
after-the-fact quality assessment rather than design.

We prefer the term architectural characteristics because it describes
concerns that are critical to the success of the architecture, and
therefore the system as a whole, without discounting the importance of
these concerns. In Head First Software Architecture (O’Reilly, 2024), we
refer to architectural characteristics as the capabilities of the
system; in contrast, the domain represents the system’s behavior.

Sometimes terms get “stuck,” and non-functional requirements seems to be
a particularly sticky one among software architects. It’s still common
in many organizations. The term first started appearing in software
engineering literature in the late 1970s, around the same time as
function point analysis, an estimation technique that decomposes system
requirements into “function points” that each represent some unit of
work. Theoretically, teams could add up all the function points at the
end of the analysis process and get some insight into the project.
Sadly, it provided a veneer of certainty but was plagued by
subjectivity, as many estimation schemes are, and is no longer in use.

However, one insight that remains with us from that time is that much of
the effort involved to create a system is about that system’s
capabilities rather than its requirements. They called those efforts
non-function points, which led to the term non-functional requirements
becoming common.

Architectural Characteristics and System Design

To be considered an architectural characteristic, a requirement must
meet three criteria. It must specify a nondomain design consideration,
influence some structural aspect of the design, and be critical or
important to the application’s success. These interlocking parts of our
definition are illustrated in Figure 4-2, which consists of these three
components and a few modifiers.

[Characteristics Triangle]

Figure 4-2. The differentiating features of architectural characteristics

Let’s look more closely at these components:

An architecture characteristic specifies a nondomain design consideration.

    Structural design in software architecture consists of two
    activities by an architect: understanding the problem domain and
    uncovering what kinds of capabilities the system needs to support to
    be successful. The domain design considerations cover the behavior
    of the system, and architectural characteristics define the
    capabilities. Taken together, these two activities define structural
    design.

    While design requirements specify what the application should do,
    architectural characteristics specify how to implement the
    requirements and why certain choices were made: in short, the
    operational and design criteria for the project to succeed.

    For example, specific levels of performance are often an important
    architectural characteristic, but often don’t appear in requirements
    documents. Even more pertinent: no requirements document actually
    states that a design must “prevent technical debt,” but it is a
    common design consideration. We cover this distinction between
    explicit and implicit characteristics in depth in “Extracting
    Architectural Characteristics from Domain Concerns”.

An architecture characteristic influences some structural aspect of the design.

    The primary reason architects try to describe architectural
    characteristics on projects is to tease out important design
    considerations. Can the architect implement it via design, or does
    this architectural characteristic require special structural
    consideration to succeed?

    For example, security is a concern in virtually every project, and
    all systems must take certain baseline precautions during design and
    coding. However, security rises to the level of an architectural
    characteristic when the architect determines that the architecture
    needs special structure to support it.

    Consider two common architectural characteristics: security and
    scalability. Architects can accommodate security in a monolithic
    system by using good coding hygiene, including well-known techniques
    such as encryption, hashing, and salting. (Architectural fitness
    functions, which also fall under this umbrella, are discussed in
    Chapter 6.) Conversely, in a distributed architecture such as
    microservices, the architect would build a more hardened service
    with stricter access protocols—a structural approach. Thus,
    architects can accommodate security via either design or structure.
    On the other hand, consider scalability: no amount of clever design
    will allow a monolithic architecture to scale beyond a certain
    point. Beyond that, the system must change to a distributed
    architectural style.

    Architects pay close attention to operational architectural
    characteristics (discussed in “Operational Architectural
    Characteristics”) because they are the characteristics that most
    often require special structural support.

An architecture characteristic must be critical or important to application success.

    Applications can support a huge number of architectural
    characteristics…but they shouldn’t. Each architectural
    characteristic that a system supports adds complexity to its design.
    That’s why architects should strive to choose the fewest possible
    architectural characteristics rather than the most.

We divide architectural characteristics into implicit versus explicit
architectural characteristics. Implicit ones rarely appear in
requirements, yet they’re necessary for the project to succeed.
Availability, reliability, and security underpin virtually all
applications, yet they’re rarely specified in design documents.
Architects must use their knowledge of the problem domain to uncover
these architectural characteristics during the analysis phase. For
example, a high-frequency trading firm may not have to specify low
latency in every system because the architects in that problem domain
already know how critical it is. Explicit architectural characteristics
appear in requirements documents or other specific instructions.

In Figure 4-2, the choice of a triangle is intentional: each of the
definition elements supports the others, which in turn support the
overall design of the system. The fulcrum created by the triangle
illustrates how these architectural characteristics often interact with
one another. This is why architects use the term trade-off so much.

Architectural Characteristics (Partially) Listed

Architectural characteristics exist along a broad spectrum of
complexity, ranging from low-level code characteristics (such as
modularity) to sophisticated operational concerns (such as scalability
and elasticity). There is no true universal standard, though people have
attempted to codify one. Instead, each organization interprets these
terms for itself. Additionally, because the software ecosystem changes
so fast, new concepts, terms, measures, and verifications are constantly
appearing, providing new opportunities to define architectural
characteristics.

While the sheer volume and breadth of architecture characteristics make
it hard to quantify them, architects do categorize them. The following
sections describe a few such broad categories and provide some examples.

Operational Architectural Characteristics

Operational architectural characteristics cover capabilities such as
performance, scalability, elasticity, availability, and reliability.
Table 4-1 lists some operational architectural characteristics.

  Term                 Definition
  -------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Availability         How much of the time the system will need to be available; if that’s 24/7, steps need to be in place to allow the system to be up and running quickly in case of any failure.
  Continuity           The system’s disaster recovery capability.
  Performance          How well the system performs; ways to measure this include stress testing, peak analysis, analysis of the frequency of functions used, and response times.
  Recoverability       Business continuity requirements: in case of a disaster, how quickly the system must get back online. This includes backup strategies and requirements for duplicate hardware.
  Reliability/safety   Whether the system needs to be fail-safe, or if it is mission critical in a way that affects lives. If it fails, will it cost the company large sums of money? This is often a spectrum rather than a binary.
  Robustness           The system’s ability to handle error and boundary conditions while running, for example, if the internet connection or power fails.
  Scalability          The system’s ability to perform and operate as the number of users or requests increases.

  : Table 4-1. Common operational architectural characteristics
  {#table_chars_OAC}

Operational architectural characteristics overlap heavily with
operations and DevOps concerns.

Structural Architectural Characteristics

Architects are responsible for proper code structure. In many cases, the
architect has sole or shared responsibility for the code’s quality,
including its modularity, its readability, how well coupling between
components is controlled, readable code, and a host of other internal
quality assessments. Table 4-2 lists a few structural architectural
characteristics.

  Term                    Definition
  ----------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Configurability         How easily end users can change aspects of the software’s configuration through interfaces.
  Extensibility           How well the architecture accommodates changes that extend its existing functionality.
  Installability          How easy it is to install the system on all necessary platforms.
  Leverageability/reuse   The extent to which the system’s common components can be leveraged across multiple products.
  Localization            Support for multiple languages on entry/query screens in data fields.
  Maintainability         How easy it is to apply changes and enhance the system.
  Portability             The system’s ability to run on more than one platform (such as Oracle and SAP DB).
  Upgradeability          How easy and quick it is to upgrade to a newer version on servers and clients.

  : Table 4-2. Structural architectural characteristics {#table-struct}

Cloud Characteristics

The software development ecosystem constantly changes and evolves; the
most recent excellent example is the arrival of the cloud. When the
first edition was published, cloud-based computing existed but wasn’t
pervasive. Now, most systems have some interaction with cloud-based
systems in at least some capacity. A few of these considerations appear
in Table 4-3.

  Term                                Definition
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  On-demand scalability               The cloud provider’s ability to scale up resources dynamically based on demand.
  On-demand elasticity                The cloud provider’s flexibility as resource demands spike; similar to scalability.
  Zone-based availability             The cloud provider’s ability to separate resources by computing zones to make for more resilient systems.
  Region-based privacy and security   The cloud provider’s legal ability to store data from various countries and regions. Many countries have laws governing where their citizens’ data may reside (and often restricting it from storage outside their region).

  : Table 4-3. Cloud provider architectural characteristics
  {#table-cloud}

For this book’s second edition, we’ve added a section to each of the
architectural style chapters that describes how that style accommodates
and facilitates cloud considerations.

Cross-Cutting Architectural Characteristics

While many architectural characteristics fall into easily recognizable
categories, others fall outside them or defy categorization, yet form
important design constraints and considerations. Table 4-4 describes a
few of these.

  Term                      Definition
  ------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Accessibility             How easily all users can access the system, including those with disabilities like colorblindness or hearing loss.
  Archivability             The system’s constraints around archiving or deleting data after a specified period of time.
  Authentication            Security requirements to ensure users are who they say they are.
  Authorization             Security requirements to ensure users can access only certain functions within the application (by use case, subsystem, web page, business rule, field level, etc.).
  Legal                     The legislative constraints in which the system operates, such as data protection laws like GDPR or financial-records laws like Sarbanes-Oxley in the US, or any regulations regarding the way the application is to be built or deployed. This includes what reservation rights the company requires.
  Privacy                   The system’s ability to encrypt and hide transactions from internal company employees, even DBAs and network architects.
  Security                  Rules and constraints about encryption in the database or for network communication between internal systems; authentication for remote user access, and other security measures.
  Supportability            The level of technical support the application needs; to what extent logging and other facilities are required to debug errors in the system.
  Usability/achievability   The level of training required for users to achieve their goals with the application/solution.

  : Table 4-4. Cross-cutting architectural characteristics
  {#table-crosscut}

Any list of architectural characteristics will necessarily be
incomplete; any software project may invent architectural
characteristics based on unique factors. Many of the terms we’ve just
listed are imprecise and ambiguous, sometimes because of subtle nuance
or a lack of objective definitions. For example, interoperability and
compatibility may appear to be equivalent, and that will be true for
some systems. However, they differ because interoperability implies ease
of integration with other systems, which in turn implies published,
documented APIs. Compatibility, on the other hand, is more concerned
with industry and domain standards. Another example is learnability: one
definition is “how easy it is for users to learn to use the software,”
and another definition is “the level at which the system can
automatically learn about its environment in order to become
self-configuring or self-optimizing using machine learning algorithms.”

Many definitions overlap: availability and reliability, for instance.
Yet consider the internet protocol IP, which underlies TCP. IP is
available but not reliable: packets may arrive out of order, and the
receiver may have to ask for missing packets again.

There is no complete list of standards defining these categories. The
International Organization for Standards (ISO) publishes a list
organized by capabilities that overlaps with our list here, but mainly
establishes an incomplete category list. Here are some of the ISO
definitions, reworded to update terms and add categories to align with
modern concerns:

Performance efficiency

    Measure of the performance relative to the amount of resources used
    under known conditions. This includes time behavior (measure of
    response, processing times, and/or throughput rates), resource
    utilization (amounts and types of resources used), and capacity
    (degree to which the maximum established limits are exceeded).

Compatibility

    Degree to which a product, system, or component can exchange
    information with other products, systems, or components and/or
    perform its required functions while sharing the same hardware or
    software environment. It includes coexistence (can perform its
    required functions efficiently while sharing a common environment
    and resources with other products) and interoperability (degree to
    which two or more systems can exchange and utilize information).

Usability

    Users can use the system effectively, efficiently, and
    satisfactorily for its intended purpose. It includes appropriateness
    recognizability (users can recognize whether the software is
    appropriate for their needs), learnability (how easily users can
    learn how to use the software), user error protection (protection
    against users making errors), and accessibility (make the software
    available to people with the widest range of characteristics and
    capabilities).

Reliability

    Degree to which a system functions under specified conditions for a
    specified period of time. This characteristic includes subcategories
    such as maturity (does the software meet the reliability needs under
    normal operation), availability (software is operational and
    accessible), fault tolerance (does the software operate as intended
    despite hardware or software faults), and recoverability (can the
    software recover from failure by recovering any affected data and
    reestablish the desired state of the system).

Security

    Degree to which the software protects information and data so that
    people or other products or systems have the degree of data access
    appropriate to their types and levels of authorization. This family
    of characteristics includes confidentiality (data is accessible only
    to those authorized to have access), integrity (the software
    prevents unauthorized access to or modification of software or
    data), nonrepudiation (can actions or events be proven to have taken
    place), accountability (can user actions of a user be traced), and
    authenticity (proving the identity of a user).

Maintainability

    Represents the degree of effectiveness and efficiency to which
    developers can modify the software to improve it, correct it, or
    adapt it to changes in environment and/or requirements. This
    characteristic includes modularity (degree to which the software is
    composed of discrete components), reusability (degree to which
    developers can use an asset in more than one system or in building
    other assets), analyzability (how easily developers can gather
    concrete metrics about the software), modifiability (degree to which
    developers can modify the software without introducing defects or
    degrading existing product quality), and testability (how easily
    developers and others can test the software).

Portability

    Degree to which developers can transfer a system, product, or
    component from one hardware, software, or other operational or usage
    environment to another. This characteristic includes the
    subcharacteristics of adaptability (can developers effectively and
    efficiently adapt the software for different or evolving hardware,
    software, or other operational or usage environments),
    installability (can the software be installed and/or uninstalled in
    a specified environment), and replaceability (how easily developers
    can replace the functionality with other software).

The last item in the ISO list addresses the functional aspects of
software:

Functional suitability

    This characteristic represents the degree to which a product or
    system provides functions that meet stated and implied needs when
    used under specified conditions. This characteristic is composed of
    the following subcharacteristics:

    Functional completeness

        Degree to which the set of functions covers all the specified
        tasks and user objectives.

    Functional correctness

        Degree to which a product or system provides the correct results
        with the needed degree of precision.

    Functional appropriateness

        Degree to which the functions facilitate the accomplishment of
        specified tasks and objectives.

However, we do not believe that functional suitability belongs in this
list. It does not describe architectural characteristics but rather the
motivational requirements to build the software. This illustrates how
thinking about the relationship between architectural characteristics
and the problem domain has evolved. We cover this evolution in
Chapter 7.

The Many Ambiguities in Software Architecture

A source of consistent frustration among architects is the lack of clear
definitions for so many critical things, including the activity of
software architecture itself! The absence of a standard leads companies
to define their own terms for common things. This often leads to
industry-wide confusion, because architects either use opaque terms or,
worse yet, the same terms for wildly different meanings.

As much as we’d like, we can’t impose a standard nomenclature on the
software development world. However, to help avoid terminology-based
misunderstandings, domain-driven design advises organizations to
establish and use a ubiquitous language among employees. We follow and
recommend that advice.

Trade-Offs and Least Worst Architecture

We said earlier that architects should support only those architectural
characteristics that are critical or important to the system’s success.
Systems can only support a few of the architectural characteristics
we’ve listed, for a variety of reasons. First, support for an
architectural characteristic is rarely free. Each supported
characteristic requires design effort from the architect, effort from
developers to implement and maintain it, and perhaps structural support.

Second, architectural characteristics are synergistic with each other
and the problem domain. As much as we would prefer otherwise, each
design element interacts with all the others. For example, taking steps
to improve security will almost certainly negatively impact performance:
the application must do more on-the-fly encryption, indirection (for
hiding secrets), and other activities that can degrade performance.
Airplane pilots often struggle when learning to fly helicopters, which
have controls for each hand and each foot. Changing one control impacts
all of the others because they are synergistic. Flying a helicopter is a
balancing exercise, which nicely describes the trade-off process when
choosing architectural characteristics; they are similarly synergistic
with both other architectural characteristics and the domain design:
changing one often entails changing another. Like our belabored
helicopter pilot, architects must learn to juggle interlocking items.

Third, as we discussed previously, the lack of standard definitions for
architectural characteristics means that organizations struggle with
ambiguity. While the industry will never be able to create an immutable
list of architectural characteristics (because new ones constantly
appear), each organization can create its own list (or ubiquitous
language) with objective definitions.

Finally, not only is the number of architectural characteristics
constantly increasing, but the number of categories has increased over
the last decade as well. For example, a few decades ago, architects
cared little for operational concerns, which were considered a separate
“black box.” However, with the increased popularity of architectures
like microservices, architects and operations must collaborate more
intensely and frequently. As software architecture becomes more complex,
it tends to entangle with other parts of the organization.

Thus, it’s very rare for architects to be able to design a system and
maximize every single architectural characteristic. More often, the
decisions come down to trade-offs between several competing concerns.

Tip

Never strive for the best architecture; aim for the least worst
architecture.

Trying to support too many architectural characteristics leads to
generic solutions that attempt to solve every business problem. The
design quickly becomes unwieldy, so such architectures rarely work.

Strive to design architecture that is as iterative as possible. The
easier it is to change the architecture, the less everyone needs to
stress about discovering the exact correct thing in the first attempt.
One of the most important lessons of Agile software development is the
value of iteration; this holds true at all levels of software
development, including architecture.

Chapter 5. Identifying Architectural Characteristics

To create an architecture or determine the validity of an existing
architecture, architects must analyze two things: architectural
characteristics and domain. As you learned in Chapter 4, identifying the
correct architectural characteristics (“-ilities”) for a given problem
or application requires not only understanding the domain problem, but
collaborating with stakeholders to determine what is truly important
from a domain perspective.

There are at least three places to uncover what architectural
characteristics a project needs: the domain concerns, the project
requirements, and your implicit domain knowledge. In addition to generic
implicit architectural characteristics, such as security and modularity,
we’ve noted that some domains also include implicit architectural
characteristics. For example, an architect working on medical software
that reads from diagnostics equipment should already understand the
importance of data integrity and the potential consequences of losing
messages. Architects who work in that domain internalize data integrity,
so it becomes implicit in every solution they design.

Extracting Architectural Characteristics from Domain Concerns

Most architectural characteristics come from listening to key domain
stakeholders and collaborating with them to determine what is important
from a business perspective. While this may seem straightforward, the
problem is that architects and domain stakeholders speak different
languages. Architects talk about scalability, interoperability, fault
tolerance, learnability, and availability; domain stakeholders talk
about mergers and acquisitions, user satisfaction, time to market, and
competitive advantage. What happens is a “lost in translation” problem
where the architect and domain stakeholder don’t understand each other.
Architects have no idea how to create an architecture to support user
satisfaction, and domain stakeholders don’t understand why architects
focus so much on the application’s availability, interoperability,
learnability, and fault tolerance.

Fortunately, it’s possible to “translate” from domain concerns into the
language of architectural characteristics. Table 5-1 shows some of the
more common domain concerns and the corresponding “-ilities” that
support them. Understanding the key domain goals allows an architect to
translate those domain concerns to “-ilities,” which then forms the
basis for correct and justifiable architecture decisions. For example,
is the domain concern of time to market more important than scalability,
or should the architect focus on fault tolerance, security, or
performance? Perhaps the system requires all these characteristics
combined.

  Domain concern             Architectural characteristics
  -------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Mergers and acquisitions   Interoperability, scalability, adaptability, extensibility
  Time to market             Agility, testability, deployability
  User satisfaction          Performance, availability, fault tolerance, testability, deployability, agility, security
  Competitive advantage      Agility, testability, deployability, scalability, availability, fault tolerance
  Time and budget            Simplicity, feasibility

  : Table 5-1. Translating domain concerns into architectural
  characteristics {#table_ilities}

Composite Architectural Characteristics

When translating domain concerns into architectural characteristics, one
common pitfall is making false equivalences, such as equating agility
solely with time to market. Agility is an example of a composite
architectural characteristic: one that has no single objective
definition but rather is composed of other measurable things. There’s no
measure for agility, so architects must ask: what is agility composed
of? It includes things like deployability, modularity, and testability,
all of which are measurable.

A common antipattern arises when architects focus narrowly on just one
part of a composite, often for convenience. This is like forgetting to
put the flour in the cake batter. For example, a domain stakeholder
might say something like, “Due to regulatory requirements, it is
absolutely imperative that we complete end-of-day fund pricing on time.”

An ineffective architect might respond by focusing solely on
performance, because that seems to be the primary focus of the domain
concern. However, that approach will fail, for many reasons:

- It doesn’t matter how fast the system is if it isn’t available when
  needed.

- As the domain grows and more funds are created, the system must be
  able to scale to finish end-of-day processing in time.

- The system must not only be available, it must also be reliable so
  that it doesn’t crash as end-of-day fund prices are being calculated.

- What happens if the system crashes while end-of-day fund pricing is
  85% complete? It must be able to recover and restart the pricing where
  it left off.

- Finally, the system may be fast, but are the fund prices being
  calculated correctly?

So, in addition to performance, this architect must focus equally on
availability, scalability, reliability, recoverability, and
auditability.

Many business goals start as composite architectural characteristics.
Decomposing them, and giving the resulting characteristics objective
definitions, is part of the architects’ job. (We’ll see the importance
of this in Chapter 6.)

Extracting Architectural Characteristics

Most architectural characteristics come from explicit statements in some
form of requirements document. For example, lists of domain concerns
commonly include explicit numbers of expected users and scale. Other
characteristics come from architects’ inherent domain knowledge (one of
many reasons every architect should know their domain).

For example, suppose you’re an architect designing an application that
handles class registration for university students. To make the math
easy, assume that the school has 1,000 students and 10 hours for
registration. Should you make the implicit assumption that the students
will distribute themselves evenly over those 10 hours, and design the
system to handle a consistent scale? Or, based on your knowledge of
university students’ habits and proclivities, should you design a system
that can handle all 1,000 students attempting to register in the last 10
minutes?

Anyone who understands how much students stereotypically procrastinate
knows the answer to this question! Rarely will details like this appear
in requirements documents—yet they inform design decisions.

The Origin of Architecture Katas

Over a decade ago, Ted Neward, a well-known architect, devised
architecture katas, a clever method to allow nascent architects a way to
practice deriving architectural characteristics from domain-targeted
descriptions. The word kata derives from Japanese, where it refers to an
individual martial arts training exercise that emphasizes proper form
and technique.

  How do we get great designers? Great designers design, of course.

  Fred Brooks

Big architectural projects take time, and it’s common for architects to
design perhaps half a dozen systems in their careers. So how are we
supposed to get great architects? The key is giving aspiring architects
opportunities to practice their craft. To provide a curriculum, Ted
created the first architecture katas site, which your authors Neal and
Mark adapted and updated on the companion site for this book at
fundamentalsofsoftwarearchitecture.com. True to their original purpose,
architecture katas provide a useful laboratory for aspiring architects.

Working with Katas

The basic premise is that each kata exercise provides a problem, stated
in domain terms, a set of requirements, and some additional context
(things that might not appear in the requirements, yet could influence
the design). Small teams work on a design (consisting of architectural
characteristics analysis and diagrams) for a set time. Then the groups
share their results and vote on who came up with the best architecture.

Each kata has predefined sections:

Description

    The overall domain problem the system is trying to solve.

Users

    The expected number and/or types of users of the system.

Requirements

    Domain requirements (as expected from domain users and experts).

Additional context

    The authors updated the kata format on the previously mentioned site
    with an additional context section with important considerations,
    making the exercises more realistic.

We encourage readers to use the site to do their own kata exercise.
Anyone can host a brown-bag lunch where a team of aspiring architects
can solve a problem. An experienced architect can evaluate the design
and trade-off analysis, discussing missed trade-offs and alternative
designs either on the spot or after the fact. The designs won’t be
elaborate because the exercise is timeboxed.

Next, we’ll use an architecture kata to illustrate how architects derive
architectural characteristics from requirements. Welcome to the Silicon
Sandwiches kata.

Kata: Silicon Sandwiches

Description

    A national sandwich shop wants to enable online ordering in addition
    to its current call-in service.

Users

    Thousands, perhaps one day, millions.

Requirements

    - Allow users to place an order and, if the shop offers delivery
      service, select pickup or delivery.

    - Give pickup customers a time to pick up their order and directions
      to the shop (which must integrate with several external mapping
      services that include traffic information).

    - For delivery service, dispatch the driver with the order to the
      user.

    - Provide mobile device accessibility.

    - Offer national daily promotions and specials.

    - Offer local daily promotions and specials.

    - Accept payment online, at the shop, or upon delivery.

Additional context

    - Sandwich shops are franchised, each with a different owner.

    - The parent company has near-future plans to expand overseas.

    - The corporate goal is to hire inexpensive labor to maximize
      profit.

Given this scenario, how would you derive architectural characteristics?
Each part of the requirement might contribute to one or more aspects of
the architecture (and many will not). The architect doesn’t design the
entire system here—​considerable effort must still go into crafting code
to solve the domain design (covered in Chapter 8). Instead, look for
things that influence or impact the design, particularly structural.

First, separate the candidate architectural characteristics into
explicit and implicit characteristics.

Explicit Characteristics

Explicit architectural characteristics appear in a requirements
specification as part of the necessary design. For example, a shopping
website may aspire to support a particular number of concurrent users,
which domain analysts specify in the requirements. Consider each part of
the requirements to see if it contributes to an architectural
characteristic. But first, consider domain-level predictions about
expected metrics, as represented in the Users section of the kata.

One of the first details that should catch your eye is the number of
users: currently thousands, perhaps one day, millions (this is a very
ambitious sandwich shop!). Thus, scalability—the ability to handle a
large number of concurrent users without serious performance
degradation—is one of the top architectural characteristics. Notice that
the problem statement didn’t explicitly ask for scalability, but rather
expressed that requirement as an expected number of users. Architects
must often decode domain language into engineering equivalents.

You’ll also probably need elasticity—the ability to handle bursts of
requests. These two characteristics are often lumped together, but they
have different constraints. Scalability looks like the graph shown in
Figure 5-1.

[]

Figure 5-1. Scalability is a measure of the increase of users over time

Elasticity, on the other hand, measures bursts of traffic, as shown in
Figure 5-2.

[]

Figure 5-2. Elastic systems must withstand bursts of users

Some systems are scalable but not elastic. For example, a hotel
reservation system’s number of users, absent special sales or events, is
probably predictably seasonal. In contrast, consider a concert-ticket
booking system. As new tickets go on sale, fervent fans will flood the
site, requiring high degrees of elasticity. Often, elastic systems also
need scalability: the ability to handle bursts and high numbers of
concurrent users.

Elasticity does not appear in the Silicon Sandwiches requirements, but
you should still identify it as an important consideration. Requirements
sometimes state architectural characteristics outright, but others lurk
inside the problem domain. Is a sandwich shop’s traffic consistent
throughout the day, or does it get bursts of traffic around mealtimes?
Almost certainly the latter, so identify this potential architectural
characteristic.

Next, consider each of these business requirements in turn to see if it
calls for architectural characteristics:

Users place their order, and, if the shop offers delivery service, select pickup or delivery.

    No special architectural characteristics seem necessary to support
    this requirement.

Pickup customers are given a time to pick up their sandwich and directions to the shop (which must provide the option to integrate with external mapping services that include traffic information).

    External mapping services imply integration points, which may impact
    aspects such as reliability. For example, say a developer builds a
    system that relies on a third-party system. If those calls fail, it
    impacts the reliability of the calling system. Conversely, be wary
    of overspecifying architectural characteristics. What if the
    external traffic service is down? Should the Silicon Sandwiches site
    fail, or should it just offer slightly less efficiency without
    traffic information? Architects should always guard against building
    unnecessary brittleness or fragility into designs.

For delivery service, dispatch the driver with the order to the user.

    No special architectural characteristics seem necessary to support
    this requirement.

Provide mobile device accessibility.

    This requirement will primarily affect the user experience (UX)
    design of the application, and points toward building either a
    portable web application or several native web applications. Given
    the budget constraints and simplicity of the application, it would
    likely be overkill to build multiple applications, so the design
    points toward a mobile-optimized web application. Thus, you may want
    to define some specific performance-related architectural
    characteristics to optimize page load time and other
    mobile-sensitive characteristics.

    You shouldn’t act alone in situations like this. Collaborate with UX
    designers, domain stakeholders, and other interested parties to vet
    such decisions. For example, the business may require some behavior
    that’s only possible if you build native applications.

Offer national daily promotions and specials; offer local daily promotions and specials.

    Both of these requirements specify customizability across both
    promotions and specials. Requirement 1 also implies customized
    traffic information based on the user’s address. Based on both of
    these requirements, you might consider customizability as an
    architectural characteristic. For example, the microkernel
    architectural style (covered in Chapter 13) supports customized
    behavior extremely well by defining a plug-in architecture. In this
    case, the default behavior appears in the core, and developers write
    the optional location-based custom parts as plug-ins. However, a
    traditional design can also accommodate this requirement via design
    patterns (such as the Template Method). This conundrum is common in
    architecture and requires architects to constantly weigh trade-offs
    between competing options. We discuss particular trade-offs in more
    detail in “Design Versus Architecture and Trade-Offs”.

Accept payment online, at the shop, or upon delivery.

    Online payments imply a need for security, but nothing in this
    requirement suggests a particularly high level of security beyond
    what’s implicit. Architects can handle security with either design
    or architecture, making it a minimal architectural characteristics
    concern in this application.

Sandwich shops are franchised, each with a different owner.

    This requirement may impose cost restrictions on the architecture.
    Check the feasibility, applying constraints like cost, time, and
    staff skill sets, to see if a simple or sacrificial architecture is
    warranted.

The parent company has near-future plans to expand overseas.

    This requirement implies internationalization (often abbreviated as
    “i18n”). Many design techniques exist to handle this requirement,
    which shouldn’t require special structure to accommodate. This will,
    however, certainly drive UX decisions.

The corporate goal is to hire inexpensive labor to maximize profit.

    This requirement suggests that usability will be important, but it,
    too, is more concerned with design than architectural
    characteristics.

The third architectural characteristic we can derive from the preceding
requirements is performance: no one wants to buy from a sandwich shop
that has poor performance, especially at peak times. However,
performance is a nuanced concept. What kind of performance should you
design for? (We cover the various nuances of performance in Chapter 6.)

It’s also important to define performance numbers in conjunction with
scalability numbers. In other words, establish a baseline of performance
without a particular scale, and determine an acceptable level of
performance given a certain number of users. Quite often, architectural
characteristics interact, forcing architects to define them in relation
to one another.

Implicit Characteristics

Many architectural characteristics aren’t specified in requirements
documents, yet they make up important aspects of the design. One
implicit architectural characteristic the system might want to support
is availability: making sure users can access the site. Closely related
to availability is stability: making sure the site stays up during
interactions. No one wants to purchase from a site that drops
connections, forcing them to log in again.

Security appears as an implicit characteristic in every system: no one
wants to create insecure software. However, you might give it different
priority depending on how critical it is, which illustrates the
interlocking nature of our definition. You can consider security an
architectural characteristic if it influences some structural aspect of
the design and is critical or important to the application.

For Silicon Sandwiches, you might assume that payments should be handled
by a third party. Thus, as long as developers follow general security
hygiene (not passing credit card numbers as plain text, not storing too
much information, and so on), good design in the application will
suffice; you shouldn’t need any special structural design to accommodate
security. Remember, architectural characteristics are synergistic—each
architectural characteristic interacts with the others. This is why
overspecifying architectural characteristics is such a common pitfall.
Overspecifying is just as damaging as underspecifying characteristics
because it overcomplicates the system design.

The last major architectural characteristic that Silicon Sandwiches
needs to support, customizability, is composed of several details from
the requirements. Several parts of the problem domain offer custom
behavior: recipes, local sales, and directions that may be locally
overridden. Thus, the architecture should support custom behavior.
Normally, this would fall under application design. However, as our
definition specifies, when part of the problem domain relies on custom
structure to support it, it moves into the realm of an architectural
characteristic. This design element isn’t critical to the application’s
success, though. Remember, there are no correct answers in choosing
architectural characteristics, only incorrect ones—or:

  There are no wrong answers in architecture, only expensive ones.

  One of Mark’s famous quotes

Design Versus Architecture and Trade-Offs

In the Silicon Sandwiches kata, you would likely identify
customizability as a part of the system, but the question then becomes:
architecture or design? The architecture implies some structural
component, whereas design resides within the architecture. For Silicon
Sandwiches, you could choose an architecture style like microkernel and
build structural support for customization. However, if you choose
another style because of competing concerns, developers could implement
the customization using the Template Method design pattern, which allows
parent classes to define workflows that can be overridden in child
classes. Which option is better?

Like everything in architecture, it depends. First, are there good
reasons not to implement a microkernel architecture (such as performance
and coupling)? Second, are other desirable architectural characteristics
more difficult in one design versus the other? Third, how much would it
cost to support all the architectural characteristics in the
architecture versus in the design? This type of trade-off analysis is an
important part of an architect’s role.

Above all, it is critical to collaborate with the developers, project
manager, operations team, and other co-constructors of the software
system. No architecture decision should be made in isolation from the
implementation team (which leads to the dreaded Ivory Tower architecture
antipattern). In the case of Silicon Sandwiches, the architect, tech
lead, developers, and domain analysts should collaborate to decide how
best to implement customizability.

You shouldn’t stress too much about discovering the exactly correct set
of architectural characteristics. Developers can implement functionality
in a variety of ways. However, correctly identifying important
structural elements may facilitate a simpler or more elegant design. You
could design an architecture that doesn’t accommodate customizability
structurally, instead requiring the design of the application itself to
support that behavior (see “Design Versus Architecture and Trade-Offs”).
Remember: there is no best design in architecture, only a least worst
collection of trade-offs.

Prioritize these architectural characteristics when trying to find the
simplest required sets. Once the team has made a first pass at
identifying the architectural characteristics, a useful exercise is to
try to determine the least important one. If you had to eliminate one,
which would it be? Generally, architects are more likely to cull the
explicit architectural characteristics, since many of the implicit ones
support general success. The way we define what’s critical or important
to success assists in determining if the application truly requires each
architectural characteristic. Attempting to determine the least
applicable one can help you determine critical necessity.

In the case of Silicon Sandwiches, which of the architectural
characteristics we’ve identified is least important? Again, no absolute
correct answer exists. However, in this case, the solution could lose
either customizability or performance. We could eliminate
customizability as an architectural characteristic and plan to implement
that behavior as part of application design. Of the operational
architectural characteristics, performance is likely the least critical
for success. Of course, that doesn’t mean the developers are setting out
to build an application that has terrible performance; it simply means
this design doesn’t prioritize performance over other characteristics,
such as scalability or availability.

Limiting and Prioritizing Architectural Characteristics

One tip when collaborating with domain stakeholders to define the
driving architectural characteristics: work hard to keep the final list
as short as possible. A common antipattern entails trying to design a
generic architecture: one that supports all the architectural
characteristics. Each characteristic the architecture supports
complicates the overall system design, so supporting too many
architectural characteristics leads to greater and greater complexity.
And that’s before the architect and developers have even started
addressing the problem domain—the original motivation for writing the
software. Don’t obsess over the number of characteristics, but remember
the motivation: keeping the design simple.

Case Study: The Vasa

The original story of overspecifying architectural characteristics to
the point of ultimately killing a project must be the Vasa. It was a
Swedish warship built between 1626 and 1628 by a king who wanted the
most magnificent ship ever created. Up until that time, ships were
either troop transports or gunships—​the Vasa would be both. Most ships
had one deck—​the Vasa had two! All of its cannons were twice the size of
those on similar ships. Despite some trepidation, the expert
shipbuilders couldn’t say no to King Adolphus.

To celebrate finishing construction, the Vasa sailed out into Stockholm
harbor and shot a cannon salute off one side. Unfortunately, because the
ship was top-heavy, it capsized and sank to the bottom. In 1961,
salvagers rescued the ship, which now resides in a museum in Stockholm.

Architect and business stakeholder collaboration is crucial during
architectural characteristics analysis. However, if the architect
provides an extensive list of possible architectural characteristics and
asks the business stakeholders which ones they want the architecture to
support, what will the answer be every time? “All of them!”

Thus, architects need a technique for determining which architectural
characteristics drive structural decisions and are critical to success.
The authors have developed a number of techniques to facilitate this
effort, including an architectural characteristics “worksheet,”
illustrated in Figure 5-3 (and downloadable at
https://developertoarchitect.com/resources.html).

The worksheet is meant to be used in an interactive session managed by
an architect, who solicits stakeholders’ opinions as to the number and
details of the required architectural characteristics. On the left,
notice the seven slots to list the desired architectural
characteristics.

Why seven? Why not? Seriously, an architect needs to restrict the list
to some reasonable number—​six or eight would also work (although there
is some interesting psychology behind the number seven). The second
column includes some implicit architectural characteristics; these
appear in most systems, but sometimes architects prioritize them as
driving concerns of the application that require special design and
consideration. In those cases, the architect “pulls” the implicit
characteristics into the first column. If the first column fills and a
better item appears to displace an existing one, the architect moves it
to the “Others Considered” category.

[Architectural characteristics worksheet]

Figure 5-3. Architectural characteristics worksheet

The last step is to collaboratively choose the top three
highest-priority architectural characteristics, in any order (check the
box next to each one). This exercise allows architects to derive a
shortened, prioritized list of driving forces they can use to drive
design decisions and trade-off analysis.

Many architects and domain stakeholders want to prioritize getting to a
final list of architectural characteristics that the application or
system must support. While this is certainly a desirable outcome, in
most cases, it is a fool’s errand that will not only waste time, but
produce a lot of unnecessary frustration and disagreement with the key
stakeholders. Rarely will all stakeholders agree on the priority of each
and every characteristic. A better approach is to have the domain
stakeholders select the top three most important characteristics from
the final list (in any order). This makes it much easier to gain
consensus and fosters discussions about what is most important. All of
this helps the architect analyze trade-offs when making vital
architectural decisions.

Chapter 6. Measuring and Governing Architecture Characteristics

Architects must deal with an extraordinarily wide variety of
architecture characteristics across all different aspects of software
projects. Operational aspects like performance, elasticity, and
scalability commingle with structural concerns, such as modularity and
deployability. It benefits architects to understand how to measure and
govern architectural characteristics, rather than drown in ambiguous
terms and broad definitions. This chapter focuses on concretely defining
some of the more common architecture characteristics and discusses how
to build governance mechanisms for them.

Measuring Architecture Characteristics

Architects struggle to define architectural characteristics for a number
of reasons:

They aren’t physics

    Many architecture characteristics in common usage have vague
    meanings. For example, how does an architect design for agility or
    deployability? What about wicked fast performance? People around the
    industry have wildly differing perspectives on common
    terms—sometimes driven by legitimate differing contexts, sometimes
    accidental.

Wildly varying definitions

    Even within the same organization, different departments may
    disagree on the definitions of critical characteristics such as
    performance. Until developers, architects, operations, and others
    can unify on a common definition, how can they have a proper
    conversation?

Too composite

    Many desirable architecture characteristics are really collections
    of other characteristics at a smaller scale, as you might remember
    from our discussion of composite architectural characteristics in
    Chapter 5. For example, agility breaks down into characteristics
    such as modularity, deployability, and testability.

Decomposing composite architectural characteristics into their
constituent parts is an important part of establishing objective
definitions for architecture characteristics, which solves all three of
these problems.

When an organization agrees that everyone will use standard, concrete
definitions for architecture characteristics, they create a ubiquitous
language around architecture. This standardization allows them to unpack
composite characteristics to uncover objectively measurable features.

Operational Measures

Many architecture characteristics have obvious direct measurements, such
as performance or scalability. Yet even these offer many nuanced
interpretations, depending on the team’s goals. For example, perhaps
your team measures the average response time for certain requests—a good
example of a measure for an operational architecture characteristic. But
if your team only measures the average, what happens if some boundary
condition causes 1% of requests to take 10 times longer than others? If
the site has enough traffic, the outliers may not even show up. To catch
outliers, you might also want to measure the maximum response times.

High-level teams don’t just establish hard performance numbers; they
base their definitions on statistical analysis. For example, say a video
streaming service wants to monitor scalability. Rather than set an
arbitrary number as the goal, the engineers measure the scale over time
and build statistical models, then raise alarms if the real-time metrics
fall outside the prediction models. If they do, the failure can mean two
things: the model is incorrect (which teams like to know) or something
is amiss (which teams also like to know).

The kinds of characteristics that teams measure evolve rapidly in
conjunction with tools, targets, devices, and capabilities. For example,
recently many teams have focused on performance budgets for metrics such
as first contentful paint and first CPU idle, both of which speak
volumes about performance issues for web page users on mobile devices.
As these and myriad other things change, teams will find new things and
ways to measure them.

The Many Flavors of Performance

Many of the architecture characteristics we describe have multiple
definitions. Performance is a great example. Many projects look at
general performance: for example, how long request and response cycles
take for a web application. However, through tremendous work, architects
and DevOps engineers in many organizations have established specific
performance budgets for specific parts of an application. For example,
many organizations have researched user behavior and determined that the
optimum time for first-page render (the first visible sign of progress
for a web page in a browser or mobile device) is some fraction of a
second. Most applications fall in the double-digit range for this
metric. But for modern sites attempting to capture as many users as
possible, this is an important metric to track, and the organizations
behind such sites have built extremely nuanced measures.

Some of these metrics have additional implications for application
design. Many forward-thinking organizations place K-weight budgets for
page downloads; that is, they allow a maximum number of bytes’ worth of
libraries and frameworks on a particular page. Their rationale derives
from physics constraints: only so many bytes can travel over a network
at a time, especially for mobile devices in low-bandwidth areas.

Structural Measures

Some objective measures are not so obvious as performance. What about
internal structural characteristics, such as well-defined modularity?
This is a great example of an implicit architectural
characteristic—architects are responsible for defining components and
interactions, and want to build a sustainable structure for overall high
quality. Unfortunately, there are not yet any comprehensive metrics to
assess the quality of an architecture. However, there are metrics and
common tools that allow architects to address some critical aspects of
code structure, albeit along narrow dimensions.

One measurable aspect of code is complexity, defined by the Cyclomatic
Complexity metric.

Cyclomatic Complexity

Cyclomatic Complexity (CC) is a code-level metric designed by Thomas
McCabe Sr., in 1976 to provide an objective measure for the complexity
of code at the function/method, class, or application level. It is
computed by applying graph theory to code—specifically, decision points,
which cause different execution paths. For example, if a function has no
decision statements (such as if statements), then CC = 1. If the
function has a single conditional, then CC = 2 because there are two
possible execution paths.

The formula for calculating the CC for a single function or method is
CC = E − N + 2, where N represents nodes (lines of code), and E
represents edges (possible decisions). Consider the C-like code shown in
Example 6-1.

Example 6-1. Sample code for Cyclomatic Complexity evaluation

    public void decision(int c1, int c2) {
        if (c1 < 100)
            return 0;
        else if (c1 + C2 > 500)
           return 1;
        else
          return -1;
    }

The Cyclomatic Complexity for Example 6-1 is 3 (3 – 2 + 2), shown in
Figure 6-1.

[fsa2 0601]

Figure 6-1. Cyclomatic Complexity graph for the decision function

The number 2 appearing in the Cyclomatic Complexity formula represents a
simplification for a single function/method. For fan-out calls to other
methods (known as connected components in graph theory), the more
general formula is CC = E − N + 2P, where P represents the number of
connected components.

Architects and developers universally agree that overly complex code
represents a “code smell”—something that appears in code that is so bad
that it has an imaginary odor. It harms virtually every one of the
desirable characteristics of code bases: modularity, testability,
deployability, and so on. If teams don’t keep an eye on gradually
growing complexity, it will dominate the code base.

Cyclomatic Complexity is a great example of the bluntness of the metrics
that architects have available. While it measures the complexity of
code, it cannot determine whether that complexity is essential (because
we’re solving a complicated problem) or accidental (because we’ve
implemented a poor design). Metrics like CC are extremely useful for
assessing code, whether it’s written by developers or generative AI.
Generative AI tends to solve problems by brute force, often leading to
accidental complexity.

What’s a Good Value for Cyclomatic Complexity?

A common question the authors receive when talking about this subject
is: what’s a good threshold value for CC? Of course, like all questions
in software architecture, the answer is: it depends! Specifically, it
depends on the complexity of the problem domain. For example, if you
have an algorithmically complex problem, the solution will yield complex
functions. Some of the key aspects of CC for architects to monitor: are
functions complex because of the problem domain or because of poor
coding? Alternatively, is the code partitioned poorly? In other words,
could a large method be broken down into smaller, logical chunks,
distributing the work (and complexity) into more well-factored methods?

In general, the industry thresholds for CC suggest that a value under 10
is acceptable, barring other considerations such as complex domains. We
consider that threshold very high and would prefer code to fall under
five, indicating cohesive, well-factored code. A metrics tool in the
Java world, Crap4J, attempts to determine how poor (crappy) your code is
by evaluating a combination of CC and code coverage; if CC grows to over
50, no amount of code coverage rescues that code from crappiness. The
most terrifying professional artifact Neal ever encountered was a single
C function that served as the heart of a commercial software package
whose CC was over 800! It was a single function with over 4,000 lines of
code, including liberal use of GOTO statements (to escape impossibly
deeply nested loops).

Engineering practices like test-driven development (TDD) have the
beneficial side effect of generating smaller, less complex methods on
average for a given problem domain. When practicing TDD, developers try
to write a simple test, then write the smallest amount of code to pass
the test. This focus on discrete behavior and good test boundaries
encourages well-factored, highly cohesive methods that exhibit low CC.

Process Measures

Some architecture characteristics intersect with software development
processes. For example, agility often appears as a desirable feature.
However, it is a composite architecture characteristic, made up of
features such as testability and deployability.

Testability is measurable through code-coverage tools for virtually all
platforms that report on what percentage of the code the tests execute.
Like all software checks, though, these cannot replace thinking and
intent. For example, a code base can have 100% code coverage, yet use
poor assertions that don’t actually provide confidence in the code’s
correctness.

Testability is an objectively measurable characteristic, as is
deployability. Deployability metrics include percentage of successful
deployments, how long deployments take, and issues/bugs raised by
deployments. Every team must arrive at a good set of measurements that
capture useful qualitative and quantitative data for their
organization’s and team’s priorities and goals.

While agility and its related parts clearly relate to the software
development process, that process may influence the structure of the
architecture. For example, if ease of deployment and testability are
high priorities, the architect would emphasize good modularity and
isolation at the architecture level—an example of an architecture
characteristic driving a structural decision. Virtually anything within
the scope of a software project can rise to the level of an architecture
characteristic if it manages to meet our three criteria, forcing an
architect to make significant decisions to account for it.

Governance and Fitness Functions

Once architects establish and prioritize architecture characteristics,
how can they make sure that developers will respect those priorities and
implement their designs correctly and safely, regardless of schedule
pressure? On many software projects, urgency dominates, yet architects
still need tools and techniques to provide architectural governance.
Modularity is a great example of an aspect of architecture that is
important but not urgent.

Governing Architecture Characteristics

Governance, derived from the Greek word kubernan (to steer) is an
important responsibility of the architect role. As the name implies, its
scope covers any aspect of the software development process that
architects want to influence. For example, ensuring software quality
falls under architectural governance because neglecting it can lead to
disastrous quality problems.

Fortunately, architects have increasingly sophisticated solutions to
this problem—a good example of incremental growth within the software
development ecosystem’s capabilities. The drive toward automation
spawned by Extreme Programming created continuous integration (CI). CI
led to further automation in operations, which we now call DevOps, and
this chain continues through to architectural governance. The book
Building Evolutionary Architectures (O’Reilly, 2022) by Neal Ford et al.
describes a family of techniques called fitness functions used to
automate many aspects of architecture governance. We’ll spend the rest
of this chapter looking at fitness functions.

Fitness Functions

The word evolutionary in the title Building Evolutionary Architectures
comes more from evolutionary computing than from biology. One of the
authors, Dr. Rebecca Parsons, spent some time in the evolutionary
computing space, including working with tools like genetic algorithms.
When a developer designs a genetic algorithm to produce some beneficial
outcome, they often want to guide the algorithm by providing an
objective measure of the quality of its outcome. That guidance mechanism
is called a fitness function: an object function used to assess how
close the output comes to achieving its aim.

For example, suppose you need to solve the traveling salesperson
problem, a famous problem used as a basis for machine learning. Given a
salesperson, a list of cities they must visit, and the distances between
those cities, what is the optimum possible route—minimizing distance,
time, and cost? If you design a genetic algorithm to solve this problem,
you might use one fitness function to evaluate the length of the route
and another to evaluate the overall cost associated with the route. Yet
another might evaluate the time the traveling salesperson is away.

Practices in evolutionary architecture borrow this concept to create an
architectural fitness function: any mechanism that provides an objective
integrity assessment of some architecture characteristic or combination
of architecture characteristics.

Fitness functions are not some new framework for architects to download.
Rather, they offer a new perspective on many existing tools. Notice in
the definition the phrase any mechanism—the verification techniques for
architecture characteristics are as varied as the characteristics are.
Fitness functions overlap many existing verification mechanisms,
depending on the way they are used: in chaos engineering or as metrics,
monitors, or unit testing libraries (see Figure 6-2).

[]

Figure 6-2. The mechanisms of fitness functions

Many different tools may be used to implement fitness functions,
depending on the architecture characteristics. Let’s look at a couple of
examples of fitness functions that test various aspects of modularity.

Cyclic dependencies

Modularity is an implicit architecture characteristic that most
architects care about. Because poorly maintained modularity harms the
structure of a code base, architects generally place a high priority on
maintaining good modularity. However, on many platforms, there are
forces working against those good intentions. For example, when coding
in any popular Java or .NET development environment, as soon as a
developer references a class not already imported, the IDE helpfully
presents a dialog asking if they would like to auto-import the
reference. This occurs so often that most programmers reflexively swat
the auto-import dialog away. But arbitrarily importing classes between
components can spell disaster for modularity. For example, Figure 6-3
illustrates Cyclic Dependencies, a particularly damaging antipattern
that architects aspire to avoid.

In Figure 6-3, each component references something in the other
components. Having a network like this damages modularity, because it’s
impossible to reuse a single component without bringing the others
along. And if those other components are coupled to other components?
The architecture will tend more and more toward the Big Ball of Mud
antipattern. How can architects govern this behavior without constantly
looking over the developers’ shoulders? Code reviews help, but happen
too late in the development cycle to be fully effective. If the
development team imports rampantly across the code base for a week until
the code review, they’ve already done serious damage to the code base.

[]

Figure 6-3. Cyclic dependencies between components

The solution to this problem is to write a fitness function to look
after cycles, as shown in Example 6-2.

Example 6-2. Fitness function to detect component cycles

    public class CycleTest {
        private JDepend jdepend;

        @BeforeEach
        void init() {
          jdepend = new JDepend();
          jdepend.addDirectory("/path/to/project/persistence/classes");
          jdepend.addDirectory("/path/to/project/web/classes");
          jdepend.addDirectory("/path/to/project/thirdpartyjars");
        }

        @Test
        void testAllPackages() {
          Collection packages = jdepend.analyze();
          assertEquals("Cycles exist", false, jdepend.containsCycles());
        }
    }

This code uses the metrics tool JDepend to check the dependencies
between packages. The tool understands the structure of Java packages
and fails the test if it finds any cycles. An architect can wire this
test into a project’s continuous build on and stop worrying about
trigger-happy developers accidentally introducing cycles. This is a
great example of a fitness function guarding the important rather than
urgent practices of software development: it’s an important concern for
architects, yet has little impact on day-to-day coding.

Distance from the Main Sequence fitness function

In “Coupling”, we introduced the more esoteric metric of Distance from
the Main Sequence, which can also be verified using fitness functions,
as shown in Example 6-3.

Example 6-3. Distance from the Main Sequence fitness function

    @Test
    void AllPackages() {
        double ideal = 0.0;
        double tolerance = 0.5; // project-dependent
        Collection packages = jdepend.analyze();
        Iterator iter = packages.iterator();
        while (iter.hasNext()) {
          JavaPackage p = (JavaPackage)iter.next();
          assertEquals("Distance exceeded: " + p.getName(),
            ideal, p.distance(), tolerance);
        }
    }

This code uses JDepend to establish a threshold for acceptable values,
failing the test if a class falls outside the range. (The tool ArchUnit,
highlighted in the next section, allows architects to create similar
fitness functions.) This example of an objective measure for an
architecture characteristic illustrates the importance of collaboration
between developers and architects when designing and implementing
fitness functions. The intent is not for a group of architects to ascend
to an ivory tower and develop esoteric fitness functions that developers
cannot understand—it’s to implement automated governance rules that
ensure the quality of the code base.

Tip

Architects must ensure that developers understand the purpose of a
fitness function before imposing it on them.

The sophistication of fitness function tools has increased over the last
few years, especially as some special-purpose tools have emerged. One
such tool is ArchUnit, a Java testing framework inspired by—and
using—several parts of the JUnit ecosystem. ArchUnit provides a variety
of predefined governance rules, codified as unit tests, and allows
architects to write specific tests that address modularity. Consider the
layered architecture illustrated in Figure 6-4.

[]

Figure 6-4. Layered architecture

When designing a layered monolith such as the one in Figure 6-4, the
architect defines the layers for good reasons (we describe these
motivations, trade-offs, and other aspects in Chapter 10). However, some
developers may not understand the importance of these patterns, while
others may adopt a “better to ask forgiveness than permission” attitude
because of some overriding local concern, such as performance. But
allowing them to erode the reasons for the architecture will hurt the
long-term health of the architecture.

ArchUnit allows architects to address this problem via a fitness
function, shown in Example 6-4.

Example 6-4. ArchUnit fitness function to govern layers

    layeredArchitecture()
        .layer("Controller").definedBy("..controller..")
        .layer("Service").definedBy("..service..")
        .layer("Persistence").definedBy("..persistence..")

        .whereLayer("Controller").mayNotBeAccessedByAnyLayer()
        .whereLayer("Service").mayOnlyBeAccessedByLayers("Controller")
        .whereLayer("Persistence").mayOnlyBeAccessedByLayers("Service")

In Example 6-4, the architect defines the desirable relationship between
layers and writes a verification fitness function to govern it.

There is a similar tool in the .NET space, NetArchTest. Example 6-5
shows a layer verification in C#.

Example 6-5. NetArchTest for layer dependencies

    // Classes in the presentation should not directly reference repositories
    var result = Types.InCurrentDomain()
        .That()
        .ResideInNamespace("NetArchTest.SampleLibrary.Presentation")
        .ShouldNot()
        .HaveDependencyOn("NetArchTest.SampleLibrary.Data")
        .GetResult()
        .IsSuccessful;

Our discussion of testability highlights a problem with any metric or
measurement: the possibility that developers will try to game the
system. Once they learn how architects are measuring compliance, they
may code to the metric rather than build the correct thing. For example,
a common failing of testability occurs when developers who are taking
shortcuts write unit tests, but without any assertions. “Touching” the
code but not verifying that it works amounts to cheating on the
code-coverage metric. Writing governance code using tools like ArchUnit
helps architects prevent this behavior by ensuring that every unit test
includes at least one assertion. Of course, dedicated rule-breakers will
always find a way, but fitness functions like this prevent accidental
lapses.

Another example of fitness functions is Netflix’s “Chaos Monkey” and the
attendant Simian Army. When Netflix decided to move its operations to
Amazon’s cloud, the architects no longer had control over operations,
which worried them: what would happen if a defect appeared
operationally? To solve this problem, they spawned the discipline of
chaos engineering. The Chaos Monkey essentially acts as a production
fitness function, simulating general chaos to see how well the system
can endure it. Latency was a problem with some AWS instances, so the
Chaos Monkey would simulate high latency. (In fact, this was such a
problem, they eventually created a specialized Latency Monkey). This led
them to develop additional tools: for instance, the Chaos Kong, which
simulates an entire Amazon datacenter failure, has helped Netflix avoid
such outages when they occur for real.

In particular, the Conformity, Security, and Janitor “Monkeys” (fitness
functions) exemplify the automated-governance approach. The Conformity
Monkey allows Netflix architects to define governance rules enforced by
the monkey in production. For example, if they decide that each service
should respond without errors for all requests, they build that check
into the Conformity Monkey. The Security Monkey checks each service for
well-known security defects, like ports that shouldn’t be active and
configuration errors.

Finally, the Janitor Monkey looks for instances to which no other
services route anymore. Netflix has an evolutionary architecture, so
developers routinely migrate to newer services, leaving old services
running with no collaborators. Because running services on the cloud
consumes money, the Janitor Monkey looks for orphan services and
disintegrates them out of production.

Chaos engineering offers an interesting new perspective on architecture:
it’s not a question of if something will eventually break, but when.
Anticipating those breakages and testing to prevent them makes systems
much more robust. A book by some of the Netflix innovators, Casey
Rosenthal and Nora Jones, called Chaos Engineering (O’Reilly, 2020)
highlights this approach.

Atul Gawande’s influential book The Checklist Manifesto (Metropolitan,
2009) describes how professionals such as airline pilots and surgeons
use checklists. (Sometimes they’re even legally mandated to do so.) It’s
not because those professionals don’t know their jobs or are forgetful.
Rather, when professionals do a highly detailed job over and over, it
becomes easy for details to slip by them; a succinct checklist forms an
effective reminder.

This is the correct perspective on fitness functions—they are not a
heavyweight governance mechanism, but a mechanism for architects to
express and automatically verify important architectural principles.
Developers know that they shouldn’t release insecure code, but that
competes with dozens or hundreds of other priorities. Tools like the
Security Monkey, and fitness functions generally, allow architects to
build important governance checks into the substrate of the
architecture.

Chapter 7. The Scope of Architectural Characteristics

Software architects’ thinking must evolve with our ecosystem, and
nowhere is that more apparent than in scoping architectural
characteristics. Many of the outdated frameworks for determining
architectural characteristics had a fatal flaw: assuming one set of
architectural characteristics for the entire system. While that is
sometimes still true, many modern architectures, like microservices,
contain different architectural characteristics at the service and
system levels.

The scope of architectural characteristics is a useful measure for
architects, especially in determining the most appropriate architecture
style to use as a starting point for implementation. When we were
writing our book Building Evolutionary Architectures, we needed a
technique to measure the structural evolvability of particular
architecture styles. None of the existing measures offered the correct
level of detail. The section “Structural Measures” discusses a variety
of code-level metrics that allow architects to analyze structural
aspects of an architecture—but none of these metrics reflects scope.
They reveal low-level details about the code, but can’t evaluate
dependent components outside the code base (such as databases) that
affect many architectural characteristics, especially operational ones.
No matter how much effort an architect puts into designing a code base
to be performant or elastic, if the system’s database doesn’t match
those characteristics, their effort won’t be successful.

Failing to find a good measure of scope, we developed one. We call it
architecture quantum.

Architectural Quanta and Granularity

Component-level coupling isn’t the only thing that binds software
together. Many business concepts bind parts of the system together
semantically, creating functional cohesion. To design, analyze, and
evolve software successfully, architects and developers must consider
all the coupling points that could break.

Plurals for Latin-Derived Technical Terms

Quantum originates in Latin, which means that the plural ends with an a.
If you have more than one quantum, you have quanta—like the more common
data, also derived from Latin. Architects rarely discuss a single datum.
The Chicago Manual of Style usage guide notes: “Though originally this
word was a plural of datum, it is now commonly treated as a mass noun
and coupled with a singular verb” (18th edition, 2024, p. 336).

Many science-literate architects know of the concept of a quantum from
physics, where it refers to the smallest possible amount of
something—​usually energy. The word quantum derives from Latin, meaning
“how great” or “how much.” In general usage, it tends to mean “small,
unbreakable thing,” which is how we define an architecture quantum.
Another common informal definition of architecture quantum is “the
smallest part of the system that runs independently.” For example,
microservices often form architecture quanta, which exemplifies this
definition: a service can run independently within the architecture,
including its own data and other dependencies.

An architecture quantum establishes the scope for a set of architectural
characteristics. It features:

- Independent deployment from other parts of the architecture

- High functional cohesion

- Low external implementation static coupling

- Synchronous communication with other quanta

This definition contains several parts. Let’s break them down:

Establishes the scope for a set of architectural characteristics

    Architects use the architecture quantum as a boundary delineating a
    set of architectural characteristics, particularly operational ones.
    Because it is independently deployable and has high functional
    cohesion (discussed next), the architecture quantum provides a
    useful measure of architecture modularity.

Independently deployable

    An architecture quantum includes all the necessary components to
    function independently from other parts of the architecture. For
    example, if an application uses a database, that database is part of
    the quantum, because the system won’t function without it. This
    requirement means that virtually all legacy systems that are
    deployed using a single database, by definition, form a quantum of
    one. However, in the microservices architecture style, each service
    includes its own database (part of the bounded context driving
    philosophy, described in detail in Chapter 18). This creates
    multiple quanta within that architecture, because each service has
    its own architectural characteristics scope.

High functional cohesion

    Cohesion in component design refers to how unified the contained
    code is in its purpose. For example, a Customer component, with
    properties and methods all pertaining to a Customer entity, exhibits
    high cohesion. A Utility component with a random collection of
    miscellaneous methods would not. High functional cohesion implies
    that an architecture quantum does something purposeful. This
    distinction matters little in traditional monolithic applications
    with a single database, where the cohesion is essentially the entire
    system. However, in distributed architectures like event-driven or
    microservices, architects are more likely to design each service to
    match a single workflow (a bounded context, as described in
    “Domain-Driven Design’s Bounded Context”), so that service would
    exhibit high functional cohesion.

Domain-Driven Design’s Bounded Context

Eric Evans’s book Domain-Driven Design (Addison-Wesley Professional,
2003) has deeply influenced modern architectural thinking. Domain-driven
design (DDD) is a modeling technique that allows architects to decompose
complex problem domains in an organized way. DDD defines a bounded
context, where everything related to a portion of the domain is visible
internally but opaque to other bounded contexts.

Before DDD, architects sought to reuse code holistically across common
entities within the organization. But they found that creating common
shared artifacts causes a host of problems, such as tight coupling, more
difficult coordination, and increased complexity. The bounded-context
concept recognizes that each entity works best within a localized
context. Thus, instead of creating a unified Customer class across the
entire organization, each problem domain can create its own Customer
class and reconcile the differences at communication points with other
domains.

To clarify the next parts of the definition, we need to make some finer
distinctions about the types of coupling:

Semantic coupling

    Semantic coupling describes the natural coupling of the problem for
    which an architect is building a solution. For example, an
    order-processing application’s inherent coupling includes things
    like inventory, catalogs, shopping carts, customers, and sales. The
    nature of the problem that motivates building a software solution
    defines this coupling. Architects have few techniques that prevent
    changes to the domain from rippling out through the system: a change
    to the domain (and therefore the semantics) means we’re changing the
    requirements for the system. While architects can adapt to that, no
    magical architecture pattern prevents changing the core problem from
    affecting the architecture.

Implementation coupling

    Implementation coupling describes how an architect and team decide
    to implement particular dependencies. In an order-processing
    application, the team must consider a variety of constraints in
    setting domain boundaries. For example, should all the data reside
    in a single database, or should some of it be split apart for better
    scalability or availability? Should we build a monolith or a
    distributed architecture? The answers to these questions have little
    effect on the system’s semantic coupling, but greatly affect
    architectural decisions.

Static coupling

    Static coupling refers to the “wiring” of an architecture—​how
    services depend upon one another. Two services are part of the same
    architecture quantum if they both depend on the same coupling point.
    For example, let’s say that two microservices, Catalog and Shipping,
    need to share address information, so they both create a dependency
    to a shared component. Because both services are coupled to that
    dependency, they are part of the same architecture quantum.

    Here’s an easy way to think about coupling in software architecture:
    two things are coupled if changing one might break the other. Static
    coupling defines the scope dependencies in an architecture. For
    example, if several services use the same relational database, they
    are part of the same quantum.

Dynamic coupling

    Dynamic coupling describes the forces involved when architecture
    quanta must communicate with each other. For example, when two
    services are running, they must communicate to form workflows and
    perform tasks within the system. Architects must consider the
    trade-offs when communicating between services in a distributed
    architecture, which is discussed in detail in Chapter 15.

With these definitions in hand, we can complete our architecture quantum
definition:

Low external implementation static coupling

    The level of implementation coupling between architecture quanta
    should be low. This characteristic is also derived from the DDD
    philosophy of low coupling between bounded contexts. Quanta form the
    operational building blocks of architecture that sit one level of
    abstraction higher than components. They often overlap with service
    boundaries. This goal reflects architects’ general preference for
    loose coupling between different parts of the architecture.

In general, tight coupling is desirable when high cohesion is required,
such as within a service or subsystem. We call an architecture “brittle”
when a single implementation change can cause unexpected rippling side
effects that break many other (ostensibly unrelated) things. The broader
the scope of the system’s coupling, the more loose coupling helps to
make the architecture less brittle. For example, an architect might
rename a field in a service call from State to StateCode, thinking it
will only affect one caller, only to discover that many other
dependencies have just broken unexpectedly.

Tip

Higher coupling is allowed for narrower scopes; the broader the scope,
the looser the coupling should be.

Synchronous Communication

Communication refers to dynamic coupling—when architecture quanta call
each other, which is common in distributed architectures. This
particularly concerns the family of operational architectural
characteristics described in “Operational Architectural
Characteristics”, because they often determine important timing and
blocking in distributed architectures.

For example, consider a microservices architecture with a Payment
service and an Auction service. When an auction ends, the Auction
service sends payment information synchronously to the Payment service.
However, let’s say that the Payment service can only handle one payment
every 500 ms. What happens when a large number of auctions end at once?
The two services have different operational architectural
characteristics. The first call will work, but then calls will start
failing because the Payment service can’t handle the number of
requests—​it isn’t as scalable as the Auction service.

We call out synchronous communication here because asynchronous
communication has less potential impact. For example, if the Auction
service calls the Payment service asynchronously, using a message queue,
the queue can act as a buffer to allow the two systems to operate. Of
course, if the Auction service continually sends more messages than
Payment can handle, it will eventually overflow the message queue.
However, when the flood of messages comes in bursts, the queue can hold
on to pending messages until the receiver is ready. Synchronous
communication is unforgiving in distributed architectures, especially if
parts of the architecture have different architectural characteristics.
Chapter 15 thoroughly covers the types of communication in event-driven
architectures.

The concept of architecture quantum provides a new way to think about
scope. In modern systems, architects define architectural
characteristics at the quantum level rather than the system level. This
provides important information when analyzing a new problem domain.

The Impact of Scoping

Architects can use the scope of architectural characteristics to help
determine appropriate service boundaries illustrated overall in the
decision tree in Figure 7-1 and further detailed in the steps.

[A decision tree that uses architectural characteristics scope to help
determine architectural style]

Figure 7-1. A decision tree that uses architectural characteristics scope to help determine architectural style

Scoping and Architectural Style

Determining the quantum boundaries of the problem domain helps in
choosing an architectural style: is a monolithic architecture or
distributed architecture most suitable? Consider the first part of the
decision chart shown in Figure 7-2.

[Choosing an appropriate architectural style based on architectural
characteristics]

Figure 7-2. Choosing an appropriate architectural style based on architectural characteristics

As we discussed in Chapter 4, architects must analyze architectural
characteristics and the domain to determine the most appropriate
architectural style. Part of this analysis concerns whether the solution
needs multiple groups of architectural characteristics. In step one in
Figure 7-2, the architect determines if the system can succeed with a
single set of architectural characteristics, or if more than one group
is required (see “Kata: Going Green” for an example).

If the architect determines that a single set of architectural
characteristics will suffice, they can choose a monolithic architecture,
reducing the number of subsequent choices. If they choose a distributed
architecture, the next step is to determine its quantum boundaries, as
shown in Figure 7-3.

[For distributed architectures, architects must choose the appropriate
quantum boundaries]

Figure 7-3. In distributed architectures, architects must choose the appropriate quantum boundaries

We provide some guidelines for determining granularity in Chapter 18.
The next step is choosing a persistence mechanism, which concerns both
architecture families, shown in Figure 7-4.

[Both architecture styles generally require persistence of some kind]

Figure 7-4. Both architecture styles generally require persistence of some kind

For monolithic architectures, a single monolithic database is generally
suitable. The architecture and database are developed and deployed
together, in lockstep. This completes the process—​the architect can move
on to choosing the most appropriate monolithic style.

Distributed architectures, on the other hand, can use a single database
(common in event-driven architectures) or partition the data along the
lines of the service granularity (as in microservices architectures).
One further step remains: determining what type of communication to use
between quanta, synchronous or asynchronous. (We discuss this question
in detail in Chapter 15.) Remember that, in some systems, choosing
synchronous communication can change the quantum boundaries established
through static coupling; the two types of coupling interact frequently.

Kata: Going Green

Let’s try analyzing a problem by using architecture quantum as a scope
for architectural characteristics. The problem, called Going Green, is
illustrated in Figure 7-5.

You are working with Going Green (GG), a business that recycles and
resells old electronics, such as cell phones. Its system uses both
public kiosks and a website, all running the same system. A user can
upload their device’s model number and condition, and GG will bid for
it. If the user accepts the bid, they can deposit it in the kiosk or, if
they go through the website, GG will send them a box to mail it in. Upon
receiving the device, GG assesses it and sends the user their payment.
GG then estimates the value of the device and either recycles or resells
it. Its system also produces reports and other analytics.

[Requirements overview for Going Green]

Figure 7-5. Requirements overview for Going Green

As you perform your architectural characteristics analysis, you notice
three distinct clusters forming, as shown in Figure 7-6.

[The GG architectural characteristics analysis yields three clusters of
capabilities]

Figure 7-6. The GG architectural characteristics analysis yields three clusters of capabilities

The public-facing parts of the application need scalability,
availability, and agility; the back-office functions need security, data
integrity, and auditability; and the assessment part needs
maintainability, deployability, and testability (which make up the
composite architectural characteristic of agility). Why does the
assessment part need a separate set of architectural characteristics?
This is a good example of how business drivers intersect with
architectural concerns. GG’s business model relies on reselling the
highest-value used electronics, and new models come out in a constant
stream. The faster they can update their device assessments, the more
they can get newer (and therefore more valuable) devices to resell.

Could you design a system that meets all these criteria: scalability,
availability, security, data integrity, auditability, maintainability,
deployability, and testability? It’s possible…​but it would be difficult.
These architectural characteristics often counteract one another: for
instance, achieving fast deployability is more difficult when you’re
also prioritizing back-office concerns like auditability. And the UI
requires a vastly different level of scalability than other parts of the
system.

Instead of trying to do it all, you can use the clusters of
architectural characteristics as your guide to separating quanta. In
Figure 7-7, the dotted lines illustrate each architectural quantum.
Using characteristic scope as a guide for service granularity is a good
first step in determining the most beneficial set of trade-offs. (We
explore this topic further in Chapter 18.)

[This GG architecture captures each set of architectural characteristics
as an architectural boundary]

Figure 7-7. This GG architecture captures each set of architectural characteristics as an architectural boundary

Scoping and the Cloud

Cloud-based resources complicate the picture, because they encapsulate
so many of the operational architectural characteristics of a system.
Architects must consider at least two scenarios when using cloud-based
resources for all or part of an application, depending on the deployment
model:

Using the cloud to host containers

    Many development teams use the cloud as an alternate operations
    center, running (and orchestrating) containers for servers. In such
    situations, architects must consider the architectural
    characteristics of the containers and the constraints introduced by
    the orchestration tool (for example, Kubernetes).

Using cloud-provider resources as system components

    Another flavor of a cloud-based system pieces applications together
    using the cloud provider’s building blocks, such as triggered
    functions, databases, and so on. In this case, architects must look
    at the capabilities the provider advertises (and hopefully
    maintains) for insights on how to build suitable capabilities for
    that particular context.

Many of the capabilities we know today as cloud providers’ configuration
settings, such as elasticity, were hard-won by the previous generation
of architects working on physical systems. Their major concerns have
become easier—but we have our own modern set of trade-offs, such as
provider availability and heightened security concerns. The details of
software architecture change a lot, but the job of analyzing trade-offs
remains constant.

Chapter 8. Component-Based Thinking

In Chapter 3, we introduced the concept of a module as a collection of
related code. In this chapter, we dive much deeper into this concept,
focusing on the architectural aspect of modularity in terms of logical
components—the building blocks of a system.

Identifying and managing logical components is a part of architectural
thinking (see Chapter 2), so much so that we call this activity
component-based thinking. Component-based thinking is seeing the
structure of a system as a set of logical components, all interacting to
perform certain business functions. It’s at this level (not the class
level) that an architect “sees” the system.

In this chapter, we define logical components within software
architecture, how to identify them, and how to arrive at an appropriate
level of granularity through analyzing what’s known as cohesion (we
define what that means a little later on in this chapter). We also
discuss coupling between components and how and why to create loosely
coupled systems.

Defining Logical Components

Think about the floor plan of a typical Western house, as illustrated in
Figure 8-1. Notice the floor plan is made up of various rooms (such as a
kitchen, bedrooms, bathrooms, a living room, an office, and so on), each
serving a different purpose. These rooms represent the building
blocks—the components—of the house.

[House floor plan]

Figure 8-1. The various rooms represent the components of the house

In the same way, the major functions a system performs represent the
components of that system, as shown in Figure 8-2. Like the rooms of a
house, each component performs a specific function, such as managing
inventory, shipping orders, or processing payments. Together they make
up the system. Each component contains source code that implements that
particular business function.

[System floor plan]

Figure 8-2. The various major functions represent the components of the system

Logical components in software architecture are usually manifested
through a namespace or a directory structure containing the source code
that implements that particular functionality. Typically, the leaf nodes
of the directory structure or namespace containing source code represent
the logical components in the architecture, and higher-level directories
or namespace nodes represent the system’s domains and subdomains. In the
directory structure illustrated in Figure 8-3, the directory path
order_entry/ordering/payment represents the Payment Processing
component, and the path order_entry/processing/fulfillment represents
the Order Fulfillment component. The source code underlying the
directories implements these logical components.

[Directory structure]

Figure 8-3. The leaf nodes of the directory represent the components of the system

An architect can analyze a software system’s directory structures or
namespaces to understand its internal structure—in other words, its
logical architecture. We describe the differences between logical and
physical architectures in the next section.

Logical Versus Physical Architecture

A logical architecture consists of a system’s logical components
(building blocks) and how they interact with one another. It also
usually shows their interactions with various actors (users who interact
with the system), and may also show a repository (not a database) to
clarify where data is used or transferred between components. Figure 8-4
illustrates an example of a logical architecture.

[Logical architecture]

Figure 8-4. Diagram of a logical architecture

A logical architecture diagram doesn’t typically show a user interface,
databases, services, or other physical artifacts. Rather, it shows the
logical components and how they interact, which should match the
directory structures and namespaces that organize the code.

A physical architecture, on the other hand, includes such physical
artifacts as services, user interfaces, databases, and so on. Figure 8-5
is an example of a physical architecture diagram.

[Physical architecture]

Figure 8-5. Diagram of a physical architecture

The system’s physical architecture should closely represent one (or
more) of the many architectural styles described in Part II of this
book: microservices, layered architecture, event-driven architecture,
and so on.

Many architects choose to bypass creating a logical architecture and
start directly with a physical architecture. However, we advise against
this practice, because a physical architecture doesn’t always show where
the system’s functionality is and how it all fits together. For example,
in a physical architecture, payment-processing functionality may be
spread across multiple services, making it difficult to see how it
interacts with other parts of the system. Furthermore, a physical
architecture doesn’t provide development teams with any guidance on how
to build a monolithic or distributed system, or organize its code,
resulting largely in unstructured architectures that are hard to
maintain, test, and deploy.

Generally, a system’s logical architecture is independent of its
physical architecture. In other words, when creating a logical
architecture, the focus is more on what the system does, how that
functionality is demarcated, and how the functional parts of the system
interact, rather than on its physical structure. For example, the
architect creating a logical architecture like that shown in Figure 8-4
may not have determined yet whether those components will all go into a
monolithic architecture (a single deployment unit) or will be deployed
as services (separate deployment units), nor have they necessarily
decided what kind of architecture style would be most appropriate.

Creating a Logical Architecture

Creating a logical architecture involves continuously identifying and
restructuring logical components. Component identification works best as
an iterative process. It involves producing candidate components, then
refining them through a feedback loop, as illustrated in Figure 8-6.

[Component flow]

Figure 8-6. The component identification and refactoring cycle

The first activity an architect does in developing a logical
architecture is to identify the initial core components, and then assign
user stories or requirements to them. After this, they analyze the
component’s roles and responsibilities to make sure that the user
stories or requirements assigned to it make sense. Then the architect
looks at the architectural characteristics the system must support and
determines whether any refactoring is needed to possibly break apart or
combine the component based on those characteristics. Finally, the
architect optionally refines the components based on this analysis. This
process is a feedback loop that essentially never stops.

The workflow in Figure 8-6 can be used for greenfield (new) systems or
anytime a feature is added to or changed in the system. For example,
suppose you need to enable an order-entry system to allow users to pick
items up at a store rather than having them shipped to their homes. This
will involve adding scheduling code as well as changing the existing
ordering process. This change may require new components, changes to
existing ones, or both. As components change, their roles and
responsibilities may change, prompting you to restructure your code or
create new components for it.

We describe each of these steps in detail in the following sections.

Identifying Core Components

The challenge in starting out with a new logical architecture (or making
major modifications to an existing one) is determining what the initial
core components should be. One mistake many software architects make is
spending too much effort trying to get the initial logical components
perfect the first time. A better approach is to make a “best guess” as
to what the initial core components might look like, based on the core
functionalities of the system, and refine them through the workflow
steps outlined in Figure 8-6. In other words, it’s better to iterate
over the logical components as you learn more about the system than to
try to get it all perfect the first time, when you know least about the
system and its specific requirements.

In most cases, the architect does not need to know all (or sometimes
any) of the system’s requirements and specifications to start creating
logical components. Typically, the initial core components are based on
major actions users might take or the system’s major processing
workflows.

We like to think of the initial core components as empty buckets. The
bucket doesn’t do anything until the architect starts “filling” it—that
is, assigning user stories or requirements to that component. As
illustrated in Figure 8-7, the component name should represent its
proposed role and responsibility. However, until the architect assigns
user stories to it (the next step in the workflow), it’s essentially a
placeholder—a best guess at a functional building block.

[Components as empty buckets]

Figure 8-7. In the beginning, initial components are like empty buckets

The following are three common approaches to creating initial core
components; the first two approaches (the Workflow and Actor/Action) are
ones we find useful, and the third (the Entity Trap) is an antipattern
we caution against.

The Workflow approach

A common approach architects use for identifying the initial core
components of a logical architecture is the Workflow approach. As the
name suggests, this approach leverages the major happy-path (nonerror)
workflows a user might take through the system (or its main
request-processing workflow). If the architect has some sense of the
general flow, they can develop components based on those steps.

For example, assume you are building a new order-entry system for your
company. You don’t know the specific requirements and specifications
yet, but you at least know the general workflow for processing a new
order. You can thus assign a component to each step in the workflow:

1.  User browses the catalog of items → Item Browser

2.  User places an order → Order Placement

3.  User pays for the order → Order Payment

4.  Send user an email with order details → Customer Notification

5.  Prepare the order → Order Fulfillment

6.  Ship the order → Order Shipment

7.  Email customer that order has shipped → Customer Notification

8.  Track shipment → Order Tracking

In the Workflow approach, not every step in the major workflow yields a
new component. In the workflow above, steps 4 and 7 both use the
Customer Notification component. The architect models as many major
workflows or user journeys they can for the system, identifying
corresponding components from those steps.

This is, again, only a “best guess” as to what the logical architecture
might look like. These components represent empty buckets and have no
responsibilities yet, so they will likely change as they evolve (as
illustrated in Figure 8-6). This is perfectly normal and part of the
iterative nature of software architecture. Don’t worry about trying to
model every workflow in your system. Instead, focus on the major
workflows. The rest will evolve as you learn more about the system and
start gathering user stories and requirements.

The Actor/Action approach

Another way architects identify initial core components is the
Actor/Action approach. This approach is particularly useful when a
system has multiple actors. With this approach, the architect identifies
the major actions a user can perform in the system (such as placing an
order). The system itself is always an actor, too, performing automated
functions such as billing and replenishing stock.

In our order-entry system example, an architect might identify three
actors: the customer, the order packer (the person who packs the box and
sends it off for shipping), and the system. The architect then
identifies the major actions each of these actors takes and assigns
components to those actions:

Customer actor

    - Search for items → Item Search

    - View the details about an item → Item Details

    - Place an order → Order Placement

    - Cancel an order → Order Cancel

    - Register as a new customer → Customer Registration

    - Update customer information → Customer Profile

Order packer actor

    - Select the box size → Order Fulfillment

    - Mark the order as ready for shipment → Order Fulfillment

    - Ship the order to the customer → Order Shipment

System actor

    - Adjust inventory → Inventory Management

    - Order more stock from the supplier → Supplier Ordering

    - Apply payment → Order Payment

Like with the Workflow approach, not every action necessarily has its
own component. For example, selecting the box size for the order and
marking it ready for shipping are both done by the Order Fulfillment
component.

Generally, the Actor/Action approach generates more components than the
Workflow approach, depending on how many major workflows the architect
chooses to model. However, in both approaches, the architect can
identify the initial core components and how they communicate even
before receiving detailed requirements or specifications.

The Entity Trap

It’s all too tempting for an architect to start identifying components
by focusing on the entities involved with the system, then deriving
components from those entities. For example, in a typical order entry
system, you may identify Customer, Item, and Order as the primary
entities in the system, and correspondingly create a Customer Manager
component, an Item Manager component, and an Order Manager component. We
strongly advise against this approach for the following reasons.

First, the names of the logical components are ambiguous and don’t
describe the role of the component. For example, asking what the
Order Manager component does just by looking at the name yields the
useless answer “it manages orders,” indicating nothing about its
specific role or responsibility in the system. Compare that to a
component name like Validate Order, and the importance of a good,
descriptive component name becomes clear. If a component name includes a
suffix like Manager, Supervisor, Controller, Handler, Engine, or
Processor, that’s a good indicator that the architect might be caught in
the Entity Trap antipattern.

Second, components become dumping grounds for domain-related
functionalities. Consider an entity-based component name like
Order Manager, as shown in Figure 8-8. Every bit of order functionality
would go into that single component: order validation, order placement,
order history, fulfilling the order, shipping the order, tracking the
order, and so on. Essentially, it becomes like those “kitchen sink”
utility classes every developer has written at least once in their
career, with dozens of methods that perform string manipulation, data
manipulation, time calculations, and whatever else the developer can put
in there.

Third, when components become too coarse-grained, they do too much and
lose their purpose. Rather than being fine-grained and single purpose
(like the Validate Order component example), components can become too
big. Such components are hard to maintain, test, and deploy, and hence
not very reliable.

[The Entity Trap]

Figure 8-8. Using the Entity Trap antipattern produces components with too much responsibility

If an architect is building a system that truly is entity based and
simply performs CRUD-based operations (create, read, update, and delete)
against those entities, then the system doesn’t need an architecture,
but rather a CRUD-based framework, tool, or no-code/low-code environment
that allows the developers to generate most of the source code that acts
on those entities.

Assigning User Stories to Components

The next step in creating a logical architecture is to assign user
stories or requirements to the logical components. This is an iterative
process, since most user stories or requirements are not completely
known up front; they evolve as the system evolves. This step is meant to
start filling those empty buckets, giving the components specific roles
and responsibilities, as illustrated in Figure 8-9.

[Filling buckets]

Figure 8-9. Filling up the empty buckets (components) with user stories or requirements

To see how logical components evolve, consider the following user
stories:

Customer #1

    As a customer, I would like to have my order validated to make sure
    I have entered everything completely and correctly.

Order preparer

    As the person preparing the order, I would like to know what size
    box I should use for the order, so I can pack it in the most
    efficient way possible.

Customer #2

    As a customer, I would like to receive an email each time the order
    status changes, so I always know the state of my order.

Assume that the architect has identified the following logical
components so far:

- Order Placement

- Order Fulfillment

- Order Shipment

- Inventory Management

It makes sense to assign the first user story to the Order Placement
component, since that’s the component the user is interacting with to
place the order:

  Validate the order (Customer #1 user story) → Order Placement

Determining the box size should probably be handled by the
Order Fulfillment component, since it’s responsible for all the system
logic needed to prepare and pack the order in a box:

  Determine box size (Order preparer user story) → Order Fulfillment

But what about the third user story? Which of the four components listed
should send emails to the customer when the order has been placed, is
ready for shipment, and has shipped? The answer might be the
Order Placement, Order Fulfillment, and Order Shipment components. But
keep in mind that the user story is implemented through source code,
which needs to reside in a specific directory or namespace. Since it
wouldn’t be a good idea to replicate the code across three components,
the architect needs to define a new component to handle this user story:

  Email customer (Customer #2 user story) → Customer Notification (new)

The Order Placement, Order Fulfillment, and Order Shipment components
need to communicate with the new component to let it know to send an
email. With this addition, the logical architecture now looks like
Figure 8-10.

[Evolving components]

Figure 8-10. Evolving components based on new user stories

Analyzing Roles and Responsibilities

The next step in refining logical components is to analyze the roles and
responsibilities of each component. This is how the architect ensures
that the requirements or user stories assigned to those components
belong there and that the components are not doing too much. What the
architect is concerned about in this step is cohesion: how, and how
much, a component’s operations interrelate. Over time, components can
get too big, even though their operations all interrelate.

To illustrate how this step works, assume the architect has assigned the
following requirements to the Order Placement component:

- Validate the order to ensure all fields have been entered and are
  correct.

- Display the shopping cart with the item descriptions, quantities, and
  prices.

- Determine the correct shipping address.

- Collect payment information.

- Generate a unique order ID.

- Apply payment for the order.

- Adjust inventory counts for the items ordered.

- Email the customer an order summary.

If the architect were to write a role and responsibility statement for
this component, it would read as follows:

  This component is responsible for validating the order and displaying
  the valid shopping cart, complete with the item picture, description,
  quantity, and price. This component is also responsible for
  determining the correct shipping address for the order, as well as
  collecting all the payment information from the customer. In addition,
  it’s also responsible for applying the payment, adjusting inventory,
  and emailing the customer the order summary.

While all of these operations have to do with placing an order, the
Order Placement component is clearly taking on too much responsibility,
particularly with regard to applying the payment, adjusting the
inventory, and emailing the customer. One way to see if a component is
taking on too much responsibility is to look for conjunctive phrases
such as and, also, in addition, or as well as, and excessive use of
commas.

Recall from earlier in the chapter that a logical component is
represented by a namespace or directory in the code repository. In the
case of the Order Placement component, all the source code representing
this component would be in the same directory or namespace, such as
com/app/order/placement or com.app.order.placement. This is a lot of
functionality—likely too much code for a single directory. Therefore, it
would make sense to separate the class files for payment processing,
inventory management, and email communications into separate directories
representing those functionalities. That’s exactly what separating
logical components is all about.

If the architect moves the responsibilities of applying the payment,
adjusting the inventory, and sending the customer an email to separate
components, they can reduce the responsibility of the single
Order Placement component, making it easier to maintain, test, and
deploy. The resulting components would look like this:

Order Placement

    - Validate the order to ensure all fields have been entered and are
      correct.

    - Display the shopping cart with the item descriptions, quantities,
      and prices.

    - Determine the correct shipping address.

    - Collect payment information.

    - Generate a unique order ID.

Payment Processing

    - Apply payment.

Inventory Management

    - Adjust the inventory counts for the items ordered.

Customer Notification

    - Email the customer an order summary.

Each component now has a clearer, more distinct role and responsibility.

Analyzing Architectural Characteristics

The final analysis step is to consider the architectural characteristics
the system will require. Some architectural characteristics, such as
scalability, reliability, availability, fault tolerance, elasticity, and
agility (the ability to respond quickly to change), may influence the
size of a logical component.

For example, breaking up a larger component (one with lots of
responsibility) into smaller components makes each of them easier to
maintain and test (that’s agility), and provides better scalability,
elasticity, and fault tolerance. Another good example is where two parts
of a system deal with user input: if one part deals with hundreds of
concurrent users and the other needs to support only a few at a time,
they will need different architecture characteristics. Thus, while a
purely functional view of component design might lead an architect to
assign a single component to handle user interaction, analyzing the
components in terms of architecture characteristics might lead to a
subdivision.

Because the architect must know the architectural characteristics before
building a logical architecture, it is usually done after determining
which architectural characteristics are most important to the system.

Restructuring Components

Feedback is critical in software design. Architects must continually
iterate on their component designs in collaboration with developers.
Designing software provides all kinds of unexpected difficulties. Thus,
an iterative approach to component design is key. First, it’s virtually
impossible to account for all the different discoveries and edge cases
that will arise, any of which could encourage redesign. Second, as the
architecture and developers delve more deeply into building the
application, they gain a more nuanced understanding of where its
behaviors and roles should lie.

Architects should expect to restructure components frequently throughout
the lifecycle of a system or product—not only in greenfield systems, but
in any that undergo frequent maintenance.

Component Coupling

When components communicate with each other, or when a change to one
component might impact other components, the components are said to be
coupled together. The more coupled a system’s components are, the harder
it is to maintain and test the system (see Figure 8-11). Therefore, it’s
important to pay close attention to coupling.

[Component coupling]

Figure 8-11. Components can be coupled even if they don’t communicate directly

Static Coupling

Static coupling occurs when components communicate synchronously with
each other. Architects need to be concerned about two types of coupling:
afferent and efferent.

Afferent coupling (also known as incoming or fan-in coupling) is the
degree to which other components depend on a target component. For
instance, consider the Customer Notification component from our
order-entry example in Figure 8-12. To email the customer, both the
Order Placement and Order Shipment components need to communicate with
the Customer Notification component. This means that the
Customer Notification component is said to be afferently coupled to the
Order Placement and Order Shipment components and would have an afferent
coupling level of 2 (the number of incoming dependencies). Afferent
coupling is usually denoted as CA.

[Afferent coupling]

Figure 8-12. The Customer Notification component is afferently coupled to the other components

Efferent coupling (also known as outgoing or fan-out coupling) is the
degree to which a target component depends on other components. For
example, as illustrated in Figure 8-13, the Order Placement component is
dependent on the Order Fulfillment component and, as such, is efferently
coupled to it and would have an efferent coupling level of 1 (the number
of outgoing dependencies). Efferent coupling is usually denoted as CE.

[Efferent coupling]

Figure 8-13. The Order Placement component is efferently coupled to the Order Fulfillment component

Temporal Coupling

Temporal coupling describes nonstatic dependencies, usually those based
on timing or transactions (single units of work). For example, when the
system is processing an order, the functionality in the Order Placement
component must be invoked before the functionality in the Order Shipment
component. Those components are thus said to be temporally coupled.

The problem with temporal coupling is that it’s hard to detect using the
tooling currently available on the market. In most cases, this kind of
coupling is instead identified through design documents or detected
through error conditions.

The Law of Demeter

Most architects are told to strive for loose coupling in system design.
Less coupling between components or services makes a system more
maintainable, easier to test, and less risky to deploy. It also
increases the system’s overall reliability, because changes impact fewer
components, allowing fewer opportunities for error.

One technique for creating loosely coupled systems is called the Law of
Demeter, otherwise known as the Principle of Least Knowledge. In Greek
mythology, the goddess Demeter produced all the grain for the entire
world, but she had no idea what people did with it (feeding livestock,
making bread, and so on). Demeter was effectively decoupled from the
rest of the world.

The Law of Demeter states: a component or service should have limited
knowledge of other components or services. While this may sound
simplistic and obvious, it’s not. Let us show you what we mean.

Consider the components and their corresponding communications
illustrated in Figure 8-14. Upon accepting a customer’s order, the
Order Placement component must tell the Inventory Management component
to decrement the inventory. If the stock goes down too low, the
Order Placement component must do two things: tell the Supplier Ordering
component to order more stock from the supplier, and tell the
Item Pricing component to adjust the price based on the limited supply
available. Finally, once all this is done, the Order Placement component
tells the Email Notification component to email the customer with the
order details.

[Law of Demeter before]

Figure 8-14. The Order Placement component is highly coupled to the rest of the system because it has too much knowledge

Notice that, in this architecture, the Order Placement component is
highly coupled to the other components. While it doesn’t have the
responsibility to perform those actions, it does have the knowledge that
these actions need to occur—and more knowledge means tighter coupling.

The idea behind the Law of Demeter is to limit each component’s
knowledge about the rest of the system. In Figure 8-14, the
Order Placement component knows that the inventory must be decremented,
more stock may need to be ordered, the item price may need to be
adjusted, and an email must be sent to the customer. (That’s a lot of
knowledge!) But what if that knowledge could be distributed to other
components? If so, then the architect can effectively decouple that
component from the rest of the system.

To see how the Law of Demeter can be applied to reduce component
coupling, refer to the system in Figure 8-14. If the architect added
another component between Order Placement and Inventory Management to
defer that knowledge that inventory must be decremented, the
Order Placement component would still have the same efferent (outgoing)
coupling level. Therefore, that coupling point needs to remain as is.

However, what about the knowledge that, if the supply goes down too low,
the system must order more stock and adjust the item price? Both of
those pieces of knowledge can be deferred to the Inventory Management
component, thereby reducing the coupling level of the Order Placement
component. Figure 8-15 illustrates the resulting architecture after
applying the Law of Demeter. Removing the knowledge that certain
functions need to happen makes the Order Placement component less
coupled to the rest of the system.

[Law of Demeter after]

Figure 8-15. The Order Placement component is less coupled to the system when it has less knowledge

The astute reader will observe that, while applying the Law of Demeter
reduced the coupling level of the Order Placement component, it also
increased the coupling level of the Inventory Management component.
Applying the Law of Demeter does not necessarily reduce the system-wide
level of coupling; rather, it usually redistributes that coupling to
different parts of the system.

Case Study: Going, Going, Gone—Discovering Components

If a team has no special constraints and is looking for a good
general-purpose component decomposition, the Actor/Actions approach
works well as a generic solution.

If the architect applies the Actor/Action approach to Going, Going, Gone
(GGG), they’ll find that this system has three main roles: the bidder,
the auctioneer, and the system—a frequent participant in this modeling
technique for internal actions. The roles interact with the system using
the following main actions:

Bidder

    - View live video stream.

    - View live bid stream.

    - Place a bid.

Auctioneer

    - Enter live bids into system.

    - Receive online bids.

    - Mark item as sold.

System

    - Start auction.

    - Make payment.

    - Track bidder activity.

Given these actions, the architect can build a set of starter components
for GGG and then iterate on it. One such solution appears in
Figure 8-16.

[Initial components]

Figure 8-16. Initial set of components for Going, Going, Gone

In Figure 8-16, each role and action maps to a component. The components
may need to collaborate to share information. These are the components
we identified for this solution:

Video Streamer

    Streams a live auction to users.

Bid Streamer

    Streams bids to users as they occur. Both Video Streamer and
    Bid Streamer offer bidders a read-only view of the auction.

Bid Capture

    This component captures bids from the auctioneer and bidders.

Bid Tracker

    Tracks bids and acts as the system of record.

Auction Session

    Starts an auction. When the bidder wins and the auction for that
    item ends, this component triggers the payment and resolution steps,
    including notifying bidders of the next item up for bid.

Payment

    A third-party payment processor for credit card payments.

After the initial round of component identification (see Figure 8-6),
the architect analyzes the previously identified architecture
characteristics to determine if any of them will change the design of
the component. For example, the current design features a Bid Capture
component to capture bids from both bidders and the auctioneer. This
makes sense functionally: bids from anyone can be captured and handled
the same way. But what previously identified architecture
characteristics does bid capture call for? The auctioneer doesn’t need
the same level of scalability or elasticity as the bidders, who could
potentially number in the thousands.

By the same token, the auctioneer might need certain previously
identified architecture characteristics more than other parts of the
system do—like reliability (ensuring connections don’t drop) and
availability (ensuring the system stays up). For example, while it would
be bad for business if a bidder can’t log in to the site or suffers from
a dropped connection, it would be disastrous if either of those things
were to happen to the auctioneer.

To support the bidders’ and auctioneer’s different levels of need for
the same architecture characteristics, the architect decides to split
the Bid Capture component into two components: Bid Capture and
Auctioneer Capture. The updated design appears in Figure 8-17.

The architect creates a new component for Auctioneer Capture. They also
update the information links from the Auctioneer Capture to both
Bid Streamer (to show the online bidders the live bids) and Bid Tracker
(to manage the bid streams). Bid Tracker is now the component that will
unify two very different information streams: the auctioneer’s single
stream of information and the multiple streams from bidders.

[Revised components]

Figure 8-17. Revised components of the GGG case study

The design shown in Figure 8-17 is unlikely to be the final design. More
requirements must be uncovered: how people will register new accounts,
how payment functions will be administered, and so on. However, this
design provides a good starting point for iterating further.

This is one possible set of components to solve the GGG problem—but it’s
not necessarily the best nor the only one. There are few software
systems that can be implemented in only one way. Every design has
different sets of trade-offs. As an architect, don’t obsess over finding
the “one true design,” because there are many that will suffice. Try to
assess the trade-offs between different design decisions as objectively
as possible, and choose the one that has the “least worst” set of
trade-offs.

Part II. Architecture Styles

The difference between an architecture style and an architecture pattern
can be confusing; we define it right away, in the upcoming Chapter 9.

Understanding architecture styles occupies much of new architects’ time
and effort, because styles are important and abundant. Architects must
understand the various styles and the trade-offs encapsulated within
each to make effective decisions; each architecture style embodies a
well-known set of trade-offs that help architects make the right choice
for a particular business problem.

Chapter 9. Foundations

We know you are anxious to get to the details of architecture styles and
patterns, but first we must cover some fundamental and definitional
material to set the proper context for later chapters.

Styles Versus Patterns

We first need to distinguish between architectural styles and patterns
in architecture, which are easily confused.

An architecture’s style describes several different characteristics of
that architecture, including its:

Component topology

    An architectural style defines how components and their dependencies
    are organized. For example, a layered architecture organizes
    component layers by their technical capabilities, whereas a modular
    monolith organizes its components around domains (more about this
    difference in “Architecture Partitioning”).

Physical architecture

    Often, the style dictates the type of physical architecture: either
    monolithic or distributed. For example, a modular monolith is
    generally a monolithic architecture with a single database, whereas
    an event-driven architecture is always distributed.

Deployment

    A system’s granularity and its deployment frequency are often
    associated with its architectural style. Teams generally deploy
    monolithic architectures as a single deployment along with a single
    relational database. Conversely, highly agile distributed
    architectures, such as microservices, feature automated integration,
    automated provisioning, and sometimes automated deployments; they
    are generally deployed in pieces, with a much faster cadence.

Communication style

    The architectural style also dictates how components communicate
    with each other. Monolithic architectures can make method calls
    within the monolith, whereas distributed architectures communicate
    via network protocols, like REST or message queues.

Data topology

    Just like component topology, a system’s data topology is often
    dictated by its architectural style. Monolithic architectures tend
    to have a monolithic database, whereas distributed architectures
    sometimes separate data—depending on the philosophy of the
    architecture style.

Naming a style provides a concise way to describe this complex set of
factors. Each name captures a wealth of understood detail—that’s one of
the purposes of design patterns. However, whereas a pattern captures a
contextualized solution, a style is more specific to architecture,
describing the aspects listed above. An architecture style describes the
architecture’s topology and its assumed and default characteristics,
both beneficial and detrimental. We cover a few common modern
architecture patterns in Chapter 20. Architects should be familiar with
several fundamental styles that are the common building blocks of
systems.

Where Do Architectural Styles Come From?

Contrary to popular opinion, there’s no official architectural cabal
that meets in an ivory tower to decide what new architectural styles
come next. Rather, new styles emerge from the constantly evolving
ecosystems within which architects work.

For example, say a clever architect notices that a new capability that
just appeared in the ecosystem solves a particular nagging problem. They
decide to combine it with several other things, new and old. Other
architects see this clever solution and copy it. It becomes common
enough that giving it a name makes it easier to discuss.

The microservices architecture style is a great example of this
phenomenon. The rise of new DevOps capabilities, reliable open source
operating systems, and the domain-driven design philosophy allowed
architects to build systems in new ways to solve issues like
scalability. The name microservices came about as a reaction to the
common architecture styles at the time, which featured large services
and extensive orchestration. Microservices is a label, not a
description. It is not a commandment for teams to build the smallest
services they can but rather a way to refer to the architecture style.

Fundamental Patterns

Several fundamental patterns appear again and again throughout the
history of software architecture, generally because they provide a
useful perspective on organizing code, deployments, or other aspects of
architecture. For example, the concept of layers separating different
concerns based on functionality is as old as software itself. Yet layers
(in both styles and patterns) continue to manifest in different guises,
including the modern variants we discuss in Chapter 10.

Alas, there’s another common antipattern that stems from the absence of
architecture: the Big Ball of Mud.

Big Ball of Mud

Architects refer to the absence of any discernible architecture
structure as a Big Ball of Mud, named after the antipattern Brian Foote
and Joseph Yoder defined in a 1997 paper presented at the 1997
conference on Patterns Languages of Programs.

  A Big Ball of Mud is a haphazardly structured, sprawling, sloppy,
  duct-tape-and-baling-wire, spaghetti-code jungle. These systems show
  unmistakable signs of unregulated growth, and repeated, expedient
  repair. Information is shared promiscuously among distant elements of
  the system, often to the point where nearly all the important
  information becomes global or duplicated.

  The overall structure of the system may never have been well defined.

  If it was, it may have eroded beyond recognition. Programmers with a
  shred of architectural sensibility shun these quagmires. Only those
  who are unconcerned about architecture, and, perhaps, are comfortable
  with the inertia of the day-to-day chore of patching the holes in
  these failing dikes, are content to work on such systems.

Today, Big Ball of Mud might describe a simple scripting application
with no real internal structure that has its event handlers wired
directly to database calls. Many trivial applications start like this,
then become unwieldy as they grow.

In general, avoid this type of architecture at all costs. Its lack of
structure makes change increasingly difficult. Such architectures also
suffer from problems with deployment, testability, scalability, and
performance. The larger these systems become, the worse the pain caused
by their lack of architecture becomes.

Unfortunately, this antipattern occurs quite often in the real world.
Few architects intend to create a mess, but many projects inadvertently
manage to, usually because of a lack of governance around code quality
and structure. For example, Neal worked on one client project whose
structure appears in Figure 9-1.

The client (whose name is withheld for obvious reasons) created a
Java-based web application as quickly as possible over several years.
The technical visualization in Figure 9-1 shows its coupling: each dot
on the perimeter of the circle represents a class, and each line
represents a connection between the classes, with bolder lines
indicating stronger connections. In this code base, changing a class in
any way makes it difficult to predict the effect on other classes,
making change a terrifying affair.

[]

Figure 9-1. A Big Ball of Mud architecture visualized from a real code base. (Made with a now-retired tool called XRay, an Eclipse plug-in.)

The problem with Big Ball of Mud architectures isn’t just their lack of
structure. Because everything is coupled to everything else, changes
tend to have hard-to-predict rippling side effects. This problem can
reach a critical point where developers spend all their time chasing
bugs and their side effects, rather than working on new features.

Unitary Architecture

In the beginning, there was only the computer, and software ran on it.
The two started as a single entity, then split as they evolved and the
need grew for more sophisticated capabilities. For example, mainframe
computers started as singular systems, then gradually separated data
into its own kind of system. Similarly, when personal computers (PCs)
were first commercially developed, the focus was largely on single
machines. As networking PCs became common, distributed systems (such as
client/server) appeared.

Client/Server

Few unitary architectures exist outside embedded systems and other
highly constrained environments. Generally, software systems tend to add
functionality over time, and separating concerns becomes necessary to
maintain their operational architecture characteristics, such as
performance and scale.

Many architecture styles deal with how to separate parts of the system
efficiently. One fundamental style in architecture separates technical
functionality between frontend and backend: this is called a two-tier,
or client/server, architecture. It comes in different flavors, depending
on the era and the system’s computing capabilities.

Desktop and database server

One early PC architecture encouraged developers to write rich desktop
applications in user interfaces like Windows, separating data into a
separate database server. This architecture coincided with the
appearance of standalone database servers that could connect through
standard network protocols. This allowed presentation logic to reside on
the desktop, while the more computationally intense action (both in
volume and complexity) occurred on more robust database servers.

Browser and web server

Once modern web development arrived, it became common to split
architectures into a web browser connected to a web server (which, in
turn, was connected to a database server). This separation of
responsibilities was similar to the desktop variant but with even
thinner clients as browsers, allowing a wider distribution both inside
and outside firewalls. Even though the database is separate from the web
server, many architects still consider this a two-tier architecture,
because the web and database servers run on one class of machine within
the operations center, while the UI runs on the user’s browser.

Single-page JavaScript applications

As web responsiveness improved, so did JavaScript implementations in
browsers. A family of client/server style applications emerged that
resembles the original desktop variation, but with the rich client
written in JavaScript in the browser, rather than as a desktop
application.

As this section illustrates, there will always be layers to separate
different parts of architectures, depending on the needs of the
application and the capabilities of the platform.

Three-tier

Three-tier architecture, which provided even more layers of separation,
became popular during the late 1990s. As tools like application servers
became prominent in Java and .NET, companies started building even more
layers into their topologies. One system might have a database tier
using an industrial-strength database server; an application tier
managed by an application server; and a frontend coded in generated HTML
and, increasingly, JavaScript (as its capabilities expanded).

The three-tier architecture corresponded with network-level protocols
such as Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) and
Distributed Component Object Model (DCOM) to facilitate building
distributed architectures.

Just as developers today don’t worry about how network protocols like
TCP/IP work (because they just work), most architects don’t have to
worry about this level of plumbing in distributed architectures. The
capabilities offered by that era’s tools exist today either as tools
(like message queues) or as architecture patterns (such as event-driven
architecture, covered in Chapter 15).

Three-Tier Architectures, Language Design, and Long-Term Implications

During the 1990s, as the Java language was designed, three-tier
computing was all the rage. People assumed that, in the future, all
systems would have three-tier architectures. One of the common headaches
with the existing languages at the time, such as C++, was how cumbersome
it was to move objects over the network in a consistent way between
systems. So Java’s designers decided to build this capability into its
core, using a mechanism called serialization.

Every Java object implements an interface that requires it to support
serialization. The designers figured that since three-tiered
architecture would be around forever, baking it into the language would
offer great convenience. Of course, that architectural style came and
went—yet the leftovers appear in Java to this day. Even though virtually
no one still uses serialization, new Java features must support it for
backward compatibility, greatly frustrating language designers.

Understanding the long-term implications of design decisions has always
eluded us, in software as in other engineering disciplines. The
perpetual advice to favor simple designs is in many ways a
future-proofing strategy.

Architecture Partitioning

The First Law of Software Architecture states that everything in
software is a trade-off, and that includes how architects partition
components in an architecture. Because components represent a general
containment mechanism, architects can partition them any way they want.
There are several common styles, with different sets of trade-offs. One
particular type of component arrangement has an outsized impact:
top-level partitioning.

Of the two architecture styles depicted in Figure 9-2, one will be
familiar to many: the layered monolith (discussed in detail in
Chapter 10). The other, called modular monolith, is an architecture
style popularized by Simon Brown that consists of a single deployment
unit, associated with a database and partitioned around domains rather
than technical capabilities (discussed in Chapter 11). These two styles
represent different methods of top-level partitioning. Note that in both
variations, each top-level layer or component likely has other
components embedded within it. Top-level partitioning is of particular
interest to architects because it defines a fundamental architecture
style and way of partitioning code.

[]

Figure 9-2. Two types of top-level partitioning: technical (such as the layered architecture) and domain (such as the modular monolith)

Organizing architecture based on its technical capabilities, like the
layered monolith style does, represents technical top-level
partitioning.

A common version of this appears in Figure 9-3, where the architect has
partitioned the system’s functionality into technical capabilities:
presentation, business rules, services, persistence, and so on. This way
of organizing a code base certainly makes sense. All the persistence
code resides in one layer, making it easy for developers to find
persistence-related code. Even though the basic concept of layered
architecture predates it by decades, the Model-View-Controller design
pattern (one of the fundamental patterns in Head First Design Patterns
by Eric Freeman and Elisabeth Robson (O’Reilly, 2020)), matches with
this architectural pattern, making it easy for developers to understand.
Thus, in many organizations, it is the default architecture.

[]

Figure 9-3. Two types of top-level partitioning in architecture

An interesting side effect of layered architecture’s predominance
relates to how companies often organized the seating in their physical
offices according to different project roles. Because of Conway’s Law,
when using a layered architecture, it makes some sense to have all the
backend developers sit together in one department, the DBAs in another,
the presentation team in another, and so on.

The other architectural variation in Figure 9-3 is domain partitioning,
a modeling technique for decomposing complex software systems that
organizes components by domain rather than technical capabilities.
Domain partitioning was inspired by Eric Evans’s book Domain-Driven
Design. In DDD, the architect identifies domains or workflows,
independent and decoupled from each other. The microservices
architecture style is based on this philosophy.

A modular monolith architecture is partitioned around domains or
workflows, rather than technical capabilities. Because components often
nest within one another, each component in the domain-partitioned
architecture shown in Figure 9-3 (for example, CatalogCheckout) may use
a persistence library and have a separate layer for business rules, but
the top-level partitioning will still revolve around domains.

Conway’s Law

Back in the late 1960s, Melvin Conway made an observation that has
become known as Conway’s Law:

  Organizations which design systems…​are constrained to produce designs
  which are copies of the communication structures of these
  organizations.

Paraphrased, this law suggests that when a group of people designs some
technical artifact, the structures of their design will replicate how
those people communicate. People at all levels of organizations see this
law in action, and they sometimes base decisions on it. For example,
while it’s common for organizations to partition workers based on
technical capabilities, this is an artificial separation of common
concerns that can hamper collaboration.

A related observation, coined by Jonny Leroy of Thoughtworks, is the
Inverse Conway Maneuver, which suggests evolving the structures of teams
and organizations together to promote the desired architecture. This
consideration has since become universally known as team topologies.

Organizations have begun to realize that team topologies can have a
significant impact on many important facets of their business, including
software architecture. In the upcoming style-focused chapters, we
discuss each architecture style’s effect on these team types.

One of the fundamental distinctions between architecture patterns is
what type of top-level partitioning each supports. In the style-specific
chapters that follow, we cover this distinction for each individual
pattern. Top-level partitioning also has a huge impact on whether the
architect decides to initially identify components technically or by
domain.

Architects using technical partitioning organize the components of the
system by their technical capabilities: presentation, business rules,
persistence, and so on. One of the organizing principles of the layered
architecture is separation of technical concerns, which creates useful
levels of decoupling. For example, if the Service layer is only
connected to the Persistence layer below and the Business Rules layer
above, then changes in persistence will potentially affect only those
layers. This decoupling reduces the potential for rippling side effects
on dependent components.

It’s certainly logical to organize systems using technical partitioning,
but, like all things in software architecture, there are some
trade-offs. The separation enforced by technical partitioning enables
developers to find certain categories of the code base quickly, since it
is organized by capabilities, but most realistic software systems
require workflows that cut across technical capabilities.

In the technically partitioned architecture shown in Figure 9-4,
consider the common business workflow of CatalogCheckout. The code to
handle CatalogCheckout in the technically partitioned architecture
appears in all the layers. In other words, the domain is smeared across
the technical layers.

[]

Figure 9-4. Where domains/workflows appear in technically partitioned and domain-partitioned architectures

Contrast this with the domain-partitioned architecture shown in
Figure 9-4, in which the architects have built top-level components
around workflows and domains. Each component may have subcomponents,
including layers, but the top-level partitioning focuses on domains,
which better reflects the kinds of changes that most often occur on
projects.

Neither of these styles is more correct than the other. (Refer to the
First Law of Software Architecture.) That said, we have observed a
decided industry trend over the last few years toward domain
partitioning for both monolithic and distributed (for example,
microservices) architectures. As we’ve noted, this is one of the first
decisions an architect must make.

Kata: Silicon Sandwiches—Partitioning

Consider the case of one of our example katas, “Kata: Silicon
Sandwiches”. Let’s start by considering the first of two possibilities
for Silicon Sandwiches: domain partitioning, shown in Figure 9-5.

[]

Figure 9-5. A domain-partitioned design for Silicon Sandwiches

In Figure 9-5, the architect has designed around domains (workflows),
creating discrete components for Purchase, Promotion, MakeOrder,
ManageInventory, Recipes, Delivery, and Location. Within many of these
components reside subcomponents to handle both common and local
variations types of customization.

[]

Figure 9-6. A technically partitioned design for Silicon Sandwiches

An alternative design isolates the common and local parts into their own
partitions, as illustrated in Figure 9-6. Common and Local represent
top-level components, while Purchase and Delivery remain to handle the
workflow.

Which is better? It depends! Each kind of partitioning offers different
advantages and drawbacks.

Domain partitioning

Domain-partitioned architectures separate top-level components by
workflows and/or domains.

Advantages

    - Modeled more closely on how the business functions rather than on
      an implementation detail

    - Easier to build cross-functional teams around domains

    - Aligns more closely to the modular monolith and microservices
      architecture styles

    - Message flow matches the problem domain

    - Easy to migrate data and components to a distributed architecture

Disadvantage

    - Customization code appears in multiple places

Technical partitioning

Technically partitioned architectures separate top-level components
based on technical capabilities rather than discrete workflows. This may
manifest as layers inspired by Model-View-Controller separation or some
other ad hoc technical partitioning. The architecture pictured in
Figure 9-6 separates its components based on customization.

Advantages

    - Clearly separates customization code.

    - Aligns more closely to the layered architecture pattern.

Disadvantages

    - Higher degree of global coupling. Changes to the Common or Local
      component will likely affect all the other components.

    - Developers may have to duplicate domain concepts in both the
      Common and Local layers.

    - Typically, higher coupling at the data level. In a system like
      this, the application architects and the data architects would
      likely collaborate to create a single database, including
      customization and domains. That in turn would create difficulties
      in untangling the data relationships later, if the architects
      eventually want to migrate this architecture to a distributed
      system. Many other factors contribute to choosing an architecture
      style, as we cover in Part II.

Monolithic Versus Distributed Architectures

As you learned in Part I, architecture styles can be classified into two
main types: monolithic (single deployment unit of all code) and
distributed (multiple deployment units connected through remote access
protocols). While no classification scheme is perfect, distributed
architectures all share a common set of challenges and issues not found
in the monolithic architecture styles, making this classification scheme
a good separation between the various architecture styles.

In Part II of this book, we describe the following architecture styles
in detail:

Monolithic

    - Layered architecture (Chapter 10)

    - Pipeline architecture (Chapter 12)

    - Microkernel architecture (Chapter 13)

Distributed

    - Service-based architecture (Chapter 14)

    - Event-driven architecture (Chapter 15)

    - Space-based architecture (Chapter 16)

    - Service-oriented architecture (Chapter 17)

    - Microservices architecture (Chapter 18)

Distributed architecture styles, although much more powerful in terms of
performance, scalability, and availability than monolithic architecture
styles, have significant trade-offs. The first group of issues facing
all distributed architectures are described in the “fallacies of
distributed computing”, first listed by L. Peter Deutsch and other
colleagues from Sun Microsystems in 1994. A fallacy is something false
that someone believes or assumes to be true. All eight of the fallacies
of distributed computing apply to distributed architectures today. The
following sections describe each fallacy.

Fallacy #1: The Network Is Reliable

[Fallacy 1]

Figure 9-7. The network is not reliable

Developers and architects alike assume that the network is reliable, but
it is not. While networks have become more reliable over time, the fact
of the matter is that networks still remain generally unreliable. This
is significant for all distributed architecture styles, because they
rely on the network for communicating to, from, and between services. As
illustrated in Figure 9-7, Service B may be totally healthy, but
Service A cannot reach it due to a network problem. Even worse,
Service A might request that Service B process some data, but receive no
response because of a network issue. This is why things like timeouts
and circuit breakers exist between services. The more a system relies on
the network (as microservices architectures notably do), the more
potential it has to become unreliable.

Fallacy #2: Latency Is Zero

[Fallacy 2]

Figure 9-8. Latency is not zero

As Figure 9-8 shows, when a local call is made to another component via
a method or function call, the time to access that component (t_local)
is measured in nanoseconds or microseconds. However, when that same call
is made through a remote access protocol (such as REST, messaging, or
RPC), the time (t_remote) is measured in milliseconds and thus will
always be greater than t_local. Latency, in any distributed
architecture, is not zero—yet most architects ignore this fallacy,
insisting that they have fast networks. Ask yourself: do you know what
the average round-trip latency is for a RESTful call in your production
environment? Is it 60 milliseconds? Is it 500 milliseconds?

When considering using any distributed architecture, particularly
microservices, architects must know this latency average. It is the only
way of determining whether a distributed architecture is feasible, due
to the fine-grained nature of the services and the amount of
communication between them.

For example, say we assume an average of 100 ms of latency per request.
Chaining service calls together to perform a particular business
function adds 1,000 ms to the request! Knowing the average latency is
important, but knowing the 95th to 99th percentile latency is even more
important. While the system’s average latency might be only 60 ms (which
is good), the 95th percentile might be 400 ms! It’s usually this “long
tail” latency that will kill performance in a distributed architecture.
In most cases, a network administrator can provide latency values (see
“Fallacy #6: There Is Only One Administrator”).

Fallacy #3: Bandwidth Is Infinite

[Fallacy 3]

Figure 9-9. Bandwidth is not infinite

Bandwidth is usually not a concern in monolithic architectures, because
once a business request goes into a monolith, little or no bandwidth is
required to process it. However, as shown in Figure 9-9, once a system
is broken apart into smaller deployment units (services) in a
distributed architecture, such as microservices, communication to and
between these services uses significant bandwidth. This slows the
network, impacting latency (fallacy #2) and reliability (fallacy #1).

To illustrate the importance of this fallacy, consider the two services
shown in Figure 9-9. Let’s say Service A manages the wish list items for
the website, and Service B manages the customer profiles. Whenever a
request for a wish list comes into Service A, Service A needs the
customer name for the response contract for the wish list. To get the
name, it must make an interservice call to Service B. Service B returns
45 attributes, totaling 500 KB, to Service A, which only needs the name
(200 bytes). This may not sound significant, but requests for the wish
list items happen about 2,000 times a second. This means that Service A
is calling Service B 2,000 times a second. At 500 KB for each request,
each interservice call takes 1 GBps of bandwidth!

This form of coupling, called stamp coupling, consumes significant
amounts of bandwidth in distributed architectures. If Service B were to
pass back only the 200 bytes of data that Service A needs, it would use
only 400 Kbps in total.

Stamp coupling can be resolved by:

- Creating private RESTful API endpoints

- Using field selectors in contracts

- Using GraphQL to decouple contracts

- Using value-driven contracts with consumer-driven contracts

- Using internal messaging endpoints

Regardless of the technique used, the best way to address this fallacy
in a distributed architecture is to ensure that services or systems
transmit only the necessary data.

Fallacy #4: The Network Is Secure

[Fallacy 4]

Figure 9-10. The network is not secure

Most architects and developers get so comfortable using virtual private
networks (VPNs), trusted networks, and firewalls that they tend to
forget about this fallacy of distributed computing—but the network is
not secure. As shown in Figure 9-10, each and every endpoint to each
distributed deployment unit must be secured against unknown or bad
requests. The surface area for threats and attacks increases by
magnitudes when moving from a monolithic to a distributed architecture,
making security much more challenging. Securing every endpoint, even in
interservice communication, is another reason performance tends to be
slower in synchronous, highly distributed architecture styles, such as
microservices and service-based architectures.

Fallacy #5: The Topology Never Changes

[Fallacy 5]

Figure 9-11. The network topology always changes

Fallacy #5, as shown in Figure 9-11, refers to the overall network
topology, including all of its routers, hubs, switches, firewalls,
networks, and appliances. Architects assume that the topology is fixed
and never changes. Of course it changes. It changes all the time. What
is the significance of this fallacy?

Suppose you come into work on a Monday morning and everyone is running
around like crazy, because services keep timing out in production. You
work with the teams, frantically trying to figure out why this is
happening. No new services were deployed over the weekend. What could it
be? After several hours, you discover that a supposedly “minor” network
upgrade at two o’clock that morning invalidated all of the system’s
latency assumptions, triggering timeouts and circuit breakers.

Architects must be in constant communication with operations and network
administrators about what is changing and when so that they can make
adjustments to avoid such surprises. This may seem obvious and easy, but
it is neither. As a matter of fact, this fallacy leads directly to the
next fallacy.

Fallacy #6: There Is Only One Administrator

[Fallacy 6]

Figure 9-12. There are many network administrators, not just one

Architects fall into this fallacy all the time: assuming they only need
to collaborate and communicate with one administrator. As Figure 9-12
shows, there are dozens of network administrators in a typical large
company. With whom should the architect talk about latency or topology
changes? This fallacy points to the complexity of distributed
architecture and the amount of coordination that must happen to get
everything working correctly. A monolithic application, with its single
deployment unit, doesn’t require this level of communication and
collaboration.

Fallacy #7: Transport Cost Is Zero

[Fallacy 7]

Figure 9-13. Remote access costs money

Many software architects confuse this fallacy, shown in Figure 9-13,
with fallacy #2 (latency is zero). Transport cost here refers not to
latency, but to the actual monetary cost of making a “simple RESTful
call.” Architects incorrectly assume that the necessary and sufficient
infrastructure is already in place for making a simple RESTful call or
breaking apart a monolithic application. It is usually not. Distributed
architectures cost significantly more than monolithic architectures,
primarily due to increased needs for hardware, servers, gateways,
firewalls, new subnets, proxies, and so on.

We encourage architects embarking on a distributed architecture to
analyze their current server and network topology with regard to
capacity, bandwidth, latency, and security zones, to avoid getting
surprised by this fallacy.

Fallacy #8: The Network Is Homogeneous

[Fallacy 8]

Figure 9-14. The network is not homogeneous

Most architects and developers assume that a network is homogeneous, as
shown in Figure 9-14—that it’s made up of network hardware from only one
vendor. Nothing could be further from the truth. Most companies’
infrastructures have multiple network-hardware vendors.

So what? The significance of this fallacy is that not all of those
heterogeneous hardware vendors play together well. Does Juniper Networks
hardware integrate seamlessly with Cisco Systems hardware? Most of it
works, and networking standards have evolved over the years, making this
less of an issue. However, not all situations, loads, and circumstances
have been fully tested, so network packets do occasionally get lost.
This in turn affects network reliability and assumptions and assertions
about latency and bandwidth. In other words, this fallacy ties back into
all of the other fallacies, forming an endless loop of confusion and
frustration when dealing with networks (which is inescapable when using
distributed architectures).

The Other Fallacies

The eight fallacies previously listed form a famous set of
observations—every architect learns them either from Deutsch’s list or
the hard way, one by one, over the course of their career. The authors
have also learned some painful, near-universal lessons that we offer as
an extension to that famous list.

Fallacy #9. Versioning is easy

When two services need to communicate, they pass information in a
contract, which includes information required for the communication.
Often, a service’s internal implementation evolves over time, changing
fields that the service accepts and passes to other services. One way to
solve this problem is to use versioning for the contract—that is, create
different versions for the old and new contracts including different
sets of information. However, this seemingly simple decision leads to a
host of trade-offs:

- Should the team version at the individual service level or for the
  whole system?

- How far should the versioning reach? What portion of the architecture
  will need to support it?

- How many versions should the team support at any given time? (Some
  teams accidentally find themselves honoring dozens of different
  versions for different purposes.)

- Should the team deprecate older versions at the system level or
  service by service?

While versioning is a reasonable approach for evolving communication
between services, it has a host of trade-offs that architects should
anticipate.

Fallacy #10. Compensating updates always work

Compensating updates is an architectural pattern in which some mechanism
(like an Orchestrator service) makes sure that several related services
all update jointly. If they don’t, the orchestrator reverses the update.
The compensating update is from the orchestrator that issues a reversing
operation to put the state back to what it was before.

This is a common pattern that most architects blithely assume always
works… but it doesn’t. What happens if the compensating update fails?
When architects demonstrate how complex interactions in distributed
architectures like microservices work, they must also show how
compensating updates work. Thus, architects designing transactional
workflows in microservices should accommodate the “normal” compensation
workflow, but must also consider how to recover if the update and the
compensating update (or a portion of it) both fail.

Fallacy #11. Observability is optional (for distributed architectures)

A common architectural characteristic for architects to prioritize in
distributed architectures is observability: the ability to observe each
service’s interactions with other services and the ecosystem, as
captured through monitors or logs. While logging is useful in monolithic
architectures, it is critical in distributed architectures, which offer
many communication failure modes that are hard to debug without
comprehensive interaction logs.

Team Topologies and Architecture

Architects and teams have done lots of research on the intersection of
architecture and team topologies, above and beyond the implications of
architecture partitioning, which we previously discussed. The very
influential book Team Topologies by Matthew Skelton and Manuel Pais (IT
Revolution Press, 2019) defines several team types that intersect with
software architecture:

Stream-aligned teams

    In team topologies terminology, a stream is a stream of work scoped
    to a particular business domain or capability. Stream-aligned teams
    focus narrowly on a single line of work, such as a product, service,
    or specific set of features.

    The goal of stream-aligned teams is to move as quickly as possible
    because they are delivering discrete value to the organization.
    Consequently, the other team types are designed to reduce any
    friction that could impede the stream-aligned teams.

Enabling teams

    An enabling team bridges a gap in some capability, providing a place
    for necessary research, learning, and other tasks that are important
    but not urgent. They supply knowledge and resources from specialized
    domains to support stream-aligned teams. Good enabling teams are
    highly collaborative and proactive.

Complicated-subsystem teams

    Many systems include highly specialized systems or parts that
    require similarly specialized skills. Members of
    complicated-subsystem teams fully understand a complex subsystem or
    domain and can help a stream-aligned team apply it. Their goal is to
    reduce other teams’ cognitive load.

Platform teams

    A platform team provides internal services and building blocks for
    solutions. As defined by Evan Botcher, a platform is

      a foundation of self-service APIs, tools, services, knowledge and
      support which are arranged as a compelling internal product.
      Autonomous delivery teams can make use of the platform to deliver
      product features at a higher pace, with reduced coordination.

    Platform teams support the other teams, attempting to remove
    needless friction while providing necessary governance around
    concerns such as quality and security.

On to Specific Styles

Architects need to understand a number of different architecture styles
before they can perform trade-off analysis. Each style supports a
different set of architectural characteristics—​each one has a “sweet
spot” that it handles best. By learning the different styles and their
underlying philosophies, an architect better understands when each one
works best (or least worst, anyway).

Chapter 10. Layered Architecture Style

The layered architecture style, also known as n-tiered, is one of the
most common architecture styles. It’s the de facto standard for many
legacy applications because of its simplicity, familiarity, and low
cost.

The layered architecture style can fall into several architectural
antipatterns, including the Architecture by Implication and the
Accidental Architecture antipatterns. When developers or architects
“just start coding,” unsure which architecture style they are using,
chances are good that they’re implementing the layered architecture
style.

Topology

Components within the layered architecture style are organized into
logical horizontal layers, as shown in Figure 10-1, with each layer
performing a specific role within the application (such as presentation
logic or business logic). Although there are no specific restrictions in
terms of the number and types of layers that must exist, most layered
architectures consist of four standard layers: Presentation, Business,
Persistence, and Database. Some architectures combine the Business and
Persistence layers, particularly when the persistence logic (such as SQL
or HSQL) is embedded within the Business layer components. Smaller
applications may have only three layers, whereas larger and more complex
business applications may contain five or more.

[Standard logical layers]

Figure 10-1. Standard logical layers within the layered architecture style

Figure 10-2 illustrates topology variants from a physical layering
(deployment) perspective. The first variant combines the Presentation,
Business, and Persistence layers into a single deployment unit, with the
Database layer typically represented as a separate external physical
database (or filesystem). The second variant physically separates the
Presentation layer into its own deployment unit, with the Business and
Persistence layers combined into a second deployment unit. Again, with
this variant, the Database layer is usually physically separated through
an external database or filesystem. A third variant combines all four
standard layers into a single deployment, including the Database layer.
This variant might be useful for smaller applications with an internally
embedded database or an in-memory database, such as mobile device
applications. Many on-premises (on-prem) products are built and
delivered to customers using this third variant.

[Physical topology variants]

Figure 10-2. Physical topology (deployment) variants

Each layer has a specific role and responsibility, and forms an
abstraction around the work that needs to be done to satisfy a
particular business request. For example, the Presentation layer is
responsible for handling all UI and browser communication logic, whereas
the Business layer is responsible for executing specific business rules
associated with the request. The Presentation layer doesn’t need to know
or worry about how to get customer data; it only needs to display that
information on a screen in a particular format. Similarly, the Business
layer doesn’t need to be concerned about how to format customer data for
display on a screen or even where that data is coming from; it only
needs to get the data from the Persistence layer, perform business logic
against it (such as calculating values or aggregating data), and pass
that information up to the Presentation layer.

This separation of concerns within the layered architecture style makes
it easy to build effective role and responsibility models. Components
within a specific layer are limited in scope, dealing only with the
logic that pertains to that layer. For example, components in the
Presentation layer only handle presentation logic, whereas components
residing in the Business layer only handle business logic. This allows
developers to leverage their particular technical expertise to focus on
the technical aspects of the domain (such as presentation logic or
persistence logic). The trade-off of this benefit, however, is a lack of
overall holistic agility (the entire system’s ability to respond quickly
to change).

The layered architecture is a technically partitioned architecture (as
opposed to domain-partitioned architecture). This means, as you learned
in Chapter 9, that components are separated by their technical role in
the architecture (such as presentation or business) rather than by
domain (such as customer). As a result, any particular business domain
is spread throughout all of the layers of the architecture. For example,
the domain of “customer” is contained in the Presentation layer,
Business layer, Rules layer, Services layer, and Database layer, making
it difficult to apply changes to that domain. As a result, a DDD
approach does not fit particularly well with the layered architecture
style.

Style Specifics

Layers in this architectural style encapsulate specific areas of
technical responsibility, but the layers themselves may exhibit other
characteristics.

Layers of Isolation

Each layer can be either closed or open. If a layer is closed, then as a
request moves from the top layer down to the bottom layer, the request
cannot skip any layers. It must go through the layer immediately beneath
to get to the next layer (see Figure 10-3). For example, in an
architecture where all the layers are closed, a request originating from
the Presentation layer must first go through the Business layer and then
to the Persistence layer before finally making it to the Database layer.

[Closed layers]

Figure 10-3. Closed layers within a layered architecture

Notice that in Figure 10-3 it would be much faster and easier for the
Presentation layer to access the database directly for simple retrieval
requests, bypassing any unnecessary layers (what used to be known in the
early 2000s as the Fast-Lane Reader pattern). For this to happen, the
Business and Persistence layers would have to be open, allowing requests
to bypass other layers. Which is better—open layers or closed layers?
The answer to this question lies in a key concept known as layers of
isolation.

The layers of isolation concept means that changes made in one layer of
the architecture generally don’t impact or affect components in other
layers, provided the contracts between those layers remain unchanged.
Each layer is independent of the other layers, with little or no
knowledge of their inner workings. However, to support layers of
isolation, layers involved with the major flow of a request have to be
closed. If the Presentation layer can access the Persistence layer
directly, then changes made to the Persistence layer would impact both
the Business layer and the Presentation layer, producing a very tightly
coupled application with layer interdependencies between components.
This makes a layered architecture very brittle, as well as difficult and
expensive to change.

Using layers of isolation also allows any layer in the architecture to
be replaced without impacting any other layer (again, assuming
well-defined contracts and the use of the Business Delegate pattern).¹
For example, you can leverage layers of isolation to replace your older
UI framework with a newer one, all within the Presentation layer.

Adding Layers

While closed layers facilitate layers of isolation and therefore help
isolate change, there are times when it makes sense for certain layers
to be open. For example, suppose your layered architecture’s Business
layer has shared objects that contain common functionality for business
components (such as date and string utility classes, auditing classes,
logging classes, and so on). You make an architecture decision
restricting the Presentation layer from using these shared business
objects. This constraint is illustrated in Figure 10-4, with the dotted
line going from a presentation component to a shared business object in
the Business layer. This scenario is difficult to govern and control
because, architecturally, the Presentation layer has access to the
Business layer, and hence access to the shared objects within that
layer.

[Shared objects]

Figure 10-4. Shared objects within the Business layer

One way to mandate this restriction architecturally would be to add a
new Services layer containing all of the shared business objects (see
Figure 10-5). Adding this new layer would architecturally restrict the
Presentation layer from accessing the shared business objects because
the Business layer is closed. However, you must mark the new Services
layer as open; otherwise, the Business layer would be forced to go
through the Services layer to access the Persistence layer. Marking the
Services layer as open allows the Business layer to either access that
layer (as indicated by the solid arrow) or bypass it and go to the next
one down (as indicated by the dotted arrow).

[Adding a services layer]

Figure 10-5. Adding a new Services layer to the architecture

Leveraging the concept of open and closed layers helps define the
relationship between architecture layers and request flows. It also
provides developers with the necessary information and guidance to
understand layer access restrictions within the architecture. Failure to
document or properly communicate which layers in the architecture are
open and closed (and why) usually results in tightly coupled, brittle
architectures that are very difficult to test, maintain, and deploy.

Every layered architecture will have at least some scenarios that fall
into the Architecture Sinkhole antipattern. This antipattern occurs when
requests are simply passed through from layer to layer, with no business
logic performed. For example, suppose the Presentation layer responds to
a user’s simple request to retrieve basic customer data (such as name
and address). The Presentation layer passes the request to the Business
layer, which does nothing but pass the request on to the Rules layer,
which in turn does nothing but pass it on to the Persistence layer,
which then makes a simple SQL call to the Database layer to retrieve the
customer data. The data is then passed all the way back up the stack
with no additional processing or logic to aggregate, calculate, apply
rules to, or transform any of it. This results in unnecessary object
instantiation and processing, draining both memory consumption and
performance.

The key to determining whether this antipattern is at play is to analyze
the percentage of requests that fall into this category. The 80-20 rule
is usually a good practice to follow. For example, it is acceptable if
only 20% of the requests are sinkholes; however, if it’s 80%, that’s a
good indicator that the layered architecture is not the correct
architecture style for the problem domain. Another approach to solving
the Architecture Sinkhole antipattern is to make all the layers in the
architecture open—realizing, of course, that the trade-off is increased
difficulty in managing change.

Data Topologies

Traditionally, layered architectures form a monolithic system alongside
a single, monolithic database. The common Persistence layer is often
used to map object hierarchies between favored object-oriented languages
and the set-based realm of relational databases.

Cloud Considerations

Because layered architectures are typically monolithic and partitioned
into layers, the cloud options are limited to deploying one or more
layers via a cloud provider. The technical partitioning inherent in this
architecture is a good fit for separated deployments via the cloud.
However, communication latency between on-premises servers and the cloud
may create issues, because workflows typically go through most of the
layers in this architecture.

Common Risks

Layered architectures don’t support fault tolerance, due to their
monolithic deployments and lack of architectural modularity. If one
small part of a layered architecture causes an out-of-memory condition
to occur, the entire application unit crashes. Overall availability is
also impacted due to most monolithic applications’ high mean time to
recover (MTTR): startup times can range from 2 minutes for smaller
applications, to 15 minutes or more for most large applications.

Governance

The news is excellent for this architecture style’s governance: because
it is so common, the architects who built some of the original
structural testing tools did so with this architecture in mind. In fact,
the example fitness function in Figure 6-4 was created for the layered
architecture (see Example 10-1).

Example 10-1. ArchUnit fitness function to govern layers

    layeredArchitecture()
        .layer("Controller").definedBy("..controller..")
        .layer("Service").definedBy("..service..")
        .layer("Persistence").definedBy("..persistence..")

        .whereLayer("Controller").mayNotBeAccessedByAnyLayer()
        .whereLayer("Service").mayOnlyBeAccessedByLayers("Controller")
        .whereLayer("Persistence").mayOnlyBeAccessedByLayers("Service")

In Example 10-1, the architect defines the layers in the architecture,
providing convenient names such as Controller for the component
represented by the package name. (In ArchUnit syntax, two periods (..)
on either side of a package name indicate its ownership.) Then the
architect defines the communication permitted between layers, governing
their open and closed layers.

Fitness function libraries support the layered architecture style
extremely well, allowing architects to automate governance of the
relationships they design between layers during implementation.

Team Topology Considerations

Unlike some of the architectural styles described in this book, the
layered architecture style is generally independent of team topologies
and will work with any team configuration:

Stream-aligned teams

    Because the layered architecture is typically small and
    self-contained and represents a single journey or flow through the
    system, it works well with stream-aligned teams. With this team
    topology, teams generally own the flow through the system through
    each layer from beginning to end, creating workflows as part of
    their solutions.

Enabling teams

    Because the layered architecture is highly modular and separated by
    technical concerns, it pairs well with enabling team topologies.
    Specialists and cross-cutting team members can interface with one or
    more layers to make suggestions and perform experiments, without
    affecting the rest of the flow. For example, the team could
    experiment with a new UI library by adding new behaviors to the
    Presentation layer, while isolating the other layers from the
    changes.

Complicated-subsystem teams

    Because each layer performs a very specific task, this style works
    well with the complicated-subsystem team topology. For example, the
    Persistence layer provides the perfect hook for a team that requires
    access to operational data for analytical purposes. If allowed
    access at the Persistence layer, the complicated-subsystem team can
    work without affecting any other layers that the stream-aligned
    teams still owns.

Platform teams

    Platform teams working on a layered architecture can leverage its
    high degree of modularity by utilizing the many tools available for
    it.

The biggest challenge with layered architectures for most platform teams
tracks the overall issue with monoliths in general: as they grow, they
become increasingly unwieldy. If teams keep adding features to a
monolith, no matter how well partitioned and governed, it will
eventually start straining at some constraints: database connections,
memory, performance, concurrent users, or a host of other impending
problems. Keeping the system operational will require the platform team
to do increasingly difficult work.

Style Characteristics

A one-star rating in the characteristics ratings table (shown in
Figure 10-6) means the specific architecture characteristic isn’t well
supported in the architecture, whereas a five-star rating means the
architecture characteristic is one of the strongest features in the
architecture style. The definition for each characteristic identified in
the scorecard can be found in Chapter 4.

[Layered Ratings]

Figure 10-6. Layered architecture characteristics ratings

Overall cost and simplicity are the primary strengths of the layered
architecture style. Being monolithic, layered architectures aren’t as
complex as distributed architecture styles; they’re simpler, easier to
understand, and relatively low cost to build and maintain. Use caution,
though, because these ratings diminish quickly as the monolithic layered
architecture gets bigger and consequently more complex.

Neither deployability nor testability rate well for this architecture
style. Deployability is low because deployments are high risk,
infrequent, and involve a lot of ceremony and effort. For example, to
make a simple three-line change to a class file, the entire deployment
unit must be redeployed—introducing the potential for changes to the
database, configuration, or other aspects of the code to sneak in
alongside the original change. Furthermore, this simple three-line
change is usually bundled with dozens of other changes, each of which
further increases the risk and frequency of deployments. The low
testability rating also reflects this scenario; with a simple three-line
change, most developers are not going to spend hours executing the
entire regression test suite for a simple three-line change (assuming
they even have such a test suite). We give testability a two-star rating
(rather than one star) because this style offers the ability to mock or
stub components or even an entire layer, which eases the overall testing
effort.

The engineering characteristics of the layered architecture style
reflect the dynamic mentioned above: they all start well, but degrade as
the size of the code base grows.

Elasticity and scalability rate very low (one star) for the layered
architecture, primarily due to its monolithic deployments and lack of
architectural modularity. Although it is possible to make certain
functions within a monolith scale more than other functions, this effort
usually requires very complex design techniques for which this
architecture isn’t well suited, such as multithreading, internal
messaging, and other parallel processing practices. However, because a
layered system’s architecture quantum is always 1 (due to its monolithic
UI and database and its backend processing), applications can only scale
to a certain point.

Architects can achieve high responsiveness in a layered architecture
with careful design, and increase it further through techniques such as
caching and multithreading. We give this style three stars overall,
because it does suffer from a lack of inherent parallel processing, as
well as from closed layering and the Architecture Sinkhole antipattern.

When to Use

The layered architecture style is a good choice for small, simple
applications or websites. It is also a good starting point for
situations with very tight budget and time constraints. Because of its
simplicity and its familiarity to developers and architects, this is
perhaps one of the lowest-cost styles, promoting ease of development for
smaller applications. The layered architecture style is also a good
choice when architects are still determining whether more complex
architectures would be more suitable, but must begin development.

When using this technique, keep code reuse at a minimum and keep object
hierarchies (the depth of the inheritance tree) fairly shallow to
maintain a good level of modularity. This will facilitate moving to
another architecture style later on.

When Not to Use

As we’ve shown, characteristics like maintainability, agility,
testability, and deployability are adversely affected as applications
using the layered architecture style grow. For this reason, large
applications and systems might be better off using other, more modular
architecture styles.

Examples and Use Cases

The layered architecture is one of the most common architecture styles
and shows up in numerous contexts.

Designers of operating systems (like Linux or Windows) tend to use
layers for the same reasons application architects do—separation of
concerns. Common layers in operating systems include:

Hardware layer

    Includes physical hardware like CPU, memory, and I/O devices

Kernel layer

    Provides hardware abstraction, memory management, and process
    scheduling

System Call Interface layer

    Interacts with the kernel to provide system services

User layer

    Includes applications and utilities that users interact with

The networking Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model conceives of how
networks should delineate responsibility. For example, the base protocol
of the internet, TCP/IP, includes the following layers:

Physical layer

    Physically transmits data

Data Link layer

    Utilizes error detection and frame synchronization

Network layer

    Handles routing (such as IP)

Transport layer

    Ensures reliable data transmission (such as TCP)

Application layer

    Provides services like email (SMTP), file transfer (FTP), and web
    browsing (HTTP)

Layered architecture promotes separation of concerns, improves
maintainability, and allows for independent development of each layer,
so any architecture that values these features will benefit from it.

Layered architecture is also extremely common for teams trying to
achieve the architectural characteristics of feasibility: can we
actually deliver the stated scope in the allotted time with the
resources available? For example, if an organization is fueled by
investors and needs to deliver something as quickly as possible, the
simplicity of layered architecture often makes it a good choice, even if
parts need to be rewritten later to achieve different capabilities.

¹ Business Delegate is a pattern designed to reduce coupling between
business services and the user interface. Business delegates act as
adapters to invoke business objects from the presentation tier.

Chapter 11. The Modular Monolith Architecture Style

Thanks to the widespread adoption of domain-driven design (DDD), as well
as increased focus on domain partitioning, the modular monolith
architectural style has gained so much popularity since we wrote the
first edition of this book in 2020 that we decided to add a chapter to
the second edition describing (and rating) it.

Topology

As the name suggests, the modular monolith architecture style is a
monolithic architecture. As such, it’s deployed as a single unit of
software: a web archive (WAR) file, a single assembly in .NET, an
enterprise archive (EAR) file in the Java platform, and so on. Because
modular monolith is considered a domain-partitioned architecture (one
organized by business domains rather than technical capabilities), its
isomorphic shape is defined as a single deployment unit with
functionality grouped by domain area. Figure 11-1 illustrates the
typical topology for modular monolith.

To get a sense of the nature of modular monolith’s domain focus,
consider the traditional layered architecture (described in Chapter 10).
Its components are defined and organized by their technical
capabilities: Presentation, Business, and Persistence layers, and so on.
For example, the presentation logic for maintaining customer profile
information might be represented by a component with the namespace
com.app.presentation.customer.profile. The third node in the namespace
represents the layer’s technical concern (in this case, the Presentation
layer).

[Modular monolith topology]

Figure 11-1. With the modular monolith architecture style, functionality is grouped by domain area

Conversely, modular monolith components are primarily organized by
domain. As such, in a modular monolith architecture, the same customer
profile maintenance component would be represented by the namespace
com.app.customer.profile. Here, the third node of the namespace refers
to a domain concern rather than a technical one. Depending on the
complexity of the component, the namespace might further be divided by
technical concern after the domain concern, such as
com.app.customer.profile.presentation or
com.app.customer.profile.business.

Style Specifics

Domains (or subdomains, in some cases) are called modules in this
architectural style. Modules can be organized in one of two ways. The
simplest architecture is a monolithic structure, where all of the
modules and corresponding logical components are contained within the
same code base, delineated by the namespace or directory structure they
are contained in. A slightly more complex option is the modular
structure, where each module is represented as an independent,
self-contained artifact (such as a JAR or DLL file), and the modules are
combined into one monolithic unit of software during deployment.

As with everything in software architecture, the choice between these
two structural options depends on many factors and trade-offs. The
following sections outline both and discuss their corresponding
trade-offs.

Monolithic Structure

In the monolithic structure, all of the modules representing the system
are contained in a single source-code repository. All the code
associated with each module is deployed as a single unit when delivering
or releasing the software. This structural option is illustrated in
Figure 11-2. Each module is represented by a separate high-level
directory containing the components and any subdomains that make up that
module.

[Monolithic structure]

Figure 11-2. An example of the monolithic structure option

The following namespaces illustrate what a modular monolith might look
like for the architecture shown in Figure 11-2:

    com.orderentry.orderplacement
    com.orderentry.inventorymanagement
    com.orderentry.paymentprocessing
    com.orderentry.notification
    com.orderentry.fulfillment
    com.orderentry.shipping

This is the simplest option for the modular monolith: all of the
system’s source code is located in one place and is thus more easily
maintained, tested, and deployed. However, strict governance is needed
(see “Governance”) to maintain the boundaries of each module. Although
this structural option is simple, developers have a tendency to reuse
too much code across modules, as well as allowing too much communication
between modules (see “Module Communication”). These practices can turn a
well-architected modular monolith into an unstructured Big Ball of Mud.

Modular Structure

With the modular structure, modules are represented as self-contained
artifacts (such as JAR and DLL files), then put together into a single
deployment unit during deployment. Figure 11-3 illustrates this option
using JAR files in the Java platform.

[Modular structure]

Figure 11-3. An example of the modular structure option using JAR files

The advantage of this structure is that each module is self-contained,
allowing teams to work on separate modules (see “Team Topology
Considerations”), many times even within the team’s own dedicated source
code repository for those modules. This option works well when the
modules are largely independent of other modules. It also works well for
larger, more complex systems where each module requires a different kind
of expertise or business knowledge. With the modular structure option,
developers are less apt to reuse code too much or to have modules
communicate too much with one another (see “Module Communication”). This
option also tends to produce cleaner boundaries between modules and
better overall separation of concerns.

However, this structural option loses its effectiveness when modules
that are dependent on one other need to communicate. Where this is the
case, the monolithic structure approach is more effective.

Module Communication

Communication between modules is never a good thing in this
architectural style, but we do acknowledge that in many cases it’s
necessary. For instance, in the architecture shown in Figure 11-2, the
OrderPlacement module must communicate with the InventoryManagement
module to have it adjust the inventory for the item ordered and perform
any additional processing (for example, to order more stock if the
inventory is too low). It also has to communicate with the
PaymentProcessing module to apply payment for an order. Two primary
options exist for communicating between modules, which we describe in
the following sections.

Peer-to-peer approach

The most straightforward solution is simple peer-to-peer communication
between modules. With this approach, a class file in one module
instantiates a class in another module and invokes the necessary
method(s) in that class to perform the operation (see Figure 11-4).

[Peer-to-peer communication between modules]

Figure 11-4. Peer-to-peer communication between modules

One issue with the monolithic approach is that it’s too convenient for
developers to instantiate any class contained within another module.
This makes it easy to go from a well-structured architecture to the Big
Ball of Mud antipattern (see Figure 9-1).

With the modular structure, however, the classes contained in another
module may be located in separate, external artifacts (JARs or DLL
files) rather than a separate directory in the source code repository. A
module that communicates with other modules won’t compile unless it has
the class references, which means the developer has to form a
compile-time dependency between those modules. The usual response to
this issue is to create a shared interface class between those modules
(in a separately shared JAR or DLL file) so that each module can compile
independently of other modules. Either way, too much communication
between modules using the modular structure approach results in the DLL
Hell antipattern (or, in the Java platform, the JAR Hell antipattern).

Mediator approach

The mediator approach decouples modules by using a mediator component to
form an abstraction layer between modules. The mediator acts as an
orchestrator, accepting requests and delivering them to the appropriate
modules. Figure 11-5 illustrates this approach.

[Mediator communication]

Figure 11-5. The mediator decouples modules, so they don’t have to communicate with each other

The astute reader will observe that, while the mediator approach
decouples modules, each module is effectively coupled to the mediator.
This approach doesn’t remove all coupling and dependencies, but it does
simplify the architecture and keep the modules independent from each
other. Note that it is the mediator, not the dependent modules, that
needs some sort of API or interface to invoke the functionality in other
modules.

Data Topologies

Because the modular monolith architecture is usually deployed as a
single unit of software, it typically relies on a monolithic database
topology. Using a single database helps reduce communication between
modules, since the data is shared. However, if the modules are
independent from each other and perform specific functions, they can
also have their own databases containing specific contextual data, even
though the architecture itself is monolithic. Figure 11-6 illustrates
these two database topology options.

[Database topology]

Figure 11-6. Data can be monolithic or modules can have their own databases

Cloud Considerations

Although modular monolithic architectures can be deployed in cloud
environments (particularly if it’s a small system), they’re not
generally well suited for cloud deployment: their monolithic nature
renders them less likely to be able to take advantage of the on-demand
provisioning that cloud environments offer. That said, smaller systems
implemented in this architectural style can still leverage many cloud
services, such as file storage, database, and messaging.

Common Risks

As with any monolithic system, the primary risk with the modular
monolith architectural style is that it can get too big to properly
maintain, test, and deploy. Monolithic architectures in and of
themselves aren’t bad; it’s when they get too big that problems start to
occur. What “too big” means varies from system to system, but here are
some of the warning signs that the system might be too big:

- Changes take too long to make.

- When one area of the system is changed, other areas unexpectedly
  break.

- Team members get in each other’s way when applying changes.

- It takes too long for the system to start up.

Another risk is going overboard with code reuse. Code reuse and sharing
are a necessary part of software development, but in this architecture
style, too much code reuse blurs the module boundaries, leading the
architecture into the risky territory of the unstructured monolith: a
monolithic architecture with such highly interdependent code that it
cannot be unraveled.

Too much intermodule communication is another risk in this architectural
style. Ideally, modules should be independent and self-contained. As
we’ve noted, it’s normal (and sometimes necessary) for some modules to
communicate with others, particularly within a complex workflow.
However, if there’s too much intercommunication between modules, it’s a
good indication that the domains may have been ill-defined in the first
place. In such cases, it’s worth putting additional thought into
redefining the domains to accommodate complex workflows and
interdependencies.

Governance

The primary artifact in the modular monolith style is a module, which
represents a particular domain or subdomain and is usually represented
through the directory structure or namespace (or package structure in
the Java platform). Therefore, one of the first forms of automated
governance architects can apply is defining and ensuring compliance with
the modules used in the architecture.

To write automated governance checks, architects use a host of tools,
including ArchUnit for the Java platform, ArchUnitNet and NetArchTest
for the .NET platform, PyTestArch for Python, and TSArch for TypeScript
and JavaScript. The pseudocode in Example 11-1 ensures that all of the
source code represented in the architecture example shown in Figure 11-2
falls under one of the listed namespaces that represent each defined
module in the system.

Example 11-1. Pseudocode for ensuring the code follows the system’s defined modules

    # The following namespaces represent the modules in the system
    LIST module_list = {
       com.orderentry.orderplacement,
       com.orderentry.inventorymanagement,
       com.orderentry.paymentprocessing,
       com.orderentry.notification,
       com.orderentry.fulfillment,
       com.orderentry.shipping
       }

    # Get the list of namespaces in the system
    LIST namespace_list = get_all_namespaces(root_directory)

    # Make sure all the namespaces start with one of the listed modules
    FOREACH namespace IN namespace_list {
       IF NOT namespace.starts_with(module_list) {
          send_alert(namespace)
       }
    }

If a developer creates any additional high-level namespaces or
directories outside the defined modules and their corresponding
namespaces (or directories), they will receive an alert indicating the
source code is not in compliance with the architecture.

This form of governance works well with the monolithic structure option
of this architecture style (see “Monolithic Structure”), but is
challenging with the modular structure option (see “Modular Structure”)
because the code might not be contained in the same monolithic source
code repository. With the modular structure option, each module must be
tested separately, as shown in Example 11-2.

Example 11-2. Pseudocode for validating the InventoryManagement module

    # Get the list of namespaces in the system
    LIST namespace_list = get_all_namespaces(root_directory)

    # Make sure all the namespaces start with com.orderentry.inventorymanagement
    FOREACH namespace IN namespace_list {
       IF NOT namepace.starts_with("com.orderentry.inventorymanagement") {
          send_alert(namespace)
       }
    }

Another way to govern a modular monolith architecture is to control the
amount of communication between modules. Defining what is “too much”
communication is highly subjective and varies from system to system, but
for the most part, architects should try to minimize the number of
interdependencies between modules. Example 11-3 shows pseudocode for
making sure the maximum total interdependency doesn’t exceed a limit of
five communication (or coupling) points.

Example 11-3. Pseudocode for limiting any given module’s total number of dependencies

    # Walk the directory structure, gathering modules and the source code files
    # contained within those modules
    LIST module_list = {
       com.orderentry.orderplacement,
       com.orderentry.inventorymanagement,
       com.orderentry.paymentprocessing,
       com.orderentry.notification,
       com.orderentry.fulfillment,
       com.orderentry.shipping
       }

    MAP module_source_file_map
    FOREACH module IN module_list {
      LIST source_file_list = get_source_files(module)
      ADD module, source_file_list TO module_source_file_map
    }

    # Determine how many references exist for each source file and send an alert if
    # the system's total dependency count is greater than 5
    FOREACH module, source_file_list IN module_source_file_map {
      FOREACH source_file IN source_file_list {
        incoming count = used_by_other_module(source_file, module_source_file_map) {
        outgoing_count = uses_other_module(source_file) {
        total_count = incoming count + outgoing count
      }
      IF total_count > 5 {
        send_alert(module, total_count)
      }
    }

A final form of automated governance is to ensure that modules stay
independent of one another by restricting one specific module from
talking to another module. For example, in Figure 11-2, the
OrderPlacement module should not communicate with the Shipping module.
Example 11-4 shows the ArchUnit code in Java to govern this dependency.

Example 11-4. ArchUnit code for governing dependency restrictions between specific modules

    public void order_placement_cannot_access_shipping() {
       noClasses().that()
       .resideInAPackage("..com.orderentry.orderplacement..")
       .should().accessClassesThat()
       .resideInAPackage("..com.orderentry.shipping..")
       .check(myClasses);
    }

Team Topology Considerations

Because the modular monolith is considered a domain-partitioned
architecture, it works best when teams are also aligned by domain area
(such as cross-functional teams with specialization). When a
domain-based requirement comes along, a domain-focused, cross-functional
team can work together on that feature, from the presentation logic all
the way to the database. Conversely, teams organized by technical
categories (such as UI teams, backend teams, database teams, and so on)
do not work well with this architectural style, primarily due to its
domain partitioning. Assigning domain-based requirements to technically
organized teams requires a lot of communication and collaboration, which
often proves difficult.

Here are some considerations for aligning the specific team topologies
outlined in “Team Topologies and Architecture” with the modular monolith
style:

Stream-aligned teams

    Stream-aligned teams generally own the flow through the system from
    beginning to end, nicely matching the monolithic and generally
    self-contained shape of the modular monolith.

Enabling teams

    Due to this style’s high level of modularity and separation of
    concerns, enabling team topologies also works well. Specialists and
    cross-cutting team members can make suggestions and perform
    experiments by introducing additional modules to the system, with
    minimal impact to other existing modules.

Complicated-subsystem teams

    Each module in a modular monolith architecture generally performs a
    specific role based on its domain or subdomain (such as
    PaymentProcessing). This works well with the complicated-subsystem
    team topology, because different team members can focus on
    complicated domain or subdomain processing independent of other team
    members (and modules).

Platform teams

    Developers can leverage the benefits of the platform-teams topology
    by utilizing common tools, services, APIs, and tasks, primarily due
    to the high degree of modularity found in this architectural style.

Style Characteristics

A one-star rating in the characteristics ratings table Figure 11-7 means
the specific architecture characteristic isn’t well supported in the
architecture, whereas a five-star rating means the architecture
characteristic is one of the strongest features in the architecture
style. The characteristics contained in the scorecard are described and
defined in Chapter 4.

The modular monolith architecture style is a domain-partitioned
architecture because its application logic is partitioned into modules.
Because it is usually implemented as a monolithic deployment, its
architectural quantum is typically 1.

Overall cost, simplicity, and modularity are the primary strengths of
the modular monolith architecture style. Being monolithic in nature,
these architectures don’t have the complexities associated with
distributed architecture styles. They’re simpler and easier to
understand, and relatively low cost to build and maintain. Architectural
modularity is achieved through the separation of concerns between the
various modules, representing domains and subdomains.

Deployability and testability, while only two stars, rate slightly
higher in modular monolith than the layered architecture due to its
level of modularity. That said, this architecture style is still a
monolith: as such, ceremony, risk, frequency of deployment, and
completeness of testing negatively impact these scores.

Modular monolith architecture elasticity and scalability rate very low
(one star), primarily due to monolithic deployments. Although it is
possible to make certain functions within a monolith scale more than
others, this effort usually requires very complex design techniques
(such as multithreading, internal messaging, and other
parallel-processing practices) for which this architecture isn’t well
suited.

[Modular monolith star ratings]

Figure 11-7. Architectural characteristics star ratings for the modular monolith

Modular monolith architecture monolithic deployments don’t support fault
tolerance. If one small part of the architecture causes an out-of-memory
condition, the entire application unit crashes. Furthermore, as in most
monolithic applications, overall availability is affected by the high
mean time to recovery (MTTR), with startup times usually measured in
minutes.

When to Use

Because of its simplicity and low cost, the modular monolith
architecture style is a good choice when faced with tight budget and
time constraints. It’s also a good choice for starting out with a new
system. If the system’s architectural direction is still unclear, it’s
often more effective to begin with a modular monolith and later move to
a more complicated and expensive distributed architecture style, such as
service based (see Chapter 14) or microservices (see Chapter 18), than
to jump straight into the distributed architecture.

Modular monolith is also a good choice for domain-focused teams, such as
cross-functional teams with specialization. This allows each team to
focus on a specific module within the architecture from end to end, with
minimal coordination with other domain teams. This architectural style
is also well suited for situations where a majority of changes to the
system are domain based (such as adding expiration dates to items in a
customer’s wishlist).

Lastly, because the modular monolith is a domain-partitioned
architecture, it’s well suited to teams engaging in DDD.

When Not to Use

The primary reason not to use this architectural style is when systems
or products require high levels of certain operational characteristics,
such as scalability, elasticity, availability, fault tolerance,
responsiveness, and performance. Like most monolithic architectures,
modular monolith is ill-suited for these architectural concerns.

Avoid using modular monolith when a majority of the changes are
technically oriented, such as continuously replacing the user interface
or database technology. Because this architecture is domain partitioned,
such changes impact every module and usually require significant
communication and coordination between domain teams. In these
situations, the layered architecture style (see Chapter 10) is a much
better choice.

Examples and Use Cases

EasyMeals is a new delivery-based neighborhood restaurant, catering to
working people who don’t always have time to cook meals after getting
home from a busy day. Hungry customers can order a nice dinner online
and have it delivered to their doorstep within an hour.

As a small, local restaurant, they don’t have high scalability or
responsiveness needs. And since their budget is limited, they don’t want
to spend a lot of money on an elaborate software system. The shape of
this business problem makes the modular monolith a good choice for
EasyMeals.

Figure 11-8 shows what EasyMeals’ simple restaurant management system
might look like using the modular monolith architectural style.

[Use case example]

Figure 11-8. A small restaurant ordering and management system using the modular monolith style

Customers access the PlaceOrder and PaymentProcessing modules through a
dedicated user interface through a different UI. The following
namespaces represent each of the modules for this system:

    com.easymeals.placeorder
    com.easymeals.payment
    com.easymeals.prepareorder
    com.easymeals.delivery
    com.easymeals.recipes
    com.easymeals.inventory

The PlaceOrder module allows each customer to view the menu; select
items; add their name, address, and payment information; and submit the
order. The components for this module could be represented through the
following namespaces, with source code implementing each of these main
functions:

    com.easymeals.placeorder.menu
    com.easymeals.placeorder.shoppingcart
    com.easymeals.placeorder.customerdata
    com.easymeals.placeorder.paymentdata
    com.easymeals.placeorder.checkout

This example illustrates that a module in the modular monolith is made
up of one to many components (see Chapter 8).

The PaymentProcessing module is responsible for applying payment.
EasyMeals accepts credit cards, debit cards, and PayPal; the modularity
of this architecture makes it easy to add an additional payment type
(such as loyalty points). Customers enter this information in the
PlaceOrder module, which passes it to the P⁠a⁠y⁠m⁠e⁠n⁠t​P⁠r⁠o⁠c⁠e⁠s⁠s⁠i⁠n⁠g module. The
components for this module could be represented through the following
namespaces:

    com.easymeals.payment.creditcard
    com.easymeals.payment.debitcard
    com.easymeals.payment.paypal

Once the order is paid for, the PlaceOrder module communicates with the
PrepareOrder module, which displays the entire order to the kitchen
staff. After cooking, the kitchen staff marks the order as ready for
delivery and it is then sent to the Delivery module. The following
namespaces represent the components within the PrepareOrder module:

    com.easymeals.prepareorder.displayorder
    com.easymeals.prepareorder.ready

The Delivery module assigns a delivery person to the order and indicates
the delivery address. It allows the delivery person to mark the order as
delivered, ending the lifecycle for that particular order, and to record
any issues (such as an aggressive dog at the front gate or a customer
who isn’t home). The following namespaces represent the components
within the Delivery module:

    com.easymeals.delivery.assign
    com.easymeals.delivery.issues
    com.easymeals.delivery.complete

The Recipes module allows the cooks and management staff to add items to
the menu and maintain the list of ingredients and measurements for each
menu item. The following namespaces represent the components within the
Recipes module:

    com.easymeals.recipes.view
    com.easymeals.recipes.maintenance

Finally, the IngredientsInventory module makes sure that there are
enough ingredients on hand for the recipes on the menu. This module is a
bit more complex than the others: it has a sophisticated AI component
that forecasts sales volume to automate the process of procuring
ingredients for the week.

The following namespaces represent the components within the
IngredientsInventory module:

    com.easymeals.inventory.maintenance
    com.easymeals.inventory.forecasting
    com.easymeals.inventory.ordering
    com.easymeals.inventory.suppliers
    com.easymeals.inventory.invoices

And that’s it! Modular monolith’s simplicity and level of modularity
makes it relatively easy to locate and maintain code to fix a bug or add
a new feature. This illustrates the power of this simple and
straightforward architectural style.

Chapter 12. Pipeline Architecture Style

One of the fundamental styles in software architecture is the pipeline
architecture (also known as the pipes and filters architecture). As soon
as developers and architects decided to split functionality into
discrete parts, this style of architecture followed. Most developers
know this architecture as the underlying principle behind Unix terminal
shell languages, such as Bash and Zsh.

Developers in many functional programming languages will see parallels
between language constructs and elements of this architecture. In fact,
many tools that use the MapReduce programming model follow this basic
topology. While the examples in this chapter show low-level
implementations of the pipeline architecture style, it can also be used
for higher-level business applications.

Topology

The topology of the pipeline architecture consists of two main component
types, pipes and filters. Filters contain the system functionality and
perform a specific business function, and pipes transfer data to the
next filter (or filters) in the chain. They coordinate in a specific
fashion, with pipes forming one-way, usually point-to-point
communication between filters, as illustrated in Figure 12-1.

[Pipeline Topology]

Figure 12-1. Basic topology for pipeline architecture

The isomorphic “shape” of the pipeline architecture is thus a single
deployment unit, with functionality contained within filters connected
by unidirectional pipes.

Style Specifics

While most implementations of the pipeline architecture are monolithic,
it is possible to deploy each filter (or a set of filters) as a service,
creating a distributed architecture with synchronous or asynchronous
remote calls to each service. Whatever its deployment topology, the
architecture consists of only two architectural components, filters and
pipes, which we describe in detail in the following sections.

Filters

Filters are self-contained pieces of functionality that are independent
from other filters. They are generally stateless, and should perform one
task only. Composite tasks are typically handled by a sequence of
filters rather than a single one.

Because filters can be implemented by more than one class file, they are
considered components of the architecture (see Chapter 8). Even if a
filter is simple and only implemented as a single class file, it’s still
a component.

There are four types of filters in the pipeline architecture style:

Producer

    The starting point of a process, producer filters are outbound only.
    They are sometimes called the source. A user interface and an
    external request to the system are both examples of producer
    filters.

Transformer

    Transformer filters accept input, optionally perform a
    transformation on some or all of the data, then forward the data to
    the outbound pipe. Functional-programming advocates will recognize
    this feature as map. Transformer filters might, for example, enhance
    data, transform data, or perform some sort of calculation.

Tester

    Tester filters accept input, test it according to one or more
    criteria, and then optionally produce output based on the test.
    Functional programmers will recognize this as similar to reduce. A
    tester filter might check that all data is valid and entered
    correctly, or act as a switch to determine if processing should move
    forward (for example, “don’t forward the data to the next filter if
    the order amount is less than five dollars”).

Consumer

    The termination point for the pipeline flow, consumer filters
    sometimes persist the final result of the pipeline process to a
    database or display the final results on a UI screen.

The unidirectional nature and simplicity of pipes and filters encourage
compositional reuse. Many developers have discovered this ability using
shells. A famous story from the blog “More Shell, Less Egg” illustrates
just how powerful these abstractions are. Donald Knuth was asked to
write a program to solve this text-handling problem: read a file of
text, determine the n most frequently used words, and print a list of
those words sorted by frequency. He wrote a program consisting of more
than 10 pages of Pascal, designing (and documenting) a new algorithm
along the way. Then Doug McIlroy demonstrated a shell script small
enough to easily fit within a social media post that solved the problem
elegantly:

            tr -cs A-Za-z '\n' |
            tr A-Z a-z |
            sort |
            uniq -c |
            sort -rn |
            sed ${1}q

Even the designers of Unix shells are often surprised at the inventive
uses developers find for their simple but powerful composite
abstractions.

Pipes

Pipes, in this architecture, form the communication channel between
filters. Each pipe is typically unidirectional and point-to-point,
accepting input from one source and directing output to another. Their
payload can be any data format, but architects typically favor smaller
amounts of data to enable high performance.

If a filter (or group of filters) is deployed as a separate service in a
distributed fashion, the pipes issue a unidirectional remote call using
REST, messaging, streaming, or some other remote communication protocol.
Whether their deployment topology is monolithic or distributed, pipes
can be either synchronous or asynchronous. In monolithic deployments,
architects use threads or embedded messaging for asynchronous
communication to a filter.

Data Topologies

Because most pipeline architectures are deployed as monoliths, they are
associated with a single monolithic database. However, this is not
always the case. Database topology can vary significantly with this
architectural style, from a single database to one database per filter.

The example in Figure 12-2 shows a pipeline architecture for a typical
continuous fitness function (architectural test) running in a production
environment that analyzes a specific operational characteristic (such as
responsiveness or scalability). Notice that the Capture Raw Data filter
loads a separate database containing raw data. This filter sends the raw
data through a pipe to the Time Series Selector filter, which reads
configuration information (such as the period of time being analyzed)
from a separate database. The transformed data is then sent through
another pipe to the Trend Analyzer filter, which analyzes the data and
stores those analytics in a separate database. This filter then sends
the analytics data through a final pipe to the Graphing Tool filter,
which ends the pipeline by generating a graphical report of the data.

[Pipeline data topologies]

Figure 12-2. Pipeline architectures can have a single database or many

Cloud Considerations

The pipeline architecture style is well suited for cloud-based
deployments due to its high level of modularity and separate filter
types. Because most pipeline architectures are not overly complex and
extensive, they work well being deployed as monolithic architectures,
where all filters are deployed in the same deployment unit.

However, filters also work well in cloud environments as distributed
functions. In AWS, the pipeline architecture can be deployed as AWS Step
Functions, where each filter is deployed as a separate lambda in the
workflow. AWS Step Functions offer two workflows: Standard, in which
each step is executed exactly once, and Express, where each step can
execute more than once. The pipeline architecture style works with both.
The following code illustrates the continuous fitness function example
in Figure 12-2 as a typical cloud deployment for the pipeline
architecture, implemented as an AWS Step Function:

    {
      "Comment": "Measure and analyze scalability trends.",
      "StartAt": "Capture Raw Data",
      "States": {
        "Capture Raw Data": {
        "Type": "Task",
        "Resource": "arn:aws:lambda:region:account_id:function:raw_data_capture",
        "Next": "Time Series Selector"
       },
        "Time Series Selector": {
        "Type": "Task",
        "Resource": "arn:aws:lambda:region:account_id:function:time_series_selector",
        "Next": "Trend Analyzer"
       },
        "Trend Analyzer": {
        "Type": "Task",
        "Resource": "arn:aws:lambda:region:account_id:function:trend_analyzer",
        "Next": "Graphing Tool"
        },
        "Graphing Tool": {
        "Type": "Task",
        "Resource": "arn:aws:lambda:region:account_id:function:graphing_tool",
        "End": true
        }
      }
    }

This example isn’t the only way to use the pipeline architecture in
cloud environments. Filters can also be deployed as serverless
functions, as containerized functions, or even as a single service
containing all four filter components in a monolithic deployment.

Common Risks

The primary goal behind the pipeline architecture is to separate
functionality into single-purpose filters, where each filter performs
one specific action on the data and then hands it off to another filter
for further processing. As such, one of its most common risks is
overloading filters with too much responsibility. Good governance, which
we cover in the next section, helps teams mitigate this risk by
identifying the purpose behind each filter component.

Another common risk with this architecture style is introducing
bidirectional communication between filters. Pipes are meant to be
unidirectional only, providing a clear separation of concerns between
filters to avoid collaboration between them. If bidirectional
communication turns out to be necessary, this is a good indication that
the pipeline architecture might not be the right style to use, or that
the filters are too complex; functionality isn’t demarcated correctly.

Handling error conditions is another complication that can introduce
significant risk within this architectural style. If an error occurs
within a pipeline, it is often difficult to determine how to properly
exit the pipeline and recover once the pipeline is started. For this
reason, it’s important for architects to determine any possible fatal
error conditions within the pipeline before defining the architecture.

The last risk area is managing the contracts between filters. Each pipe
has a contract representing the data (and possibly the corresponding
types) that it sends to the next filter. Changing a contract between
filters requires strict governance and testing to ensure that other
filters receiving the contract don’t break.

Governance

Governance for general operational characteristics—such as
responsiveness, scalability, availability, and so on—is specific to each
individual use case and can vary greatly. However, from a structural
standpoint, architects use the role and responsibility of each filter
type to govern pipeline architectures.

Each of the four basic filter types (producer, transformer, tester, and
consumer) performs a specific role. However, it’s all too easy for
developers to overload filters with too much responsibility, turning the
pipeline architecture into an unstructured monolith.

It is difficult to write an automated fitness function to govern whether
a producer filter is actually the starting point of the pipeline, or
whether a tester filter is actually performing a conditional check to
determine whether to continue with the flow or terminate it. Governance
techniques help architects guide the development team in adhering to
each filter type’s role and the responsibility of a specific filter
type.

One such technique is to leverage tags. (In the Java language, tags are
implemented as annotations, and in C# as custom attributes.) Tags don’t
actually perform any function; they programmatically provide metadata
about the component or service. Utilizing tags in the starting class of
the filter component tells developers about the type of filter they are
creating or modifying, helping prevent them from giving that filter too
much responsibility or performing a function not associated with its
type.

To illustrate this technique, consider the following source code that
defines tags for the four basic filter types. Here is the Java tag
annotation definition:

    @Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
    @Target(ElementType.TYPE)
    public @interface Filter {
       public FilterType[] value();

       public enum FilterType {
          PRODUCER,
          TESTER,
          TRANSFORMER,
          CONSUMER
       }
    }

And here is the C# tag custom attribute definition:

    [System.AttributeUsage(System.AttributeTargets.Class)]
    class Filter : System.Attribute {

       public FilterType[] filterType;

       public enum FilterType {
          PRODUCER,
          TESTER,
          TRANSFORMER,
          CONSUMER
       };
    }

Since filters are essentially an architectural component, they can be
implemented through multiple class files. For example, in our continuous
fitness function example in Figure 12-2, the Trend Analyzer filter is
fairly complex and could have multiple class files. Because of this,
we’ll define one additional tag to identify the class that represents
the filter’s entry point, so we can attach other tags to it.

Here is the Java entry point tag definition:

    @Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
    @Target(ElementType.TYPE)
    public @interface FilterEntrypoint {}

And the C# entry point tag definition:

    [System.AttributeUsage(System.AttributeTargets.Class)]
    class FilterEntrypoint : System.Attribute {}

Now the developers can add the FilterType tag to the Entrypoint class,
identifying its type and its corresponding role in the architecture. For
example, the following annotations identify the type and role of the
Trend Analyzer transformation filter. In Java:

    @FilterEntrypoint
    @Filter(FilterType.TRANSFORMER)
    public class TrendAnalyzerFilter {
       ...
    }

And in C#:

    [FilterEntrypoint]
    [Filter(FilterType.TRANSFORMER)]
    class TrendAnalyzerFilter {
       ...
    }

While this technique might not stop every developer from making a
transformer filter type perform testing logic (which should be done by a
tester filter), at least it provides additional context.

Team Topology Considerations

Unlike some of the architectural styles described in this book, the
pipeline architecture style is generally independent of team topologies
and will work with any team configuration:

Stream-aligned teams

    Because the pipeline architecture is typically small and
    self-contained and represents a single journey or flow through the
    system, it works well with stream-aligned teams. With this team
    topology, teams generally own the flow through the system from
    beginning to end, nicely matching the shape of the pipeline
    architecture.

Enabling teams

    Because the pipeline architecture is highly modular and separated by
    technical concerns, it pairs well with enabling team topologies.
    Specialists and cross-cutting team members can make suggestions and
    perform experiments by introducing additional filters within the
    pipeline, without affecting the rest of the flow. For example, in
    our continuous fitness function example, an enabling team might add
    a transformation filter after the Time Series Selector filter to do
    some alternative trend analysis. This new filter would use the same
    data as the existing Trend Analyzer filter without disrupting the
    normal pipeline flow.

Complicated-subsystem teams

    Because each filter performs a very specific task, the pipeline
    architecture works well with the complicated-subsystem team
    topology. Different team members can focus on complicated filter
    processing independently from one another (and from other filters).
    The unidirectional handoffs involved in this architectural style
    allow members of complicated-subsystem teams to focus narrowly on
    the complexity contained within their specific filter processing.

Platform teams

    Platform teams working on a pipeline architecture can leverage its
    high degree of modularity by utilizing common tools, services, APIs,
    and tasks.

Style Characteristics

A one-star rating in the characteristics ratings table (Figure 12-3)
means the specific architecture characteristic isn’t well supported in
the architecture, whereas a five-star rating means the architecture
characteristic is one of the strongest features in the architecture
style. The characteristics contained in the scorecard are described and
defined in Chapter 4.

The pipeline architecture style is a technically partitioned
architecture because its application logic is separated into filter
types. Also, because the pipeline architecture is usually implemented as
a monolithic deployment, its architectural quantum is always 1.

[Pipeline ratings]

Figure 12-3. Pipeline architecture characteristics ratings

Overall cost, simplicity, and modularity are the primary strengths of
the pipeline architecture style. Being monolithic, pipeline
architectures don’t have the complexities associated with distributed
architecture styles—they’re simple and easy to understand, and are
relatively low-cost to build and maintain. Architectural modularity is
achieved through separating concerns between the various filter types
and transformers: any filter can be modified or replaced without
affecting the other filters. For instance, in the Kafka example
illustrated in Figure 12-4, the Duration Calculator can be modified to
change the duration calculation without changing any other filter.

Deployability and testability, while only average, rate slightly higher
than in the layered architecture due to the level of modularity filters
can achieve. However, pipeline architectures are still typically
monolithic, so their downsides include ceremony, risk, frequency of
deployment, and completeness of testing.

Elasticity and scalability rate very low (one star) in the pipeline
architecture, primarily due to monolithic deployments. Implementing this
architecture style as a distributed architecture using asynchronous
communication can significantly improve these characteristics, but the
trade-off is a blow to overall cost and simplicity.

Pipeline architectures don’t support fault tolerance because they are
typically deployed as monolithic systems. If one small part of a
pipeline architecture causes an out-of-memory condition to occur, the
entire application unit is impacted and crashes. Furthermore, overall
availability is affected by the high mean time to recovery (MTTR) common
in most monolithic applications, with startup times measured in minutes.
As with elasticity and scalability, implementing this architecture style
as a distributed architecture using asynchronous communication can
significantly improve fault tolerance, again paying the price with cost
and complexity.

As we’ve mentioned, most of the low-scoring operational characteristics
can be raised by making this a distributed architecture with
asynchronous communication, where each filter is a separate deployment
unit and the pipes are remote calls. However, doing so will negatively
affect other attributes such as simplicity and cost, illustrating one of
the classic trade-offs of software architecture.

When to Use

The pipeline architecture is suitable for systems of any complexity with
distinct, ordered, and deterministic one-way processing steps. This
style’s simplicity also makes it well suited for situations involving
tight time frames and budget constraints.

When Not to Use

Because of the monolithic nature of this architectural style, it’s not a
good fit for systems that need high scalability, elasticity, and fault
tolerance. However, using a distributed architecture approach will help
mitigate these concerns.

The pipeline architecture style is also ill-suited for scenarios
involving back-and-forth communication between filters, since the pipes
are meant to be unidirectional only. While it’s possible to use this
architecture style for nondeterministic workflows by leveraging lots of
tester filters throughout the pipeline, we don’t recommend doing so. It
overcomplicates this relatively simple architecture style and can
negatively affect maintainability, testability, deployability, and
consequently overall reliability. Event-driven architecture (see
Chapter 15) is much better suited for situations involving
nondeterministic workflows.

The pipeline architecture style appears in a variety of applications,
especially with tasks that facilitate simple, one-way processing. For
example, many electronic data interchange (EDI) tools use this pattern,
building transformations from one document type to another using pipes
and filters. Database extract, transform, and load (ETL) tools leverage
pipeline architectures to modify data and flow it from one database or
data source to another. Orchestrators and mediators such as Apache Camel
use the pipeline architecture to pass information from one step in a
business process to another.

Examples and Use Cases

To illustrate how the pipeline architecture can be used, consider the
following example, where service telemetry information is sent from
services via streaming to Apache Kafka (Figure 12-4).

[Pipeline Example]

Figure 12-4. Pipeline architecture example

The system depicted in Figure 12-4 uses the pipeline architecture style
to process different kinds of data streamed to Kafka. The Service Info
Capture filter (producer filter) subscribes to the Kafka topic and
receives service information. It then sends this captured data to a
tester filter called the Duration filter to determine whether it’s
related to the duration (in milliseconds) of the service request.

Notice the separation of concerns between the filters; the Service Info
Capture filter is only concerned with how to connect to a Kafka topic
and receive streaming data, whereas the Duration filter is only
concerned with qualifying the data and determining whether to route it
to the next pipe. If the data is related to the service request
duration, it is passed to the Duration Calculator transformer filter;
otherwise, the data is passed to the Uptime tester filter to check if
it’s related to uptime metrics. If not, then the pipeline ends—the data
is of no interest to this particular processing flow. If it is relevant
to uptime metrics, the Uptime tester filter passes it to the
Uptime Calculator, which uses it to calculate the uptime metrics. The
Uptime Calculator then passes the modified data to the Database Output
consumer, which persists it in a MongoDB database.

This example shows how extensible the pipeline architecture is. For
example, in Figure 12-4, a new tester filter could easily be added after
the Uptime filter to send the data to be used in a new metric, such as
for database connection wait time.

The pipeline architectural style, while typically a monolithic
architecture, nevertheless demonstrates a good level of modularity
thanks to the use of technically partitioned filters. It’s a good fit
for situations involving a workflow-based, step-by-step approach to
processing data within a system.

Before we move on to more complicated distributed architectures, we have
one more monolithic architecture to describe in the next chapter that
also supports a good level of modularity through the use of plug-in
components: the microkernel architecture.

Chapter 13. Microkernel Architecture Style

The microkernel architecture style (also referred to as the plug-in
architecture) was invented several decades ago and is still widely used
today. This architecture style is a natural fit for product-based
applications: that is, applications packaged and made available for
download and installation as a single, monolithic deployment, typically
installed on the customer’s site as a third-party product. However, it
is also widely used in nonproduct custom business applications,
especially problem domains that require customization. For example, an
insurance company in the US that has unique rules for each state, or an
international shipping company that must adhere to various legal and
logistical variations, would both benefit from this style.

Topology

The microkernel style is a relatively simple monolithic architecture
consisting of two components: a core system and plug-ins. Application
logic is divided between independent plug-in components and the basic
core system, which isolates application features and provides
extensibility, adaptability, and custom processing logic. Figure 13-1
illustrates the basic topology of the microkernel architecture style.

[Microkernel architecture components]

Figure 13-1. Basic components of the microkernel architecture style

Style Specifics

The essence of the microkernel architecture consists of two types of
components: the core system and plug-ins.

Core System

The core system is formally defined as the minimal functionality
required to run the system. Let’s look at the Eclipse IDE for a good
example of this. Eclipse’s core system is just a basic text editor: open
a file, change some text, and save the file. It’s not until you add
plug-ins that Eclipse starts becoming a usable product.

However, another definition of the core system is the happy path: a
general processing flow through the application that involves little or
no custom processing. A microkernel architecture takes the cyclomatic
complexity of the application, removes it from the core system, and
places it into separate plug-in components. This allows for better
extensibility and maintainability, as well as increased testability.

To dive deeper, we’ll return to Going Green, the electronic device
recycling application we introduced in Chapter 7. Let’s say you’re
working on Going Green’s application, which must assess each electronic
device it receives according to specific, custom assessment rules. The
Java code for this sort of processing might look as follows:

    public void assessDevice(String deviceID) {
       if (deviceID.equals("iPhone6s")) {
          assessiPhone6s();
       } else if (deviceID.equals("iPad1"))
          assessiPad1();
       } else if (deviceID.equals("Galaxy5"))
          assessGalaxy5();
       } else ...
          ...
       }
    }

Rather than placing all this client-specific customization—which has
lots of cyclomatic complexity—in the core system, you could create a
separate plug-in component for each electronic device being assessed.
Not only do specific client plug-in components isolate independent
device logic from the rest of the processing flow, they also allow for
expansion: adding a new device to assess is simply a matter of adding a
new plug-in component and updating the registry. With the microkernel
architecture style, assessing an electronic device only requires the
core system to locate and invoke the corresponding device plug-ins, as
illustrated in this revised source code:

    public void assessDevice(String deviceID) {
    	String plugin = pluginRegistry.get(deviceID);
    	Class<?> theClass = Class.forName(plugin);
    	Constructor<?> constructor = theClass.getConstructor();
    	DevicePlugin devicePlugin =
    		(DevicePlugin)constructor.newInstance();
    	devicePlugin.assess();
    }

In this example, all of the complex rules and instructions for assessing
a particular electronic device are self-contained in a standalone,
independent plug-in component that can be generically executed from the
core system.

Depending on its size and complexity, you could implement the core
system as a layered architecture or as a modular monolith (as
illustrated in Figure 13-2). In some cases, you might even split the
core system into separately deployed domain services, with each domain
service containing plug-in components specific to that domain. For the
sake of this example, we’ll assume that you implement it as a layered
architecture for Going Green.

Suppose Payment Processing is the domain service representing the core
system. Each payment method (credit card, PayPal, store credit, gift
card, and purchase order) would have a separate plug-in component
specific to that payment domain.

[Microkernel architecture core system variants]

Figure 13-2. Variations of the microkernel architecture core system

The core system’s Presentation layer can be embedded within the core
system or implemented as a separate user interface, with the core system
providing backend services. As a matter of fact, you could also
implement a separate UI using a microkernel architecture style.
Figure 13-3 illustrates these Presentation layer variants in relation to
the core system.

[User Interface Variants]

Figure 13-3. User interface variants

Plug-In Components

Plug-in components are standalone, independent components that contain
specialized processing, additional features, and custom code meant to
enhance or extend the core system. Additionally, they isolate highly
volatile code, creating better maintainability and testability within
the application. Ideally, plug-in components should have no dependencies
between them.

Communication between the plug-in components and the core system is
generally point-to-point, meaning the “pipe” that connects the plug-in
to the core system is usually a method invocation or function call to
the entry-point class of the plug-in component. In addition, the plug-in
component can be either compile based or runtime based. Runtime plug-in
components can be added or removed at runtime without redeploying the
core system or other plug-ins, and are usually managed through
frameworks such as Open Service Gateway Initiative (OSGi) for Java,
Penrose (Java), Jigsaw (Java), or Prism (.NET). Compile-based plug-in
components are much simpler to manage, but modifying, removing, or
adding them requires the entire monolithic application to be redeployed.

Point-to-point plug-in components can be implemented as shared libraries
(such as a JAR, DLL, or Gem), package names in Java, or namespaces in
C#. In our Going Green application, each electronic device plug-in can
be written and implemented as a JAR, DLL, or Ruby Gem (or any other
shared library), with the name of the device matching the name of the
independent shared library, as illustrated in Figure 13-4.

[Shared library plug-in implementation]

Figure 13-4. Shared library plug-in implementation

An easier approach, shown in Figure 13-5, is to implement each plug-in
component as a separate namespace or package name within the same code
base or IDE project. When creating the namespace, we recommend the
following semantics: app.plug-in.<domain>.<context>. For example,
consider the namespace app.plug-in.assessment.iphone6s. The second node
(plug-in) makes it clear that this component is a plug-in and therefore
should strictly adhere to the basic rules (they must be self-contained
and separate from other plug-ins). The third node describes the domain
(in this case, assessment), allowing plug-in components to be organized
and grouped by a common purpose. The fourth node (iphone6s) describes
the specific context for the plug-in, making it easy to locate the
device plug-in for modification or testing.

[Package or namespace plug-in implementation]

Figure 13-5. Package or namespace plug-in implementation

Plug-in components do not always have to use point-to-point
communication with the core system. Alternatives include using REST or
messaging to invoke plug-in functionality, with each plug-in being a
standalone service (or maybe even a microservice, implemented using a
container). Although this may sound like a good way to increase overall
scalability, note that this topology (illustrated in Figure 13-6) is
still only a single architecture quantum, due to the monolithic core
system. Every request must first go through the core system to get to
the plug-in service.

The benefits of the remote-access approach to plug-in components
implemented as individual services is that it allows for better overall
component decoupling, better scalability and throughput, and runtime
changes without any special frameworks (like OSGi, Jigsaw, or Prism). It
also allows for asynchronous communications to plug-ins which, depending
on the scenario, could significantly improve overall user
responsiveness. Using the Going Green example, rather than having to
wait for the electronic device assessment to run, the core system could
make an asynchronous request to kick off an assessment for a particular
device. When the assessment completes, the plug-in can notify the core
system through another asynchronous messaging channel, which in turn
notifies the user that the assessment is complete.

[Remote Plug-in Access]

Figure 13-6. Remote plug-in access using REST

With these benefits come trade-offs. Remote plug-in access turns the
microkernel architecture into a distributed architecture rather than a
monolithic one, making it difficult to implement and deploy for most
third-party on-prem products. Furthermore, it creates more overall
complexity and cost, and complicates the overall deployment topology. If
a plug-in becomes unresponsive or stops running, particularly if the
system is using REST, the request cannot be completed. This would not be
the case with a monolithic deployment. The choice between point-to-point
and remote communication should be based on the project’s specific
requirements and a careful trade-off analysis.

The Spectrum of “Microkern-ality”

Not all systems that support plug-ins are microkernels, but all
microkernels support plug-ins. A system’s degree of “microkern-ality,”
as we call it, depends on how much standalone functionality exists in
the core system. This is reflected in the spectrum illustrated in
Figure 13-7.

[The spectrum of microkern-ality]

Figure 13-7. The spectrum of “microkern-ality”

In Figure 13-7, “pure” microkernel architectures (like the
aforementioned Eclipse IDE or linter tools) have very little core
functionality. For example, a linter parses source code and delivers the
abstract syntax tree so that a developer can write rules about language
use. The core parses the code, but until someone writes a plug-in to
take advantage of it, it’s of little use. Contrast that with a web
browser, which supports plug-ins but is perfectly functional without
them; browsers fall on the righthand side of the spectrum.

Determining the volatility of the core goes a long way toward helping
architects decide between a system that just supports plug-ins or a more
“pure” microkernel.

Registry

The core system needs to know which plug-in modules are available and
how to get to them. One common way of implementing this is through a
plug-in registry. This registry contains information about each plug-in
module, including things like its name, data contract, and remote access
protocol details (depending on how the plug-in is connected to the core
system). For example, a plug-in for tax software that flags high-risk
tax-audit items might have a registry entry that contains the name of
the service (AuditChecker), the data contract (input data and output
data), and the contract format (XML).

The registry can be as simple as an internal map structure owned by the
core system containing a key and the plug-in component reference, or it
can be as complex as a registry and discovery tool embedded within the
core system or deployed externally (such as Apache ZooKeeper or Consul).
Using the electronics recycling example, the following Java code
implements a simple registry within the core system, showing examples of
a point-to-point entry, a messaging entry, and a RESTful entry for
assessing an iPhone 6S device:

    Map<String, String> registry = new HashMap<String, String>();
    static {
      //point-to-point access example
      registry.put("iPhone6s", "Iphone6sPlugin");

      //messaging example
      registry.put("iPhone6s", "iphone6s.queue");

      //restful example
      registry.put("iPhone6s", "https://atlas:443/assess/iphone6s");
    }

Contracts

The contracts between plug-in components and the core system are usually
standard across a domain of plug-in components and include behavior,
input data, and output data returned from the plug-in component. Custom
contracts are typically used in situations where the plug-in components
are developed by a third party, so the architect has no control over the
contract the plug-in uses. In such cases, it is common to create an
adapter between the plug-in contract and your standard contract so that
the core system doesn’t need specialized code for each plug-in.

Plug-in contracts can be implemented in XML, in JSON, or even in objects
passed back and forth between the plug-in and the core system. In the
electronics recycling application, the following contract (implemented
as a standard Java interface named AssessmentPlugin) defines the overall
behavior (assess(), register(), and deregister()), along with the
corresponding output data expected from the plug-in component
(AssessmentOutput):

    public interface AssessmentPlugin {
    	public AssessmentOutput assess();
    	public String register();
    	public String deregister();
    }

    public class AssessmentOutput {
    	public String assessmentReport;
    	public Boolean resell;
    	public Double value;
    	public Double resellPrice;
    }

In this contract example, the device assessment plug-in is expected to
return the assessment report with:

- A formatted string

- A resell flag (true or false) indicating whether this device can be
  resold on a third-party market or safely disposed of

- If the item can be resold, its calculated value and recommended resell
  price

Notice the roles and responsibility model between the core system and
the plug-in component in this example, specifically with the
assessmentReport field. It is not the responsibility of the core system
to format and understand the details of the assessment report, only to
either print it out or display it to the user.

Data Topologies

Generally, teams implement microkernel architectures as monolithic
architectures, using a single (typically relational) database.

It’s uncommon practice for plug-in components to connect directly to a
centrally shared database. Instead, the core system takes on this
responsibility, passing whatever data is needed to each plug-in. The
primary reason for this practice is decoupling. Making a database change
should only affect the core system, not the plug-in components. That
said, plug-ins can have separate data stores that are only accessible to
that plug-in. For example, each device assessment plug-in in the Going
Green system could have its own simple database or rules engine
containing all of the specific assessment rules for that product. The
data store owned by the plug-in component can be external (as shown in
Figure 13-8), or embedded as part of the plug-in component or monolithic
deployment (as in the case of an in-memory or embedded database).

[Plug-in data store]

Figure 13-8. A plug-in component can own its own data store

Cloud Considerations

Because microkernel architectures are typically monolithic, the cloud
represents a few coarse-grained options. The first option is to deploy
the entire application on the cloud, using cloud facilities or
containers. The second is to place just the data in the cloud and
implement the microkernel as an on-premises system. The third option
segregates the core system as on-premises and places the plug-ins in the
cloud. While this may seem like a good option from a modularity
standpoint, it comes with some challenging implications for
responsiveness. Generally, in a microkernel architecture, plug-in calls
happen frequently and each call passes a fair amount of information,
since teams implement key workflows using plug-ins. The latency incurred
by separating the core and plug-ins may lead to undesirable overhead.

Common Risks

The common risks associated with this architecture mainly arise from
misapplying it.

Volatile Core

The core in a microkernel architecture is supposed to be as stable as
possible after initial development; part of the benefit of this style is
that it isolates changes to plug-ins. Building a core that undergoes
constant change undermines the philosophy of this architecture, but it’s
a common mistake. Often this is the result of architects misjudging the
core’s volatility; they must then address that volatility via
refactoring.

Plug-In Dependencies

Microkernels work best when the plug-ins communicate only with the core
system, not with each other. Most systems that use plug-ins that are not
microkernels use dependency-free plug-ins, which are plug-ins that have
no dependencies other than the core. In other words, the plug-ins don’t
communicate with each other and therefore have no shared dependencies
that must be resolved by the core. However, complex applications of
microkernel architecture, such as the Eclipse IDE, sometimes build
dependencies between components, making the core resolve transitive
dependency conflicts between them.

While it’s thus possible to have dependencies, they create myriad
complexities around transitive dependency management. What happens if
two plug-ins depend on different versions of the same core library? The
core must resolve those dependencies and facilitate communication
between the different plug-in versions. Anyone who has struggled with
adding plug-ins in an environment where transitive dependencies are in
play understands the headache of untangling conflicting versions. It is
best to try to avoid dependencies between plug-ins whenever possible.

Governance

Governance in a microkernel architecture revolves around checking how
well the architects are honoring its philosophy.

Common governance checks include:

- Volatility checks for the core—which are fitness functions wired into
  checking churn in version control, rather than a specific code check

- Rate of change in the core

- Contract tests (especially if some plug-ins support different versions
  than others because of gradual evolution)

- Other structural verifications for the topology

Team Topology Considerations

The obvious split for teams in this architecture is between core and
plug-ins, reflecting its topology:

Stream-aligned teams

    The core is an obvious sweet spot for stream-aligned teams, which
    build the core functionality of the system. Plug-ins may also fall
    to this team, depending on the type of application.

Enabling teams

    The microkernel architecture is extremely well suited for enabling
    teams, since it segregates some behavior in plug-ins to allow for
    A/B testing and other experiments.

Complicated-subsystem teams

    Microkernels are also well suited for complicated-subsystem teams
    because they defer specialized behavior to plug-ins. For example,
    specialized processing like analytics might be isolated in plug-ins,
    allowing the stream-enabled team to work on core behavior and call
    out to sophisticated plug-ins for specialized behavior.

Platform teams

    Platform teams mostly concern themselves with the operational
    details for this architecture, as with other monolithic
    architectures.

Architecture Characteristics Ratings

A one-star rating in the characteristics ratings in Figure 13-9 means
the specific architecture characteristic isn’t well supported in the
architecture, whereas a five-star rating means the architecture
characteristic is one of the strongest features in the architecture
style. The definition for each characteristic identified in the
scorecard can be found in Chapter 4.

In the microkernel architecture style, similar to layered, simplicity
and overall cost are the main strengths, and scalability, fault
tolerance, and elasticity the main weaknesses. These weaknesses are due
to the typical monolithic deployments found with the microkernel
architecture. Also like the layered architecture style, the architecture
quanta is always singular (1) because all requests must go through the
core system to get to the independent plug-in components. That’s where
the similarities end.

Microkernel is unique in that it is the only architecture style that can
be both domain partitioned and technically partitioned. While most
microkernel architectures are technically partitioned, the
domain-partitioning aspect comes about mostly through a strong
domain-to-architecture isomorphism. For example, problems that require
different configurations for each location or client match extremely
well with this architecture style. So do products or applications that
emphasize user customization and feature extensibility (such as Jira or
an IDE like Eclipse).

[Microkernel ratings]

Figure 13-9. Microkernel architecture characteristics ratings

Testability, deployability, and reliability rate a little above average
(three stars), primarily because functionality can be isolated to
independent plug-in components. If done right, this reduces the overall
testing scope of changes as well as the overall risk of deployment,
particularly if plug-in component deployment is runtime based.

Modularity and evolvability also rate a little above average (three
stars). With the microkernel architecture style, additional
functionality can be added, removed, and changed through independent,
self-contained plug-in components, making it relatively easy to extend
and enhance applications, and allowing teams to respond to changes much
faster. Consider the tax-preparation software example from the previous
section. If the US tax law changes (which it does all the time),
requiring a new tax form, that new tax form can be created as a plug-in
component and added to the application without much effort. Similarly,
if a tax form or worksheet is no longer needed, that plug-in can simply
be removed from the application.

Responsiveness is always an interesting characteristic to rate with the
microkernel architecture style. We gave it three stars (a little above
average), mostly because microkernel applications are generally small
and don’t grow as big as most layered architectures. Also, they don’t
suffer as much from the Architecture Sinkhole antipattern we discussed
in Chapter 10. Finally, microkernel architectures can be streamlined by
unplugging unneeded functionality, making the application run faster. A
good example of this is WildFly (previously the JBoss Application
Server). Unplugging unnecessary functionality like clustering, caching,
and messaging makes the application server perform much faster than it
does with these features in place.

Examples and Use Cases

Most tools for developing and releasing software are implemented using
the microkernel architecture. Some examples include the Eclipse IDE,
PMD, Jira, and Jenkins, to name a few. Internet web browsers, such as
Chrome and Firefox, also commonly use the microkernel architecture:
viewers and other plug-ins add additional capabilities not otherwise
found in the basic browser (the core system). We could point to endless
examples of product-based software, but what about large business
applications? The microkernel architecture applies to these situations
as well.

To illustrate this point, consider our earlier example of
tax-preparation software. The US tax agency, the Internal Revenue
Service, has a basic two-page tax form called the 1040 form that
contains a summary of all the information needed to calculate a person’s
tax liability. Each line in the 1040 tax form has a single number, such
as gross income, and arriving at each of those numbers requires many
other forms and worksheets. Each additional form and worksheet can be
implemented as a plug-in component, with the 1040 summary tax form being
the core system (the driver). This way, changes to tax law can be
isolated to an independent plug-in component, making changes easier and
less risky.

Another example of a large, complex business application that can
leverage the microkernel architecture is insurance claims processing.
Claims processing is a very complicated process. Each jurisdiction has
different rules and regulations for what is and isn’t allowed in an
insurance claim. For example, some jurisdictions (such as US states)
allow insurance companies to provide free windshield replacement if your
windshield is damaged by a rock; others do not. This creates an almost
infinite set of conditions for a standard claims process.

Most insurance claims applications leverage large, complex rules engines
to handle much of this complexity. A rules engine is a framework or
library that allows developers (or end users) to define a series of
rules or steps to define a workflow declaratively, either using visual
tools or a domain-specific language. However, these rules engines can
grow into the Big Ball of Mud antipattern, where a simple rule change
requires an army of analysts, developers, and testers to make sure
nothing breaks. Using the microkernel architecture pattern can solve
many of these issues.

The claims rules for each jurisdiction can be contained in separate,
standalone plug-in components, implemented as source code or as a
specific rules-engine instance accessed by the plug-in component. This
way, rules can be added, removed, or changed for a particular
jurisdiction without affecting any other part of the system.
Furthermore, new jurisdictions can be added and removed without
affecting other parts of the system. The core system, in this example,
would be the standard process for filing and processing a
claim—something that doesn’t change often.

The microkernel architecture style is extremely common; once you’ve seen
it, you start noticing it everywhere. It’s a case where an architecture
structure (core + plug-ins) matches the common domain problem of
customization, and it turns out that customization comes up a lot in
software.

Chapter 14. Service-Based Architecture Style

Service-based architecture is a hybrid variant of the microservices
architectural style and is considered one of the most pragmatic styles
available, mostly due to its flexibility. Although service-based
architecture is distributed, it doesn’t have the same level of
complexity and cost as other distributed architectures (such as
microservices or event-driven architecture), making it a popular choice
for business-related applications.

Topology

The basic topology of service-based architecture follows a distributed
macro-layered structure consisting of a separately deployed user
interface; separately deployed, remote, coarse-grained services; and,
optionally, a monolithic database.

Although Figure 14-1 illustrates the basic topology of this style, it
can vary greatly, including using separate UIs and separate databases.
This chapter will describe these topology variants in detail.

Services within this architectural style typically represent a specific
domain or subdomain with a system, so they are called domain services.
Domain services are generally coarse-grained and represent some portion
of the system’s functionality (such as order fulfillment or order
shipping). They are typically independent of each other and separately
deployed. Services are typically deployed much like any monolithic
application would be, so they do not require containerization (although
deploying a domain service in a container such as Docker or Kubernetes
is certainly an option). When using a single monolithic database, an
architect should try to minimize the number of domain services (we
recommend no more than 12) to avoid change control, scalability, and
fault tolerance issues.

[Service-based architecture basic topology]

Figure 14-1. Basic topology of the service-based architectural style

Typically, each domain service is deployed as a single instance.
However, based on the system’s scalability, fault tolerance, and
throughput needs, architects sometimes create multiple instances of a
domain service. Doing so usually requires some sort of load-balancing
capability between the UI and the domain service so that the UI can be
directed to a healthy and available service instance.

Services are accessed remotely from a UI using a remote access protocol,
typically REST. Other possibilities include messaging, remote procedure
call (RPC), an API layer with a proxy or gateway, or even SOAP. However,
in most cases, the UI has an embedded service locator pattern so it can
access the services directly; the service locator pattern can also be
embedded within an API Gateway or proxy.

The service-based architecture typically uses a centrally shared
monolithic database. This allows services to leverage SQL queries and
joins just as a traditional monolithic layered architecture would.
Because of the small number of domain services typically found in this
architectural style, exhausting the available database connections is
rarely an issue. Managing database changes, however, can present a
challenge. “Data Topologies” describes techniques for addressing and
managing database changes within a service-based architecture.

Style Specifics

Because domain services in a service-based architecture are generally
coarse-grained, each domain service is typically designed using a
layered architectural style consisting of an API Facade layer, a
Business layer, and a Persistence layer. Another popular design approach
is to partition each domain service into subdomains, similar to the
modular monolith architectural style (see Chapter 11). Both approaches
are illustrated in Figure 14-2.

[Service-based architecture service design variants]

Figure 14-2. Domain service design variants

Regardless of its design, a domain service must contain some sort of API
access facade that the UI interacts with to execute some sort of
business functionality. The API access facade typically takes on the
responsibility of orchestrating the business request from the UI.

Let’s consider an example from an ecommerce site with a service-based
architecture. A business request comes from the UI: a customer is
ordering some items. This single request is received by the API access
facade within the OrderService domain service. The API access facade
internally orchestrates everything that has to happen to fulfill this
request: placing the order, generating an order ID, applying the
payment, and updating the inventory for each product ordered. In a
microservices architecture, completing this request would likely involve
orchestrating many separately deployed, remote, single-purpose services.
This difference in granularity—between internal class-level
orchestration in a service-based architecture and external service
orchestration in microservices—points to one of the many significant
differences between the two styles.

Because domain services are coarse-grained, regular ACID (atomicity,
consistency, isolation, durability) database transactions with standard
database commits and rollbacks can ensure database integrity within a
single domain service. Compare this to the fine-grained single-purpose
services of highly distributed architectures like microservices, which
use a distributed transaction technique known as BASE transactions
(basic availability, soft state, eventual consistency). Such
fine-grained services don’t support the same level of database integrity
that ACID transactions in a service-based architecture can support.

To illustrate this point, consider the order checkout process within our
example service-based ecommerce site. Suppose the customer places an
order, but the credit card they use for payment has expired. Since this
payment is an atomic transaction within the same service, the service
can remove everything added to the database so far using a standard
transaction rollback. The service notifies the customer that the payment
cannot be applied.

Now consider this same process in a microservices architecture, with its
smaller, fine-grained services. First, the OrderPlacement service
accepts the request, creates the order, generates an order ID, and
inserts the order into the order tables. Once this is done, the
OrderPlacement service makes a remote call to the PaymentService, which
tries to apply the payment. If the payment cannot be applied because the
credit card is expired, the order cannot be placed. Now the data is in
an inconsistent state: the order information has already been inserted,
but has not been approved. A separate action known as a compensating
update (discussed in Chapter 9) would need to be applied to the
OrderPlacement service to bring the data to a consistent state.

Service Design and Granularity

Because domain services are coarse-grained, they allow for better data
integrity and consistency, but there’s a big trade-off. In a
service-based architecture, changing the order-placement functionality
in an OrderService would require the team to test and redeploy all of
the service’s functionality, including payment processing. In a
microservices architecture, however, the same change would only affect a
smaller, fine-grained OrderPlacement service, requiring no testing or
deployment for the PaymentService. Furthermore, because a domain service
deploys more functionality, there’s more risk that something else might
break (including payment processing). With microservices, each service
has a single responsibility, so there’s less chance of breaking other
functionalities when making changes.

User Interface Options

The service-based architecture style includes many UI variants, making
it very flexible. For example, an architect could break apart the single
monolithic UI illustrated in Figure 14-1 into separate UIs, even to the
point of matching each domain service. This would increase the system’s
overall scalability, fault tolerance, and agility. These UI variants are
illustrated in Figure 14-3.

[User interface variants]

Figure 14-3. Three user-interface variants in a service-based architecture

For example, a typical ordering system could have a UI for customers to
place orders, and separate, internal UIs for the order packers to view
the items that need to be packed and for customer support.

API Gateway Options

Thanks to the flexibility of this architectural style, it’s possible to
add an API layer consisting of a reverse proxy or API Gateway between
the UI and services, as shown in Figure 14-4. This is useful for
exposing domain service functionality to external systems, for
consolidating shared cross-cutting concerns (such as metrics, security,
auditing requirements, and service discovery) and moving them into the
API Gateway, and for load-balancing domain services that have multiple
instances.

[Service-based architecture API variant]

Figure 14-4. Adding an API layer between the UI and the domain services

Data Topologies

Service-based architectures offer architects many choices of database
topology, further illustrating their flexibility. This style is unique
in being a distributed architecture that can effectively support a
monolithic database. However, that single monolithic database could be
broken apart into separate databases, even going as far as to create a
domain-scoped database to match each domain service (similar to
microservices). If using multiple separate databases, the architect must
make sure that no other domain service needs the data in each database,
which might incur interservice communication between domain services.
It’s usually preferable to share data rather than call another domain
service in this architectural style. These database variants are
illustrated in Figure 14-5.

[Database Topologies]

Figure 14-5. Service-based architecture database topologies

Although this architectural style supports a monolithic database, schema
changes to the database table can, if not done properly, affect every
domain service. This makes changing the database a very costly, risky
task that demands a great deal of effort, coordination, and overall
reliability.

In a service-based architecture, the shared class files representing the
database table schemas (called entity objects) usually reside in a
custom shared library used by all of the domain services, such as a JAR
or DLL file. These shared libraries can also contain SQL code. Creating
a single shared library of all of the entity objects is the least
effective way to implement a service-based architecture. Any change to
the database table structures also requires changing that library of the
corresponding entity objects, which means changing and redeploying every
service, regardless of whether it actually accesses the changed table.
Shared library versioning can help address this issue, but it’s still
difficult to know which services the table change will affect without
doing detailed manual analysis. This scenario, which is considered an
antipattern in service-based architecture, is illustrated in
Figure 14-6.

[Single shared library for entity objects]

Figure 14-6. Using a single shared library for database entity objects impacts all services when a change occurs and is considered an antipattern in service-based architecture

One way to mitigate the impact and risk of database changes is to
logically partition the database and represent that logical partitioning
through separate shared libraries. Notice that in Figure 14-7, the
database is logically partitioned into five separate domains: common,
customer, invoicing, order, and tracking. The domain services use five
corresponding shared libraries that match the logical partitions in the
database. Using this technique, any changes the architect makes to a
table within a particular logical domain (in this case, Invoicing) would
match the corresponding shared library containing the entity objects
(and possibly SQL as well). The only services affected would be those
using that shared library. No other services would be affected by this
change, so there would be no need to retest and redeploy them.

[Multiple shared libraries for entity objects]

Figure 14-7. Using multiple shared libraries for database entity objects

In Figure 14-7, the database contains a Common domain and a
corresponding common_entities_lib shared library, which is used by all
services. This is relatively common. Since these tables are common to
all services, changing them requires coordinating all services that
access the shared database. One way to mitigate the potential rippling
side effects of changes to these tables (and to their corresponding
entity objects and domain services) is to lock the common entity objects
in the version control system (if available) and allow only the database
team to make changes. This helps control change and emphasizes the
significance of making changes to the common tables used by all
services.

Tip

To better control database changes within a service-based architecture,
make the logical partitioning in the database as fine-grained as
possible—while still maintaining well-defined data domains.

Cloud Considerations

Being a distributed architecture, the service-based style works well in
cloud environments, even though its domain services are typically
coarse-grained. Due to their large scope, domain services are typically
implemented as containerized services rather than as serverless
functions, and they can easily leverage cloud file storage, database,
and messaging services.

Common Risks

While interservice communication is typical with microservices, it’s
something architects try to avoid in the service-based architectural
style. Ideally, domains should be as independent as possible, with
coupling focused only at the database level. Too much communication
between domain services is a good indication that either the architect
didn’t partition the domains correctly or this isn’t the right
architectural style for the problem they are solving.

Another common risk is creating too many domain services. The practical
upper limit is around 12. Any more than that is likely to start causing
issues with testing, deployment, monitoring, and database connections
and changes.

Governance

In addition to the common structural and operational architectural
governance techniques discussed throughout this book, such as cyclomatic
complexity, scalability, responsiveness, and so on, architects can apply
specific governance tests to ensure the structural integrity of a
service-based architecture.

Because domain services should be as independent as possible, the first
aspect of governing this style is ensuring that changes don’t span
across multiple domain services. If they do, that’s a good indication
that the domain boundaries aren’t appropriately defined, or that
service-based is not the most appropriate architectural style for the
problem.

When interservice communication is unavailable, architects can also
govern the amount of communication between domain services. There are
certainly situations and workflows where one domain service must
communicate with another: for example, an OrderProcessing domain might
need to communicate with a CustomerNotification domain to email order
status information to the customer. For the most part, though, domain
services should be largely independent from each other, with
orchestration taking place at the UI or API Gateway level.

Team Topology Considerations

Since service-based architectures are domain partitioned, they work best
when teams are also aligned by domain area (such as cross-functional
teams with specialization). When a domain-based requirement comes along,
a domain-focused cross-functional team can work together on that feature
within a specific domain service, without interfering with other teams
or services. Conversely, technically partitioned teams (such as UI
teams, backend teams, database teams, and so on) do not work well with
this architectural style because of its domain partitioning. Assigning
domain-based requirements to a technically organized team requires a
level of interteam communication and collaboration that proves difficult
in most organizations.

Here are some considerations for architects with regard to aligning a
service-based architecture with the specific team topologies outlined in
“Team Topologies and Architecture”:

Stream-aligned teams

    If domain boundaries are properly aligned, stream-aligned teams work
    well with this architectural style, particularly when their streams
    are focused on a specific domain. However, service-based
    architecture becomes more challenging when streams cross the
    boundaries defined by the domain services. In this case, the
    architect should analyze the boundaries and granularity of the
    domain services and either realign them to the streams or choose a
    different architectural style.

Enabling teams

    Service-based architecture is not as effective when paired with the
    enabling team topology as other distributed architectures are, due
    to the coarse-grained nature of its domain services. However, an
    architect can increase this style’s modularity by carefully
    identifying and creating appropriate components within each domain
    service. Specialists and cross-cutting team members can then make
    suggestions and perform experiments based on those components.

Complicated-subsystem teams

    Complicated-subsystem teams can leverage this architecture style’s
    domain-level and subdomain-level modularity to focus on complicated
    domain or subdomain processing, independent of other team members
    (and services).

Platform teams

    Service-based architecture’s high degree of modularity helps teams
    leverage the benefits of the platform team topology by utilizing
    common tools, services, APIs, and tasks.

Style Characteristics

A one-star rating in the characteristics ratings table in Figure 14-8
means the specific architecture characteristic isn’t well supported in
the architecture, whereas a five-star rating means the architecture
characteristic is one of the strongest features in the architectural
style. The definition for each characteristic identified in the
scorecard can be found in Chapter 4.

[Service-Based Ratings]

Figure 14-8. Service-based architecture characteristics ratings

Service-based architecture is a domain-partitioned architecture, meaning
that its structure is driven by domains rather than technical
considerations (such as presentation logic or persistence logic).

Consider the example of the Going Green electronics recycling
application, which we introduced in Chapter 7 and revisited in
Chapter 13. For the purposes of this chapter, let’s imagine that Going
Green uses a service-based architecture style. Each service, being a
separately deployed unit of software, is scoped to a specific domain
(such as item assessment). Changes made within this domain only impact
that specific service and its corresponding UI and database. Nothing
else needs to be modified to support a specific assessment change.

In a distributed architecture, the number of quanta can be greater than
or equal to one. For example, if Going Green’s services all share the
same database or UI, the entire system would be only a single quantum.
However, as discussed in “Style Specifics”, both the UI and database can
be federated (broken apart), resulting in multiple quanta within the
overall system. In Figure 14-9, Going Green’s system contains two
quanta. One is for the customer-facing portion of the application and
contains a separate customer UI, database, and set of services (Quoting
and Item Status). The other deals with the internal operations of
receiving, assessing, and recycling electronic devices. Even though the
internal operations quantum contains separately deployed services and
two separate UIs, they all share the same database, making the internal
operations portion of the application a single quantum.

[Separate Quanta]

Figure 14-9. Separate quanta in a service-based architecture

Although we didn’t give service-based architecture any five-star
ratings, it nevertheless rates high (four stars) in many vital areas.
Breaking an application apart into separately deployed domain services
using this architectural style allows for faster change (agility),
better test coverage due to modularity based on domain scoping
(testability), and the ability to deploy more frequently with less risk
than with a monolithic architecture (deployability). These three
characteristics lead to better time to market, allowing organizations to
deliver new features and fix bugs relatively quickly.

Fault tolerance and overall application availability also rate high for
service-based architecture. Even though domain services tend to be
coarse-grained, the four-star rating comes from the fact that services
in this architectural style are usually self-contained and, thanks to
code and database sharing, do not typically use interservice
communication. As a result, if one domain service goes down (for
instance, Going Green’s Receiving service), it doesn’t affect any of the
other six services.

Scalability only rates three stars due to the coarse-grained nature of
the services; correspondingly, elasticity rates only two stars. Although
programmatic scalability and elasticity are certainly possible with this
architectural style, it does replicate more functionality than
architecture styles with finer-grained services (such as microservices),
making it less cost-effective and less efficient in terms of machine
resources. Typically, service-based architectures use only a single
instance of each service, unless there is a need for better throughput
or failover. A good example of this, illustrated in Figure 14-9, is
Going Green—only its Quoting and Item Status services need to scale to
support high customer volumes. The other operational services only
require single instances, making it easier to support things like single
in-memory caching and database-connection pooling.

Simplicity and overall cost are two other drivers that differentiate
this architectural style from other, more expensive and complex
distributed architectures, such as microservices, event-driven
architecture, or even space-based architecture. This makes service-based
one of the easiest and most cost-effective distributed architectures to
implement. While that’s an attractive proposition, there is, as always,
a trade-off. The higher the cost and complexity, the better these
four-star characteristics (such as scalability, elasticity, and fault
tolerance) become.

Its flexibility, combined with its many three-star and four-star
architecture characteristics, make service-based architecture one of the
most pragmatic styles available. While there are much more powerful
distributed architectural styles, many companies find that such power
comes at too steep a price. Others find that they simply don’t need that
much power. It’s like buying a Ferrari but only using it to commute to
work in rush-hour traffic—sure, it looks cool, but what a waste of
power, speed, and agility!

Service-based architecture is also a natural fit for domain-driven
design. Because services are coarse-grained and domain scoped, each
domain fits nicely into a separately deployed service encompassing that
particular domain. Compartmentalizing that functionality into a single
unit of software makes it easier to apply changes to that domain.

Maintaining and coordinating database transactions is always an issue
with distributed architectures, which typically rely on eventual
consistency (meaning that independent database updates will eventually
be in sync with each other) rather than traditional ACID transactions
(meaning database updates are coordinated and performed together in a
single unit of work). Service-based architecture leverages ACID
transactions better than any other distributed architecture style
because its domain services are coarse-grained. This means the
transaction scope is set to a particular domain service, allowing for
the traditional commit-and-rollback transaction functionality found in
most monolithic applications.

Finally, service-based architecture is a good choice for architects who
want to achieve a good level of modularity without getting tangled up in
the complexities of granularity and service coordination (see
“Choreography and Orchestration” in Chapter 18).

Examples and Use Cases

To illustrate the flexibility and power of the service-based
architectural style, we’ll revisit our example of Going Green, a system
used to recycle old electronic devices (such as an iPhone or Galaxy cell
phone).

Going Green’s processing flow works as follows:

1.  The customer asks Going Green (via a website or kiosk) how much
    money it will pay for an old electronic device (quoting).

2.  If satisfied with the quote, the customer sends the device to the
    recycling company (receiving).

3.  Going Green assesses the device’s condition (assessment).

4.  If the device is in good working condition, Going Green pays the
    customer for the device (accounting). During this process, the
    customer can go to the website at any time to check on the status of
    the item (item status).

5.  Based on the assessment, Going Green either safely destroys the
    device and recycles its parts, or resells it on a third-party sales
    platform, such as Facebook Marketplace or eBay (recycling).

6.  Going Green periodically runs financial and operational reports on
    its recycling activity (reporting).

Figure 14-10 illustrates this system as implemented using a
service-based architecture. Each of the domain areas we just identified
is implemented as a separately deployed, independent domain service. The
services that need to scale (and hence would require multiple service
instances) are those needing higher throughput (in this case, the
customer-facing Quoting and ItemStatus services). Since the other
services don’t need to scale, they only require a single service
instance.

[Electronics recycling example]

Figure 14-10. Going Green’s electronics recycling application using service-based architecture

In this example, the UI applications are separated into domains:
Customer Facing, Receiving, and Recycling and Accounting. This
separation provides good fault tolerance at the UI level, good
scalability, and appropriate security (since external customers have no
network path to access internal functionality). Notice, too, that there
are two separate physical databases: one for external customer-facing
operations, and one for internal operations. This arrangement allows
internal data and operations to reside in a separate network zone from
the external operations (denoted by the horizontal line). It also
provides much better security-access restrictions and data
protection—and constitutes a separate architectural quantum). One-way
access through the firewall allows internal services to access and
update customer-facing information, but not vice versa. Alternatively,
depending on the database, teams could also use internal table mirroring
and external table synchronization to synchronize the data between the
two databases.

Additionally, the Assessment service changes constantly, as new products
are received or come on the market. With a service-based architecture,
these frequent changes are isolated to a single domain service,
providing agility, testability, and deployability.

Service-based architecture is a very flexible architectural style that
offers domain partitioning and good levels of scalability, agility,
fault tolerance, availability, and responsiveness at a fairly low price,
compared to other distributed architectures. These factors make it a
popular choice.

Service-based architectures also make good “stepping stone” migration
targets for other distributed architectures, whether the organization is
migrating to another distributed architecture style or creating a new
distributed system from scratch. This drives us to our main point:

  Not every portion of an application needs to be microservices.

  Mark Richards

Initially moving to or creating a service-based architecture as a
“stepping stone” before migrating to the target architectural style
allows teams to analyze the domains and decide which portions of the
architecture should be microservices. For example, in the Going Green
example, the Recycling and Accounting services don’t need to be broken
down any further and should probably remain domain services. However,
the Assessment service changes frequently and requires high levels of
agility, so that service should be broken down into separate services,
one for each type of electronic device. If the Going Green team skipped
this step and moved straight to a microservices architecture, every
piece of functionality would likely end up as a microservice, even if it
didn’t need to be one.

These are a few of the many reasons that service-based architectures are
a favorite among architects. However, it’s only one of many distributed
architectural styles, and understanding all of them is helpful for
determining the right fit for a particular business problem. To that
end, let’s look at some other distributed architectures.

Chapter 15. Event-Driven Architecture Style

The event-driven architecture (EDA) style is a popular distributed,
asynchronous architecture style used to produce highly scalable and
high-performance applications. It is also particularly adaptable and can
be used for small applications as well as large, complex ones.
Event-driven architecture is made up of decoupled event processing
components that asynchronously trigger and respond to events. It can be
used as a standalone architecture style or embedded within other
architecture styles (such as an event-driven microservices
architecture).

Many developers and software architects consider EDA more of an
architectural pattern than an architectural style. We disagree. Your
authors have developed entire systems that rely solely on EDA, which is
why we maintain that it’s primarily an architectural style. While EDA
can be used in other architectural styles—such as microservices and
space-based architecture—to form hybrid architectures, it remains at its
core a way of designing complex systems.

Most applications follow what is called a request-based model, as
illustrated in Figure 15-1. When a customer requests, for example, their
order history for the past six months, this request is initially
received by a request orchestrator. The request orchestrator is
typically a user interface, but it can also be implemented through an
API layer, orchestration services, event hubs, an event bus, or an
integration hub. Its role is to direct the request to various request
processors, deterministically and synchronously. They process the
request by retrieving and updating the customer’s information in a
database. Retrieving order history information is a data-driven,
deterministic request made to the system within a specific context, not
an event happening that the system must react to, which is why this is a
request-based model.

An event-based model, on the other hand, reacts to a particular event by
taking action. For example, take submitting an online auction bid for a
particular item. The bidder submitting the bid is not making a request
to the system, but rather initiating an event that happens after the
current asking price is announced. The system must respond to that event
by comparing the bid to others received at the same time and determining
the current highest bidder.

[Request-based model]

Figure 15-1. Request-based model

Topology

Event-driven architecture leverages asynchronous fire-and-forget
communication, where services trigger events and other services respond
to those events. The four primary architectural components of its
topology are an initiating event, an event broker, an event processor
(usually just called a service), and a derived event.

The initiating event is the event that starts the entire event flow.
This could be a simple event, like placing a bid in an online auction,
or more complex events, like making updates to a health-benefits system
when an employee gets married. The initiating event is sent to an event
channel in the event broker for processing. A single event processor
accepts the initiating event from the event broker and begins processing
that event.

The event processor that accepted the initiating event performs a
specific task associated with processing that event (such as placing a
bid for an auction item), then asynchronously advertises what it did to
the rest of the system by triggering what is called a derived event to
an event broker. Other event processors respond to the derived event,
perform specific processing based on it, then advertise what they did
through new derived events. This process continues until all event
processors are idle and all derived events have been processed.
Figure 15-2 illustrates this event-processing flow.

[Event-driven architecture topology]

Figure 15-2. Basic topology of an event-driven architecture

The event-broker component is usually federated (meaning it has multiple
domain-based clustered instances). Each federated broker contains all of
the event channels (such as queues and topics) used within the event
flow (the entire workflow for processing the event) for that particular
domain. Because of the decoupled, asynchronous, fire-and-forget
broadcast nature of this architectural style, the broker topology uses
topics, topic exchanges (in the case of the Advanced Message Queuing
Protocol (AMQP)), or streams with a publish-and-subscribe messaging
model.

To illustrate how EDA processing works overall, consider the workflow of
a typical retail-order entry system, as illustrated in Figure 15-3,
where customers can place orders for items (say, a book like this one).
In this example, the Order Placement event processor receives the
initiating event (place order), inserts the order in a database table,
and returns an order ID to the customer. It then advertises to the rest
of the system that it created an order through an order placed derived
event. Notice that three event processors are interested in that derived
event: the Notification event processor, the Payment event processor,
and the Inventory event processor, all of which perform their tasks in
parallel.

[Event-driven architecture example]

Figure 15-3. Example of the event-driven architecture topology

The Notification event processor receives the order placed derived event
and emails the customer with the order details. Because the Notification
event processor has performed an action, it then generates an email sent
derived event. However, notice in Figure 15-3 that no other event
processors are listening to that derived event. This is typical within
EDA and illustrates this style’s architectural extensibility—the ability
for future event processors to respond to the derived event without any
changes to the existing system (see “Triggering Extensible Events”).

The Inventory event processor also listens for the order placed derived
event and adjusts the corresponding inventory for that book. It then
advertises this action by triggering an inventory updated derived event,
which in turn triggers a response from the Warehouse event processor.
This processor responds to and manages the corresponding inventory
between warehouses, reordering items if supplies get too low. When stock
is replenished, the Warehouse event processor triggers a
stock replenished derived event, to which the Inventory event processor
responds by adjusting the current inventory.

In this case, the Inventory event processor would not trigger a
corresponding inventory adjusted event. If it did, that would lead to
what is called a poison event—an event that keeps looping and looping
forever.

Warning

A poison event occurs when a derived event keeps getting triggered and
responded to in a continuous loop between services. These can happen
frequently when using an event-driven architecture, so be careful to
avoid them.

The Payment event processor also responds to the order placed derived
event. It responds by charging the customer’s credit card. Figure 15-3
shows that one of two possible derived events will be generated as a
result of the Payment event processor’s action: one to notify the rest
of the system that the payment was applied (payment applied), and one to
notify the system that the payment was denied (payment denied). The
Notification event processor is interested in the payment denied derived
event, because if this happens, it needs to email the customer informing
them that they must update their credit card information or choose a
different payment method.

The Order Fulfillment event processor listens for the payment applied
derived event and performs various automated functions within order
picking and packing, such as instructing the worker where to find the
item and what size box is needed for the order. Once that’s completed,
it triggers an order fulfilled derived event telling the rest of the
system that it has fulfilled the order. Both the Notification and the
Shipping event processors listen for this derived event. Concurrently,
the Notification event processor notifies the customer that the order
has been fulfilled and is ready for shipment, and the Shipping event
processor selects a shipping method, ships the order, and sends out an
order shipped derived event. The Notification event processor also
listens for the order shipped derived event and notifies the customer
that the order is on its way.

All of the event processors are highly decoupled and independent of each
other. One way to understand this asynchronous processing workflow is to
think about it as a relay race. In a relay race, runners hold a baton (a
wooden stick) and run for a certain distance (say, 1.5 kilometers), then
hand off the baton to the next runner, who does the same, on down the
chain until the last runner crosses the finish line. Once a runner hands
off the baton, that runner is done with the race and can move on to
other things. This is also true with event processors: once an event
processor hands off an event, it is no longer involved with processing
that specific event and is available to react to other initiating or
derived events. In addition, each event processor can scale
independently to handle varying load conditions or backups.

Style Specifics

The following sections describe EDA in more detail, including some
considerations, patterns, and hybrids of this complex architectural
style.

Events Versus Messages

Event-driven architecture leverages events to pass and process
information. But is an event really that different from a message? Turns
out, yes, it really is.

An event broadcasts to other event processors that something has already
happened: “I just placed an order.” A message, however, is more of a
command or query, such as “apply the payment for this order” or “give
the shipping options for this order.” This is not a subtle difference.
When we talk about event processing, we mean reacting to something that
has already happened, whereas a message describes something that needs
to be done. In our example, it’s clear that “I just placed an order” is
an event because it does not describe what processing needs to occur, as
a message would. This illustrates EDA’s decoupled nature.

The second main difference between an event and a message is that an
event typically does not require a response from the receiver, whereas a
message usually does. This reduces back-and-forth communication between
event processors, further decoupling them from one another.

Another major difference between events and messages is that an event is
typically broadcast to multiple event processors, whereas a message is
almost always directed to one event processor. In our simple
order-processing example, several event processors are interested in and
respond to the order created event, whereas only one event processor
responds to the message apply payment. Events typically use a publish
and subscribe (one-to-many) form of communication, whereas messages
typically use a point-to-point (one-to-one) form of communication.

A final difference between events and messages is the physical artifact
that represents the communication channel. Events use a topic, stream,
or notification service so that multiple event processors can subscribe
to the channel and listen for the event. Messaging typically uses a
queue or messaging service to guarantee that only one type of event
processor will receive that message.

Event-driven architecture mostly uses events (hence its name), but it
can use messages on occasion, such as requesting data from another event
processor (see “Data Topologies” and “Request-Reply Processing”). Later
in this chapter, we’ll show you mediated event-driven architecture (see
“Mediated Event-Driven Architecture”), which uses messages to control
the processing order of events.

Can you pick out which of the following choices are events and which are
messages?

- “Adventurous Air Flight 6557, turn left, heading 230 degrees.”

- “In other news, a cold front has moved into the area.”

- “OK, class, turn to page 145 in your workbooks.”

- “Hi, everyone! Sorry I’m late for the meeting.”

Let’s look at these one by one:

“Adventurous Air Flight 6557, turn left, heading 230 degrees.”

    This is a message because it’s a command (something that needs to be
    done) and because it’s directed toward one target, the pilot, even
    though several other pilots may hear the message.

“In other news, a cold front has moved into the area.”

    This is an event: it’s being broadcast to multiple people, it
    describes something that has already happened, and the news
    broadcaster is not expecting a reply. (There are, however, some
    messages that don’t require a reply either.)

“OK, class, turn to page 145 in your workbooks.”

    This one is a little tricky. Turns out this is a message, even
    though it’s being broadcast to multiple students. It’s a command to
    do something, not something that has already happened (which would
    make it an event). This illustrates an important point about the
    difference between an event and a message: broadcasting a command
    (such as turning to page 145 in the workbooks) through a
    publish-and-subscribe channel doesn’t turn it into an event.

“Hi, everyone! Sorry I’m late for the meeting.”

    This is an event, because this person being late for the meeting has
    already happened. It’s also being broadcast to multiple people, and
    no response is expected.

Derived Events

Derived events are a critical and necessary part of EDA. They are
created and triggered by event processors after the initiating event is
received. An event processor can trigger more than one derived event,
based on its processing.

Consider the derived events triggered when the Payment event processor
charges a customer’s credit card for a purchase in Figure 15-3. As
illustrated in Figure 15-4, charging a credit card involves checking for
possible fraud (processed by the Fraud Detection event processor) and
checking the credit card balance (processed by the Credit Limit event
processor). EDA can leverage a single event (creditcard charged) to do
both activities at the same time.

[Derived Events]

Figure 15-4. Derived events are generated in response to the initiating event

Notice how many derived events this single action generates. In the
Fraud Detection event processor, it triggers two possible derived
events: one if the processor detects fraud, another if no fraud is
detected. Both of these derived events are necessary, because different
event processors might take further actions depending on the outcome of
the fraud detection.

Now look at the derived events from the Credit Limit event processor.
First, a limit okay derived event indicates to the rest of the system
there is no risk for this purchase and that the customer has plenty of
credit available. As a matter of fact, this particular event could also
store in its event payload the amount of credit the customer has left,
which might be of interest to downstream event processors. Second, the
limit warning derived event, warning that the card’s balance is close to
the credit limit, might be of interest to other downstream event
processors—for instance, the Notification event processor, which could
notify the customer that they are close to their credit limit. Last, the
fatal limit exceeded derived event is of interest to several event
processors, including Notification, Decline Purchase, and perhaps a
marketing-based Extend Credit Limit event processor that automatically
extends the customer’s credit limit to allow the purchase.

This illustrates that more than one derived event can be triggered from
an event processor. However, be careful not to get trapped in the Swarm
of Gnats antipattern, where a processing unit sends out too many
fine-grained events (see “The Swarm of Gnats Antipattern”).

Triggering Extensible Events

In EDA, it’s usually a good practice for each event processor to
advertise what it has done to the rest of the system, regardless of
whether or not any other event processor cares about what that action
was.

When no event processors care about or respond to the event, we call it
an extensible derived event because it nevertheless provides support for
architectural extensibility by providing a built-in “hook” in case
processing that event requires additional functionality. For example,
suppose that, as part of a complex event process (as illustrated in
Figure 15-5), the Notification event processor generates an email that
it sends to a customer, notifying them of a particular action. It then
advertises that it has sent the email to the rest of the system through
a new derived event (email sent). Since no other event processors are
currently listening or responding to that event, the message simply
disappears (or is ignored, in the case of event streaming). That might
seem like a waste of resources, but it’s not. Suppose the business
decides to analyze all emails sent to customers. The team can add a new
Email Analyzer event processor to the overall system with minimal effort
and with no changes to other event processors, because the email
information is already available via the email sent derived event.

[Notification event ignored]

Figure 15-5. Notification event is sent, but ignored and not used

Asynchronous Capabilities

The event-driven architectural style has a unique characteristic in that
it relies primarily on asynchronous communication for both
fire-and-forget processing (no response required) and request/reply
processing (when a response is required from the event consumer, see
“Request-Reply Processing”). Asynchronous communication can be a
powerful technique for increasing a system’s overall responsiveness.

In Figure 15-6, a user is posting a product review on a website. The
comment service, in this example. takes 3,000 milliseconds to validate
and post that comment. The comment has to go through several parsing
engines: a check for unacceptable words, a check to make sure that the
comment is not indicating abusive text (such as “slow thinker” or
“unable to think clearly”), and finally a context check to make sure the
comment is about the product (and not, say, just a political rant).

The top path in Figure 15-6 posts the comment using a synchronous
RESTful call. That means 50 ms in network latency for the service to
receive the post, 3,000 ms to validate and post the comment, and 50 ms
of latency to tell the user that the comment was posted. The total time
to post a comment, from the user’s point of view, is thus 3,100
milliseconds. Now look at the bottom path, which uses asynchronous
messaging. Here, the user’s total posting time is only 25 ms, as opposed
to 3,100 ms. It still takes the system 25 ms to receive the comment and
3,000 ms to post it, for a total of 3,025 ms, but from the end user’s
perspective, only 25 ms go by before the system responds that it has
accepted the comment (although it hasn’t actually been posted yet).

[Synchronous versus asynchronous]

Figure 15-6. Synchronous versus asynchronous communication

The difference in response time between 3,100 ms and 25 ms is
staggering. There is, however, one caveat: on the synchronous top path,
the end user gets a guarantee that their comment has been posted.
However, on the asynchronous bottom path, the post is only acknowledged,
with a future promise that eventually it will be posted. What would
happen if the user’s comment includes profanity and the system rejects
it? There is no way for it to notify the end user—or is there? If the
user must register with the website to post a comment, the system could
send them a message indicating a problem with the comment and suggesting
how to repair it.

This example illustrates the difference between responsiveness (the time
it takes to get information back to the user) and performance (the time
it takes to insert the comment into the database). When the user doesn’t
need any information back (other than an acknowledgment or a thank-you
message), why make them wait? Responsiveness is all about notifying the
user that the action has been accepted and will be processed
momentarily, whereas performance is about making the end-to-end process
faster. On the asynchronous bottom path, the architect did nothing to
optimize the way the comment service processes the comment (that’s
addressing responsiveness). If the architect took the time to optimize
the comment service, perhaps by executing all of the text and grammar
parsing engines in parallel, leveraging caching and other similar
techniques but still using synchronous communication, they would be
instead addressing overall performance.

That was a simple example. What about a more complicated one? This time,
let’s look at an online stock trade, where a user is purchasing some
stock asynchronously. What if there is no way to notify the user of an
error?

While asynchronous communication significantly improves responsiveness,
error handling is a big issue. The difficulty of addressing error
conditions adds to the complexity of this architecture style. “Error
Handling” illustrates a pattern of reactive architecture for addressing
error-handling challenges: the Workflow Event pattern.

In addition to its responsiveness, asynchronous communication also
provides a good level of dynamic decoupling and avoids an antipattern,
Dynamic Quantum Entanglement, which occurs when two architectural quanta
communicate through synchronous communication. (You probably recall from
Chapter 7 that an architectural quantum is a part of the system that can
be deployed independently from the rest of the system and is bound
through synchronous dynamic coupling, and that architectural
characteristics live at the quantum level.) Because these two
architectural quanta are now dependent on each other, they essentially
become entangled. The dependency turns them into a single architectural
quantum. Asynchronous communication can help detangle architectural
quanta because it removes that dynamic dependency.

To illustrate this important point, consider the two systems in
Figure 15-7. In this example, the Portfolio Management system creates a
trade order to buy some stock. It synchronously sends this trade order
to the Trade Order system, which will perform compliance checks and
create the trade order. Because the communication between these two
systems is synchronous, the Portfolio Management system must necessarily
block and wait for a trade confirmation number from the Trade Order
system. These two systems have become entangled and now form a single
architectural quantum.

[Single architectural quantum]

Figure 15-7. These systems form a single architectural quantum due to synchronous dynamic coupling

The significance of this entanglement is that the architectural
characteristics now live between these two systems. If the Trade Order
system becomes unavailable or unresponsive, the Portfolio Management
system cannot submit the trade order. This also degrades responsiveness:
if the Trade Order system is slow, the Portfolio Management system will
be slow too. Scalability also suffers because if the
Portfolio Management system needs to scale, so does the Trade Order
system. If it doesn’t or can’t, then the Portfolio Management system
can’t scale as needed.

An architect can detangle these architectural quanta by replacing the
synchronous call with an asynchronous call between the two systems, as
illustrated in Figure 15-8.

[Multiple architectural quanta]

Figure 15-8. These systems form separate architectural quanta due to their asynchronous dynamic coupling

By using asynchronous communication, the Portfolio Management system can
send the trade order through a queue or some other asynchronous means,
so it doesn’t have to wait for the Trade Order system to create the
trade order. Once the Trade Order system performs its compliance checks
and creates the trade order, it can send the confirmation number to the
Portfolio Management system through a separate, asynchronous channel.
Removing this dependency from the two systems’ dynamic coupling allows
them to form two separate architectural quanta. If the Trade Order
system is unavailable or unresponsive, the Portfolio Management system
can still issue trade orders, knowing that at some point they will be
created and confirmation numbers sent back.

Broadcast Capabilities

Another of EDA’s unique characteristics is its ability to broadcast
events without knowing what other processing units (if any) are
receiving those events or what processing they will perform in response.
As Figure 15-9 shows, this dynamically decouples the event processors
from each other.

[Broadcast messaging]

Figure 15-9. Broadcasting events to other event processors

Broadcast capabilities are an essential part of many patterns, including
eventual consistency and complex event processing (CEP). For example,
prices for instruments traded on the stock market change frequently.
Every time a new ticker price (the current price of a particular stock)
is published, many event processors might respond to the new price (such
as trade analytics, or buying or selling the stock). However, the event
processor that publishes the latest price simply broadcasts it, with no
knowledge of how that information will be used. This is known as
semantic decoupling in that one event processor has no knowledge of (or
dependency on) the actions of other event processors.

Event Payload

The information contained in an event is known as its payload. Payloads
can vary significantly: an event payload could be a simple key-value
pair, or all the information necessary for downstream processing. The
two basic types are data-based and a key-based event payloads.
Architects must do careful trade-off analysis to determine which of
these options suits each type of event triggered in the system. In this
section, we describe these two payload types and their corresponding
trade-offs.

Data-based event payloads

A data-based event payload is an event payload that sends all necessary
information for processing. In the example illustrated in Figure 15-10,
a customer places an order. First, the Order Placement event processor
inserts the complete order into the database (the system of record). It
then broadcasts an event called order_placed, which contains all of the
order details (in this case, 45 attributes, totalling 500 KB of memory).
The Payment event processor responds to this event by pulling
information from the event payload—specifically the order ID, the
customer’s information, and the total cost of the order—and using it to
apply the payment. Simultaneously, the Inventory Management event
processor uses the item ID and item quantity from the event payload to
adjust the current inventory for the item purchased.

[Data-based event payload]

Figure 15-10. Data-based event payloads contain all the data necessary for processing

The Payment and Inventory Management event processors didn’t have to
query the database to get the order information, because the data was
already contained in the event payload. This is one of the biggest
advantages of using data-based event payloads. The less an event
processor queries the database, the better its performance,
responsiveness, and scalability will be. Furthermore, given the highly
dynamic decoupled nature of EDA, the Order Placement event processor
might not know which other event processors are responding to the event
or what data they might need for processing. Sending all of the
information in the event payload guarantees that each responding event
processor will have the information it needs to perform its processing.
Event processors might not even have access to the database that
contains the order information, particularly in data topologies with
strict bounded contexts, domain based or database-per-service (see “Data
Topologies”).

While these advantages demonstrate ways of creating more responsive,
scalable, and flexible systems, data-based payloads do have several
disadvantages. The first is that it’s harder to maintain data
consistency and data integrity when you have multiple systems of record.
Because all of the order information is contained in the database and in
the events being triggered in the system, the order information can
easily get out of sync—particularly if the order is updated during
processing.

For example, suppose a customer places an order for a hundred items, but
only meant to order one, and realizes their mistake immediately after
submitting the order. Or perhaps the customer realizes just after
ordering that they’ve used the incorrect shipping address (this has
happened to your authors many times). In either of these situations, the
customer immediately updates the order with the correct information. The
database, which is the single system of record, contains the corrected
values, but some of the events containing the older values might not be
processed immediately. This means that any of the older, incorrect
values still being processed will be used instead of the newer, correct
ones. To further complicate this scenario, it is very difficult in EDA
to control the timing of events, so it’s possible that the newer values
might be processed before the older values. This means that if other
event processors use the older, incorrect values, those could be
overlaid on the correct, newer values.

A second major disadvantage of the data-based event payload is about
contract management and versioning. We know that an order in this system
has 45 attributes. Because all of that information is contained in the
event payload, the event needs some sort of contract—a way of
structuring the data being sent. The architect is now faced with myriad
decisions: should the payload type be a JSON object? An XML object?
Should the contract be strict or loose? (A strict contract is one that
uses some sort of schema or object definition, such as a JSON schema,
GraphQL spec, or class definition; whereas a loose contract might use
simple JSON name-value pairs.) Each of these decisions carries with it
many trade-offs, and each forms a tight static coupling between event
processors.

And then there’s versioning. For strict contracts, an architect or
developer might use a vendor MIME type in the event headers to specify
the version number. This helps make the system more agile and provides
backward compatibility (to avoid breaking other event processors).
However, all event processors must leverage the same versioning logic,
which requires strong governance. If an event processor ignores a
contract version when responding to a strict contract’s payload,
changing that schema is likely to cause that event processor to fail. In
addition, it’s very difficult to implement version communication and
deprecation strategies in a highly decoupled, asynchronous architecture
like EDA. All this makes data-based event payloads somewhat fragile.

Data-based event payloads can also suffer from stamp coupling: a form of
static coupling where several modules (in this case, event processors)
all share a common data structure, but only use parts of it (and in many
cases different parts of it). When this situation occurs, changing the
common data structure can require changing other event processors, even
ones that don’t care about the data.

Figure 15-11 illustrates how stamp coupling works and its negative
impact on the architecture. In this example, the Order Placement event
processor sends an order_placed event consisting of 45 attributes,
containing all the information about the order, at a size of 500 KB. The
Inventory event processor responds to the order_created event, but only
requires two attributes, the item_id and the quantity, totaling only 30
bytes. In this example, changing to the payload, for example by removing
an address-line attribute, would affect the Inventory event processor
even though it doesn’t care about that field.

[Stamp coupling]

Figure 15-11. An example of stamp coupling, where another service only needs part of the data sent

In this example, using contract versioning with strict contracts helps
mitigate the risk of the Inventory event processor breaking, but at some
point—when the contract version is deprecated or a breaking contract
change occurs—a developer will have to retest and redeploy it.

One commonly overlooked problem with stamp coupling is bandwidth
utilization. The third fallacy of distributed computing is that
“bandwidth is infinite.” It’s not, of course. As a matter of fact, in
most cloud-based environments, bandwidth is what costs so much. Going
back to our example in Figure 15-11, with a data-based payload, if
customers are placing 500 orders per second, sending a single 500-KB
event to the Inventory event processor will utilize 250,000 KB per
second of bandwidth. However, if the system sends only the 30 bytes of
data actually needed, the event will only utilize 15 KB per second of
bandwidth. This is a staggering difference, one worth investigating when
using data-based event payloads.

One reason architects sometimes limit stamp coupling is to leverage
consumer-driven contracts, where each consumer of a message has its own
contract containing only the data it needs for processing. However,
because of EDA’s broadcast capabilities and because the system can’t
always know which event processors will respond to an event, it’s
difficult to leverage consumer-driven contracts with events in
event-driven architecture. For this reason (and to address the other
disadvantages of data-based event payloads), many architects turn to
key-based event payloads.

Key-based event payload

A key-based event payload is an event payload that contains only a key
identifying the context for the event (such as an order ID or customer
ID). With key-based event payloads, the event processors responding to
the event must query a database to retrieve the information they need to
process the event.

When a customer places an order, the Order Placement event processor
inserts the order into the database and triggers a key-based event
called order_placed. This event contains a single key value containing
the order ID in simple JSON:

    {
     "order_id": "123"
    }

One of the main disadvantages of key-based event payloads is that each
event processor responding to the event must query the database to get
the information it needs to process the order. For instance, when the
Payment event processor responds to the event, it must query the
database for the order information it needs to process payment. The
Inventory event processor also responds simultaneously to the event, so
it must also query the database to retrieve the item ID and quantity.
This can detract from responsiveness, performance, and scalability, and
can overwhelm a database, particularly in a highly parallel and
asynchronous architecture such as event-driven architecture. (See “Data
Topologies” for ways to mitigate this risk.) Key-based event payloads
also present a challenge if the required data is not easily accessible
(such as if it lies within the bounded context of another event
processor). Figure 15-12 illustrates this technique.

[Key-based event payload]

Figure 15-12. With key-based event payloads, only the context key is contained in the event

However, using key-based event payloads carries many advantages, some of
which may outweigh the performance and scalability issues. The first
main advantage is better overall data consistency and data integrity,
thanks to having a single system of record. Because data about the event
is located in only one place (the database), key-based event payloads
can handle changes to the data during event processing much more easily
than data-based event payloads.

The second main advantage is that because the contract in key-based
event payloads is so simple and rarely changes, architects typically
implement it through loose, schema-less JSON or XML. Therefore,
key-based event payloads don’t have the same issues with contract change
management, versioning, and communication and deprecation strategies
that data-based event payloads tend to have.

Another advantage of key-based event payloads: they don’t have the same
stamp coupling and bandwidth issues as data-based event payloads.
Because there’s no opaque data associated with the event, contracts are
simple, small, and utilize minimal bandwidth. Thus, they tend to perform
faster, from a network and message broker perspective, than data-based
event payloads.

Trade-off summary

Choosing between a data-based event payload versus a key-based data
payload requires careful trade-off analysis. Remember, it’s not an
all-or-nothing proposition: each type of event can use a different
payload type. Table 15-1 summarizes the trade-offs associated with
data-based and key-based event payloads.

  Criteria                      Data-based payloads   Key-based payloads
  ----------------------------- --------------------- --------------------
  Performance and scalability   Good                  Bad
  Contract management           Bad                   Good
  Stamp coupling                Bad                   Good
  Bandwidth utilization         Bad                   Good
  Restricted database access    Good                  Bad
  Overall system fragility      Bad                   Good

  : Table 15-1. Data-based versus key-based event payloads
  {#table-eda-payload-type .pagebreak-before .less_space}

Notice that the overall trade-off between these two options boils down
to scalability and performance versus contract management and bandwidth
utilization. Ask which one is more important for each particular event.
Some event processing requires extreme levels of scale and performance,
in which case a data-based event payload would be a better choice; some
event processing data will undergo frequent change, in which case a
key-based event payload might be more appropriate.

As with most things in software architecture, architects’ choices lie on
a spectrum, not a simple binary. That’s why it’s important to be careful
to avoid triggering what are known as anemic events.

Anemic events

An anemic event is a derived event with a payload that doesn’t contain
enough information to help the event processor make decisions, and lacks
the necessary context for further downstream processing.

Figure 15-13 illustrates an anemic derived event. In this example, a
customer has updated some information in their user profile. Once that
information is updated in the database, the Customer Profile event
processor triggers a profile_updated event, using a key-based event
payload that passes only the customer ID as its key-based data.

The three services responding to this event receive only the customer ID
and the context that the customer’s profile was changed. The first
service (Service 1) has no idea what data was changed in the profile:
name, address, some other critical information? Unfortunately, querying
the database cannot answer this question, so Service 1 has no idea how
to respond or what action to take. Service 2 responds to the
profile_updated event, but going only by the key, does not know if it
needs to perform any additional processing. Finally, Service 3 responds
to the same event, but has no idea what the prior values were and
therefore cannot perform its processing. All three of these event
processors need to respond in some way to the customer updating their
profile but can’t, due to a lack of information. These are anemic
events: events that do not include additional information to further
process the event.

[Anemic events]

Figure 15-13. An anemic event lacks enough context to process the event

To avoid anemic events such as this one, include the updated customer
information as well as the prior values, since most databases typically
don’t reflect that information.

This is an example of the spectrum of event payload granularity. On the
extreme left side of the spectrum sit key-based event payloads, where
only the key is contained within the event. While this has merit when
creating or deleting an order, it doesn’t work well when a customer
updates an order. On the far right side of the spectrum is the
data-based event payload, where all the data is included, whether it’s
needed or not. This is where stamp coupling rears its ugly head. The
customer-profile-update scenario fits somewhere between these extremes
because it provides the right level of information, thus avoiding the
anemic derived event problem.

The Swarm of Gnats Antipattern

Related to anemic events is an antipattern known as the Swarm of Gnats.
You probably know gnats as very small, annoying flying insects that buzz
around your head, bothering you enough to send you back indoors on a
beautiful sunny day. Whereas anemic events are concerned about the
granularity of an event payload, the Swarm of Gnats antipattern is
concerned about the granularity of the triggered events themselves and
with how many derived events are triggered from an event processor. If
an architect triggers too many derived events from a single event
processor, they risk getting caught up in the Swarm of Gnats
antipattern.

Consider the credit card payment example shown in Figure 15-14, where a
customer places an order and their credit card is charged to pay for it.
When the credit card is charged, the Payment event processor triggers a
payment applied event, and (fortunately) the Fraud Detection event
processor listens for it. This event processor analyzes each charge to
determine whether it’s legitimate or fraudulent. Whatever the outcome,
the Fraud Detection event processor triggers a fraud_checked derived
event with the outcome of the fraud check contained in its event
payload.

[Coarse-grained event]

Figure 15-14. An example of an event that is too coarse-grained

Three event processors are interested in the outcome of the credit card
fraud check:

- If fraud is detected, the Credit Card Locking event processor locks
  the customer’s credit card to prevent further charges.

- The Customer Notify event processor notifies the customer of possible
  fraud.

- If fraud is not detected, the Purchase Profile event processor updates
  its algorithms.

Unfortunately, when a single fraud_checked derived event is triggered,
all of these event processors must respond to the event, check the
payload for the outcome, and decide whether to take action. Because this
derived event is too coarse-grained, all of the event processors must
perform additional processing: analyzing the payload of the single
derived event to decide whether to take action. If no fraud has been
detected, this is a waste of bandwidth and processing power, since only
the Purchase Profile event processor needed to take any action.

A much more efficient approach would be to trigger two separate derived
events (fraud_detected and no_fraud_detected), as shown in Figure 15-15.
Here, the derived events triggered by the Fraud Detection event
processor provide context outside of the event payload, allowing each
event processor to decide whether to respond without having to analyze
the event’s internal payload.

[Appropriate event granularity]

Figure 15-15. Triggering multiple events allows for more efficient processing and decision making

In this example, triggering multiple derived events for each outcome
allows for better event flow, less churn, and more efficient processing.
However, triggering too many derived events results in the Swarm of
Gnats antipattern.

The scenario shown in Figure 15-16 illustrates how this antipattern can
occur. A customer has recently moved and needs to change their user
profile on the website to update their credit card’s bill-to address,
ship-to address (where orders will be shipped), and phone number from
their old landline to their cell phone. When the customer hits the
Submit button for these profile changes, the Customer Profile event
processor receives the update request, updates the database, and
triggers a separate event for each update that contains the necessary
information to do any further processing.

[Swarm of gnats antipattern]

Figure 15-16. Triggering too many fine-grained derived events is known as the Swarm of Gnats antipattern

The problem with triggering too many fine-grained, detailed events is
that it can saturate and overwhelm the system with derived events all
related to the same thing: the customer updated their user profile. This
antipattern also tends to proliferate numerous small derived events from
other event processors, eventually making it hard for anyone to
understand the system’s overall event flows.

To avoid this antipattern, the architect could bundle each individual
profile update into a single profile_updated derived event for the
complete action, containing the before and after data of all updated
fields. This more efficient approach is illustrated in Figure 15-17.

[Domain Event]

Figure 15-17. Combining individual state changes into a single derived event avoids the Swarm of Gnats antipattern

Determining the right level of granularity for derived events can be
quite challenging. We recommend focusing on the outcome of the
processing or state change to avoid the Swarm of Gnats antipattern and
help simplify event flows.

Error Handling

The Workflow Event pattern of reactive architecture is one way of
addressing error handling in an asynchronous workflow. This pattern
addresses both resiliency and responsiveness, since it allows the system
to handle asynchronous errors without affecting its responsiveness.

The Workflow Event pattern leverages delegation, containment, and repair
by using a workflow delegate, as illustrated in Figure 15-18. In this
pattern, an event processor asynchronously passes data through a message
channel to the event consumer. If the event consumer experiences an
error while processing the data, it immediately delegates that error to
the Workflow Processor service and moves on to the next message in the
event queue. This way, the next message is immediately processed, so
overall responsiveness remains the same. If the event consumer were to
spend time trying to figure out the error, then it would not be
processing the next message in the queue—delaying not only the next
message, but all other messages waiting in the processing queue.

When the Workflow Processor service receives an error, it tries to
figure out what’s wrong with the message. Perhaps there’s a static,
deterministic error? It could analyze the message using some
machine-learning or AI algorithms to look for some anomaly in the data.
Either way, the workflow processor programmatically (that is, without
human intervention) makes changes to the original data to try to repair
it, then sends it back to the originating queue. The event consumer sees
this updated message as a new one and tries to process it again,
hopefully this time with more success.

Of course, the workflow processor can’t always determine what’s wrong
with the message. In these cases, it sends the message off to another
queue, which is then received by a dashboard on the desktop of a
knowledgeable person. This person looks at the message, applies manual
fixes, and then resubmits it to the original queue (usually through a
reply-to message header variable).

[Workflow event pattern]

Figure 15-18. The Workflow Event pattern of reactive architecture

Suppose a trading advisor in one part of the country accepts trade
orders (instructions on what stock to buy and for how many shares) on
behalf of a large trading firm in another part of the country. The
advisor batches up the trade orders in what is usually called a basket
and asynchronously sends them to a broker across the country, who then
purchases the stock. To simplify the example, suppose the contract for
the trade instructions must adhere to the following:

    ACCOUNT(String),SIDE(String),SYMBOL(String),SHARES(Long)

Suppose the large trading firm receives the following basket of Apple
(AAPL) trade orders from the trading advisor:

    12654A87FR4,BUY,AAPL,1254
    87R54E3068U,BUY,AAPL,3122
    6R4NB7609JJ,BUY,AAPL,5433
    2WE35HF6DHF,BUY,AAPL,8756 SHARES
    764980974R2,BUY,AAPL,1211
    1533G658HD8,BUY,AAPL,2654

The fourth trade instruction (2WE35HF6DHF,BUY,AAPL,8756 SHARES) has the
word SHARES after the number of shares for the trade. When the primary
firm processes these asynchronous trade orders without any error
handling capabilities, the following error occurs within the
TradePlacement service:

    Exception in thread "main" java.lang.NumberFormatException:
    	For input string: "8756 SHARES"
    	at java.lang.NumberFormatException.forInputString
    	(NumberFormatException.java:65)
    	at java.lang.Long.parseLong(Long.java:589)
    	at java.lang.Long.<init>(Long.java:965)
    	at trading.TradePlacement.execute(TradePlacement.java:23)
    	at trading.TradePlacement.main(TradePlacement.java:29)

When this exception occurs, because this was an asynchronous request,
there is no user to synchronously respond to and fix the error. The
TradePlacement service can’t do anything, except possibly log the error
condition.

Applying the Workflow Event pattern can fix this error programmatically.
Because the primary firm has no control over the trading advisor or the
trade-order data it sends, it must react to fix the error itself (see
Figure 15-19). When the same error occurs
(2WE35HF6DHF,BUY,AAPL,8756 SHARES), the TradePlacement service
immediately delegates the error via asynchronous messaging to the
Trade Placement Error service for error handling, passing it along with
the error information about the exception:

    Trade Placed: 12654A87FR4,BUY,AAPL,1254
    Trade Placed: 87R54E3068U,BUY,AAPL,3122
    Trade Placed: 6R4NB7609JJ,BUY,AAPL,5433
    Error Placing Trade: "2WE35HF6DHF,BUY,AAPL,8756 SHARES"
    Sending to trade error processor <-- delegate the error fixing and move on
    Trade Placed: 764980974R2,BUY,AAPL,1211
    ...

The Trade Placement Error service, acting as the workflow delegate,
receives the error and inspects the exception. Seeing that the issue is
with the word SHARES in the Number of Shares field, the
Trade Placement Error service strips off the word SHARES and resubmits
the trade for reprocessing:

    Received Trade Order Error: 2WE35HF6DHF,BUY,AAPL,8756 SHARES
    Trade fixed: 2WE35HF6DHF,BUY,AAPL,8756
    Resubmitting Trade For Re-Processing

The TradePlacement service can now process the fixed trade successfully:

    ...
    trade placed: 1533G658HD8,BUY,AAPL,2654
    trade placed: 2WE35HF6DHF,BUY,AAPL,8756 <-- this was the original trade in error

[Workflow Event pattern example]

Figure 15-19. Error handling with the Workflow Event pattern

One consequence of using the Workflow Event pattern is that messages
that are sent to a workflow processor and then resubmitted are processed
out of sequence. In our trading example, the order of the messages
matters, because all trades within a given account must be processed in
order (for example, a SELL for IBM must occur before a BUY for AAPL
within the same brokerage account). It would be complex, although not
impossible, to maintain the message order within a given context (in
this case, the brokerage account number). One way to address this is for
the TradePlacement service to queue and store the brokerage account
number of the erroneous trade. Any trade with that same brokerage
account number would be stored in a temporary queue for later processing
(in first-in, first-out, or FIFO, order). Once the erroneous trade is
fixed and processed, the TradePlacement service de-queues the remaining
trades for that same account and processes them in order.

Preventing Data Loss

Architects dealing with asynchronous communications are always concerned
with data loss: when an event or message gets dropped or never makes it
to its final destination. Fortunately, there are basic out-of-the-box
techniques to prevent data loss.

Architects can implement event channels in a variety of ways. Most
event-driven architectures use the Advanced Message Queuing Protocol
(AMQP) for triggering and responding to events. Examples of AMQP brokers
include Amazon SNS (Simple Notification Service), RabbitMQ, Solace, and
Azure Event Hubs. With AMQP, events are published to an exchange. The
exchange uses the binding rules set by the consuming event processors to
forward the event to a queue for each event processor that subscribes to
that event. AMQP brokers can also leverage what is known as the Event
Forwarding pattern to prevent data loss, a technique we describe in this
section.

Another event channel implementation is the Jakarta Messaging API
(formerly Java Message Service or JMS), which uses topics rather than
the two-step forwarding process queues use. Nevertheless, Jakarta
Messaging can still leverage the Event Forwarding pattern to prevent
data loss, provided that the event processors responding to an event are
configured as durable subscribers. A durable subscriber is one that is
guaranteed to receive an event. If the event processor is down or
otherwise unavailable, the JMS topic stores the event until the
subscribing event processor becomes available.

Another possible event-channel implementation is event streaming using
Kafka as an event broker (the software product containing the queues and
topics). The techniques for preventing data loss within event streaming
are very different from those used for the Event Forwarding pattern
described in this section. Refer to the Kafka website for more
information about preventing data loss when using this kind of streaming
event broker.

Consider a typical scenario in which event processor A asynchronously
publishes an event to a message broker, which eventually goes to an AMQP
queue or JMS topic. Event processor B responds to the event and inserts
the data from the payload into a database. As illustrated in
Figure 15-20, there are three ways data loss can occur in this scenario:

1.  While event processor A is publishing the event, it crashes before
    an acknowledgment from the event broker can be sent; alternately,
    the event broker sends an acknowledgment to event processor A, but
    then crashes before the event is accepted by another event
    processor.

2.  Event processor B accepts the event from the queue but crashes
    before it can process the event.

3.  Event processor B is unable to persist the message to the database
    due to a data error.

Each of these areas of data loss can be mitigated through the Event
Forwarding pattern.

[Data loss issue]

Figure 15-20. Places where data loss can happen within an event-driven architecture

With the first issue, the event never makes it to the queue or the
broker fails before the event is read. To address this, use persistent
message queues along with synchronous send. Persisted message queues
support guaranteed delivery: when the event broker receives the event,
not only does it store the event in memory for fast retrieval, it also
persists the event in some sort of physical data store (such as a
filesystem or database). If the event broker goes down, the event is
physically stored on disk, so it will still be available for processing
when the event broker comes back up. Synchronous send does a blocking
wait in the event processor, stopping it from triggering the event until
the broker acknowledges that it has persisted the event to the database.
These two basic techniques prevent data loss between the event producer
and the queue, because the event is either still with the event producer
or persisted within the queue.

A basic messaging technique called client acknowledge mode can address
the second issue, where event processor B de-queues the next available
event and crashes before it can process the event. By default, when an
event is read from a queue, it is immediately removed from that queue
(this is called auto acknowledge mode). Client acknowledge mode keeps
the event in the queue and attaches the client ID to it so that no other
consumers can read or process the event. With this mode, if event
processor B crashes, the event is still preserved in the queue,
preventing message loss.

The third issue, in which event processor B is unable to persist the
event to the database due to some data error, can be addressed with ACID
transactions via a database commit. Once the event processor issues a
database commit, the data is guaranteed to be persisted in the database.
Last participant support (LPS) removes the event from the persisted
queue by acknowledging that all processing has been completed and that
the event has been persisted. This guarantees that the event has not
been lost in transit from event processor A to the database. These
techniques are illustrated in Figure 15-21.

[Preventing data loss]

Figure 15-21. Preventing data loss within an event-driven architecture

Request-Reply Processing

So far in this chapter, we’ve dealt with asynchronous requests that
don’t need an immediate response from the event consumer. But what about
event processors that need information back immediately from another
event processor—for example, waiting for some sort of confirmation ID or
acknowledgment before triggering an event? This scenario requires
synchronous communication to complete the request.

In EDA, synchronous communication is typically accomplished through
request-reply messaging (sometimes referred to as pseudosynchronous
communications). Each event channel within request-reply messaging
consists of two queues: a request queue and a reply queue. The message
producer making the initial request for information asynchronously sends
data to the request queue, and then returns control to the message
producer. The message producer then does additional processing, and
eventually waits on the reply queue for the response. The message
consumer receives and processes the message, then sends the response to
the reply queue. The event producer receives the message with the
response data. This basic flow is illustrated in Figure 15-22.

[Request-reply]

Figure 15-22. Request-reply message processing

There are two primary ways to implement request-reply messaging. The
first (and most common) technique is to put a correlation ID (CID) field
in the message header of the reply message, usually set to the message
ID of the original request message (simply called ID in Figure 15-23).
It works like this:

1.  The event producer sends a message to the request queue and records
    the unique message ID (ID 124). Notice that the CID in this case is
    null.

2.  The event producer does a blocking wait on the reply queue with a
    message filter (also called a message selector), where the CID in
    the message header equals the original message ID (124). There are
    two messages in the reply queue: ID 855 with CID 120, and ID 856
    with CID 122. Neither of these messages will be picked up, because
    neither correlation ID matches what the event consumer is looking
    for (CID 124).

3.  The event consumer receives the message (ID 124) and processes the
    request.

4.  The event consumer creates the reply message containing the response
    and sets the CID in the message header to the original message ID
    (124).

5.  The event consumer sends the new message ID (857) to the reply
    queue.

6.  The event producer receives the message, because the CID (124)
    matches the message selector from step 2.

[Correlation ID]

Figure 15-23. Request-reply message processing using a correlation ID

The other way to implement request-reply messaging is to use a temporary
queue for the reply queue. A temporary queue is dedicated to a specific
request, created when the request is made, and deleted when the request
ends. This technique, as illustrated in Figure 15-24, does not require a
correlation ID, because the temporary queue is a dedicated queue only
known to the event producer for that specific request. The temporary
queue technique works as follows:

1.  The event producer creates a temporary queue (or one is
    automatically created, depending on the message broker) and sends a
    message to the request queue, passing the name of the temporary
    queue in the reply-to header (or some other agreed-upon custom
    attribute in the message header).

2.  The event producer does a blocking wait on the temporary reply
    queue. No message selector is needed because any message sent to
    this queue belongs solely to the event producer that sent the
    original message.

3.  The event consumer receives the message, processes the request, and
    sends a response message to the reply queue named in the reply-to
    header.

4.  The event processor receives the message and deletes the temporary
    queue.

[Temporary queues]

Figure 15-24. Request-reply message processing using a temporary queue

While the temporary queue technique is much simpler, the message broker
must create a temporary queue for each request and then delete it
immediately. This can significantly slow the broker down and can affect
overall performance and responsiveness, particularly for large message
volumes and high concurrency. For this reason, we usually recommend
using the correlation ID technique.

Mediated Event-Driven Architecture

So far in this chapter we’ve focused on choreographed EDA, where event
processors trigger events through broadcast capabilities, and multiple
event processors respond to the event. However, there may be times when
an architect wants more control over the processing of an event. In this
case, the architect can use an orchestrated form of EDA known as the
mediator topology.

The mediator topology addresses some of the shortcomings of the standard
choreographed EDA topology we’ve described so far in this chapter. It’s
centered on an event mediator, which manages and controls the workflow
for initiating events that require coordination between multiple event
processors. The architecture components that make up the mediator
topology are: an initiating event, an event queue, an event mediator,
event channels, and event processors.

Importantly, the mediated topology typically uses messages rather than
events (see “Events Versus Messages”). They are generally commands (such
as ship_order) rather than events that have happened (such as
order_shipped).

Like in the choreographed topology, the initiating event is what starts
the whole process. However, in the mediator topology (Figure 15-25), an
event mediator accepts the initiating event. It only knows the steps
involved in processing the event, so it generates corresponding derived
messages and sends them to dedicated message channels (usually queues)
in a point-to-point fashion. Event processors then listen to the
dedicated event channels, process messages, and (usually) respond to the
mediator when they have completed their work. Event processors within
the mediator topology do not advertise what they’ve done to the rest of
the system through additional derived messages.

In most implementations of the mediator topology, there are multiple
mediators, each usually associated with a particular domain or grouping
of events. This avoids having a single point of failure, which can be an
issue with this topology, and increases overall throughput and
performance. For example, a customer mediator might handle all
customer-related events (such as new customer registrations and profile
updates), while an order mediator handles order-related activities (such
as adding an item to a shopping cart and checking out).

How architects choose to implement the event mediator usually depends on
the nature and complexity of the messages the event mediator is
processing. For example, for events requiring simple error handling and
orchestration, mediators such as Apache Camel, Mule ESB, or Spring
Integration will usually suffice. Message flows and message routes
within these types of mediators are typically custom written in
programming code (such as Java or C#) to control the event-processing
workflow.

However, if the event workflow requires lots of conditional processing
and multiple dynamic paths with complex error handling directives, then
a mediator such as Apache ODE or the Oracle BPEL Process Manager would
be a more appropriate choice. These mediators are based on the Business
Process Execution Language (BPEL), an XML-like structure that describes
the steps involved in processing an event. BPEL artifacts also contain
structured elements used for error handling, redirection, multicasting,
and so on. BPEL is a powerful but relatively complex language to learn,
so architects usually create mediators using the GUI tools in BPEL’s
engine suite.

[Mediator topology]

Figure 15-25. Mediator topology

BPEL is good for complex, dynamic workflows, but it does not work well
for event workflows with long-running transactions that involve human
intervention throughout the event process. For example, suppose a trade
is being placed through a place_trade initiating event. The event
mediator accepts this event, but during the processing, finds that
manual approval is required because the trade is over a certain number
of shares. The event mediator now has to stop the event processing,
notify a senior trader to get the manual approval, and wait for that
approval. In these cases, a Business Process Management (BPM) engine,
such as jBPM, would be more appropriate than using an event mediator.

Before choosing what kind of event mediator to implement, it’s important
to know the types of events it will process. For complex, long-running
events involving human interaction, Apache Camel would be extremely
difficult to use and maintain. By the same token, using a BPM engine for
simple event flows would waste months of effort on something Apache
Camel could accomplish in a matter of days.

Of course, it’s rare to have all events fit neatly into one class of
complexity. We recommend classifying events as simple, hard, or complex,
and sending every event through a simple mediator, such as Apache Camel
or Mule. The simple mediator can handle the event itself or forward it
to another, more complex event mediator based on that complexity
classification. This mediator delegation model, illustrated in
Figure 15-26, ensures that all types of events are handled by the type
of mediator that will process them most effectively.

[Mediator delegation]

Figure 15-26. Delegating the event to the appropriate type of event mediator

Notice in Figure 15-26 that the Simple Event Mediator generates and
sends a derived message when the event workflow is simple enough to be
handled entirely by the simple mediator. However, when the initiating
event is classified as hard or complex, the Simple Event Mediator
forwards the original initiating event to the corresponding mediators
(BPEL or BPM). The Simple Event Mediator, having intercepted the
original event, may still be responsible for knowing when that event is
complete, or it could simply delegate the entire workflow (including
client notification) to the other mediators.

To examine how the mediator topology works, let’s consider the same
retail order entry system that we described in the section on
choreographed topology, but this time using the mediator topology. The
mediator knows the steps required to process this particular event. The
mediator component’s internal event flow is illustrated in Figure 15-27.

[Mediator flow]

Figure 15-27. Mediator steps for placing an order

In keeping with the prior example, the same initiating event
(place order) is sent to the event mediator via a dedicated queue for
processing. The Customer mediator picks up this initiating event and
begins generating derived messages, based on the flow in Figure 15-27.
The events shown in steps 2, 3, and 4 are all done concurrently and
serially, between steps. In other words, step 3 (fulfill order) must be
completed and acknowledged before the customer can be notified that the
order is ready to be shipped in step 4 (ship order).

Once it receives the initiating event, the Customer mediator generates a
create order derived message, which it sends to the order placement
queue (see Figure 15-28). The Order Placement event processor accepts
the message and validates and creates the order, and sends the mediator
an acknowledgment and the order ID in return. At this point, the
mediator might send that order ID to the customer, indicating that the
order was placed, or it might have to continue until all the steps are
complete (this would depend on specific business rules about order
placement).

[Mediator example 1]

Figure 15-28. Step 1 of the mediator example

Now that step 1 is complete, the mediator moves to step 2 (see
Figure 15-29) and generates three derived messages at the same time:
email customer, apply payment, and adjust inventory. It sends all three
to their respective queues. All three event processors receive these
messages, perform their respective tasks, and notify the mediator that
their processing is complete. The mediator must wait until it receives
acknowledgment from all three parallel processes before moving on to
step 3. If an error occurs in one of the parallel event processors, the
mediator can take corrective action (more about that later in this
section).

[Mediator example 2]

Figure 15-29. Step 2 of the mediator example

Once the mediator gets a successful acknowledgment from all of the event
processors in step 2, it can move to step 3 to fulfill the order (see
Figure 15-30). Once again, both of these messages (fulfill order and
order stock) can occur simultaneously. The Order Fulfillment and
Warehouse event processors accept the messages, perform their work, and
return an acknowledgment to the mediator.

[Mediator example 3]

Figure 15-30. Step 3 of the mediator example

The mediator moves on to step 4 (see Figure 15-31) to ship the order.
This step generates two derived messages: a ship order message, and
another email customer message with specific information about what to
do (notify the customer that the order is ready to be shipped).

[Mediator example 4]

Figure 15-31. Step 4 of the mediator example

Finally, the mediator moves to step 5 (see Figure 15-32) and generates
another contextual email customer message to notify the customer that
the order has been shipped. This ends the workflow. The mediator marks
the initiating event flow complete and removes all state associated with
the initiating event.

[Mediator example 5]

Figure 15-32. Step 5 of the mediator example

In this topology, unlike the choreographed topology, the mediator
component has knowledge of and control over the workflow. It can
maintain event state and manage error handling, recoverability, and
restart capabilities. For example, suppose in our example that the
payment was not applied because the credit card has expired. When the
mediator receives this error condition, it knows that the order cannot
be fulfilled (step 3) until payment is applied, so it stops the workflow
and records the state of the request in its own persistent datastore.
Once payment is eventually applied, the workflow can be restarted from
where it left off (in this case, the beginning of step 3).

While the mediator topology addresses the issues associated with the
choreographed topology, it has its own disadvantages. First of all, it
is very difficult to declaratively model the dynamic processing that
occurs within a complex event flow. As a result, many workflows within
the mediator topology only handle general processing, but use a hybrid
model that combines the mediator and choreographed topologies to address
the dynamic nature of complex event processing, such as out-of-stock
conditions or other nontypical errors. Furthermore, although the event
processors can easily scale in the same manner as the choreographed
topology, the mediator must scale as well—something that occasionally
produces a bottleneck in the overall event-processing flow. Event
processors are not as highly decoupled in the mediator topology as they
are in the choreographed topology. Finally, performance is not as good
in this topology, because the mediator controls event processing.

The trade-off between the choreographed and mediator topologies
essentially comes down to weighing workflow control and error handling
capability against high performance and scalability. Although
performance and scalability are still good within the mediator topology,
they are not as high as with the choreographed topology.

Data Topologies

With all this talk of events and event processing, it’s easy to forget
about the data side of EDA. Database topologies are a unique and
interesting aspect of this architectural style. It offers many options,
each with significant trade-offs that can have a big impact on the
overall architecture. To describe the different database topologies
within EDA, we’ll use a simplified version of the example we showed in
Figure 15-3 (see Figure 15-33).

When a customer places an order, the Order Placement event processor
creates the order, then triggers an order placed event, to which both
the Payment and Inventory event processors respond. Once the payment has
been applied, the Order Fulfillment event processor helps the order
packer prepare the order, then triggers an order fulfilled event. The
Shipping event processor responds to the order fulfilled event by
shipping the order to the customer, completing the processing and
fulfilling the customer’s request.

[Data topology example]

Figure 15-33. A simplified example of the example order-entry system using EDA

One complication of EDA is that the Order Placement event processor
needs to know two pieces of information: how many items are currently in
stock, and what shipping options are available based on the customer’s
location. How it gets this information will depend on the type of
database topology the architecture uses. Let’s look at each database
topology option to see its significant trade-offs.

Monolithic Database Topology

The first, and perhaps most common, database topology used within EDA is
the single monolithic database topology. With this topology, all data is
available to all event processors through a central database.

The main benefit of the monolithic database topology is that any event
processor can query the data it needs directly from the database,
without having to synchronously communicate with any other event
processors. This is a significant advantage, since event-driven
architectures rely on highly decoupled event processors communicating
through asynchronous communications. In Figure 15-34, the
Order Placement event processor can simply query the central monolithic
database to retrieve the number of items currently in stock and the
customer’s shipping options.

[Monolithic topology query]

Figure 15-34. With the monolithic database topology, data is available directly from the database

While the monolithic database topology supports decoupling and limits
communication between event processors, it carries with it some messy
disadvantages, the first of which is fault tolerance. If the central
monolithic database crashes or goes down for maintenance, all event
processors become unavailable.

The second issue is scalability. Because event-driven architectures use
asynchronous communication, each event processor can scale independently
of the others. The event channel essentially acts as a backpressure
point so that individual event processors can scale as necessary,
regardless of whether other event processors scale as well. However, if
all the event processors are simultaneously querying and writing to the
same database, the database must scale to meet these demands. Many
databases are unable to achieve this at high concurrency loads.

The third issue is change control. When the structure of the database
changes (such as dropping a column or attribute), multiple event
processors are affected and must coordinate, even for a single database
change.

Finally, the monolithic database topology necessarily creates a single
architectural quantum, due to the shared monolithic database.

Domain Database Topology

Another possible database topology within EDA is the domain database
topology, which groups event processors into various domains, each
owning its own database (Figure 15-35).

[Domain topology]

Figure 15-35. The domain database topology uses a separate database for each domain

The main advantages of the domain database topology over the monolithic
database topology, which flow from being domain partitioned, are better
fault tolerance, scalability, and change control. In the example shown
in Figure 15-35, if the order-processing domain database (the one
associated with the Order Fulfillment and Order Shipping event
processors) crashes or becomes unavailable due to maintenance, the order
placement domain is still fully operational and can continue to accept
orders. The event channel containing the payment applied derived event
acts as a backpressure point, queuing events until the order-processing
database becomes available. The same is true with scalability and change
control; each domain database only has to worry about scaling based on
its domain’s specific event processors, and only those domain-scoped
event processors need to change if the database structure changes.

However, consider the two pieces of information needed by the
Order Placement event processor: the number of books currently on hand
and the shipping options. With the domain database topology, the
Order Placement event processor can simply query its domain database to
get the book inventory, similar to how it retrieved this information
with the monolithic database topology. However, it must make a
synchronous call to the Order Shipping event processor to retrieve the
shipping options, thus synchronously coupling these services (see
Figure 15-36).

[Domain topology query]

Figure 15-36. Data needed by the Order Placement event processor may require synchronous communication to an event processor in another domain

Architects should try to avoid synchronous coupling in a highly dynamic,
decoupled architecture like EDA. Synchronous calls can take a toll on
fault tolerance and scalability, negating many of the benefits of using
this topology. Always check that the domains remain fairly independent
from each other, and minimize synchronous interservice calls as much as
possible. If too much synchronous communication between event processors
is required, reevaluate the domain boundaries, combine the domains into
a single one, or move to a monolithic database topology.

Dedicated Data Topology

Another viable option within EDA is the dedicated database topology,
commonly referred to in the microservices world as the
database-per-service pattern. With this database topology, each event
processor owns its own dedicated database in a tightly formed bounded
context, similar to microservices (see “Data Topologies” in Chapter 18).
This topology is illustrated in Figure 15-37.

[Dedicated topology]

Figure 15-37. The dedicated database topology of EDA uses a separate database for each event processor

Not surprisingly, the dedicated database topology has the highest levels
of fault tolerance, scalability, and change control out of all the
available topologies. If an event processor or database goes down, the
outage is isolated to just that event processor; all other event
processors function normally. Databases only need to scale based on the
single event processor within its bounded context, making this topology
the most scalable of the three discussed in this section. Finally,
changes to the database structure only impact the event processor
attached to that database.

On the negative side, depending on the database technology stack, this
can be a very expensive option. Perhaps the biggest disadvantage,
however, is synchronous dynamic coupling between event processors. To
illustrate this disadvantage, look again at the two pieces of
information the Order Placement event processor needs for its
processing: book inventory and shipping options. In this topology, the
Order Placement event processor would need to make synchronous calls to
both the Inventory event processor and the Order Shipment event
processor to get the information it needs, forming tight synchronous
coupling points throughout the architecture (as shown in Figure 15-38).
As with the domain database topology, identify all data-related
requirements in each event processor before selecting this database
topology option.

[Dedicated Topology Query]

Figure 15-38. Data needed by the Order Placement event processor may require synchronous communication to other event processors

The dedicated database topology is a good choice when event processors
are mostly self-contained, only needing the data within its own bounded
context and corresponding database. If event processors are
communicating too much (see “Governance”), the architect should consider
moving to the domain or even the monolithic database topology to improve
overall performance and scalability. However, if the specific situation
involves frequent structural changes to the database, that might warrant
a trade-off between these operational characteristics to minimize the
number of event processors affected.

Cloud Considerations

Event-driven architectures work well with cloud-based environments and
implementations, primarily due to their highly decoupled nature. EDA can
easily leverage the asynchronous services provided by cloud vendors, and
the elastic nature of cloud infrastructure and cloud-based services
matches its shape. Essentially, cloud-based environments are a good
match for EDA.

Common Risks

One of the main risks associated with EDA is that its nondeterministic
event processing can cause side effects: for instance, event processors
unexpectedly triggering derived events or not responding to an event
when they should. Event workflows can get very complex in an
event-driven architecture, and many times it’s difficult to know exactly
what will happen when an event is triggered.

Another big risk is having too much static coupling (and hence
brittleness) within the event-driven architecture. Although EDA is
highly dynamically coupled, event payload contracts (see “Event
Payload”) can also introduce tight static coupling. Changing a contract
can be a daunting task, since architects don’t always know which event
processors are responding to a particular event. When an event payload
contract does change, it may negatively impact several other event
processors, adding to the overall brittleness of this architectural
style. Key-based event payloads help mitigate this risk, but the risks
of this practice include issues with scalability and performance and the
possibility of anemic events (see “Event Payload”).

Watch out for too much synchronous communication between event
processors as well. Event-driven architecture gets its superpowers from
its highly dynamically decoupled event processors. However, if event
processors keep needing to communicate synchronously, it’s a good sign
that EDA is not the most appropriate architectural style.

Finally, overall state management is both a risk and a challenge in EDA.
It’s good to know when the initiating event has been completely
processed, but that can be very hard to determine due to EDA’s
nondeterministic, asynchronous parallel event processing. Occasionally
an architect can identify the final processing endpoint and have the
event processor that accepted the initiating event subscribe to that
“ending” event, but in most cases this is hard to determine. As a
result, it’s difficult to know when an initiating event has been fully
processed, or even its current state.

Governance

A majority of the governance associated with EDA is nonstructural and
requires observability in the form of logs as part of an overall
governance mesh. Depending on the infrastructure and environment, some
governance metrics associated with EDA may need to be manually
collected.

The two main areas of governance in this style are static coupling
through contract management, and dynamic coupling through synchronous
calls. Both of these aspects are considered structural decay in EDA, so
it’s important to keep an eye on them.

From a static coupling perspective, architects can set up governance
around things like the rate of change of event payload contracts and
overall stamp coupling. Changing contracts can be very risky in EDA
because of its decoupled nature. Changing an event contract,
particularly one with no associated schema, can break a downstream event
processor. This is a particular risk in EDA because it’s so difficult to
test nondeterministic end-to-end event flows.

Stamp coupling (see “Event Payload”) can be governed by continually
recording and observing which fields in an event contract are not being
used by event processors responding to the event. Observing these unused
fields can help trim down contract size, reduce bandwidth, and help
manage stamp coupling and corresponding unnecessary changes to event
processors.

From a dynamic coupling standpoint, architects can write automated
fitness functions to observe and track synchronous communication between
event processors through logs and other observable means (such as source
code annotations or use of standard synchronous custom-identifier
libraries). Any synchronous communication in an event-driven
architecture should be tracked and discussed to ensure that it is
necessary, particularly if using a domain or dedicated database
topology.

Team Topology Considerations

EDA is largely considered a technically partitioned architecture due to
the many artifacts that make up each domain: multiple event processors,
event channels, message brokers, and possibly databases, depending on
the database topology. Nevertheless, it can work well when teams are
aligned within domain areas (such as cross-functional teams with
specialization). That said, specific types of team topologies (see “Team
Topologies and Architecture”) might find EDA challenging.

Here are some considerations regarding the alignment between these
specific team topologies and EDA:

Stream-aligned teams

    Depending on the size of the system, stream-aligned teams might find
    themselves struggling to implement domain-based changes, due to the
    decoupled nature of event processors. Because domains and subdomains
    in EDA are typically implemented with multiple event processors and
    derived events, stream-aligned teams might find it a challenge to
    understand all of these moving parts. For example, adding a step to
    the order-placement workflow might require changing multiple event
    processors, as well as restructuring how (and when) the existing
    derived events are triggered. The larger and more complex the
    event-driven architecture, the less effective stream-aligned teams
    will be.

Enabling teams

    Because of the integration required between event processors based
    on derived events and their contracts, enabling teams don’t work
    well in event-driven architectures. Experimentation and efficiency
    by enabling teams within a stream can disrupt a stream-aligned
    team’s understanding and management of an overall event flow, and
    usually requires too much coordination between stream-aligned teams
    and enabling teams.

Complicated-subsystem teams

    Complicated-subsystem teams work well with EDA due to its decoupled,
    asynchronous nature. Complex processing can be easily isolated
    through separate event processors, and the complicated-subsystem
    team can focus on those, leaving less complicated processing to the
    stream-aligned teams. Because event processors are highly
    dynamically decoupled, stream-aligned teams only need to coordinate
    with complicated-subsystem teams for static event-payload contracts
    and derived events.

Platform teams

    In EDA, developers can leverage the benefits of the platform-teams
    topology by utilizing common tools, services, APIs, and tasks,
    primarily due to EDA’s technical partitioning. This is especially
    true if teams treat the infrastructure-related parts of EDA (such as
    the message brokers, event hubs, event buses, and other
    event-channel artifacts) as platform related.

Style Characteristics

A one-star rating in the characteristics ratings table in Figure 15-39
means the specific architecture characteristic isn’t well supported in
the architecture, whereas a five-star rating means it’s one of that
style’s strongest features. Definitions for each characteristic
identified in the scorecard can be found in Chapter 4.

Event-driven architecture is primarily a technically partitioned
architecture, in that any particular domain is spread across multiple
event processors and tied together through brokers, contracts (event
payload), and topics. Changes to a particular domain usually impact
multiple event processors and other messaging artifacts, so EDA is not
generally considered domain partitioned.

[event-driven Ratings]

Figure 15-39. EDA characteristics ratings

The number of quanta within EDA can vary from one to many, depending on
the database interactions within each event processor and whether the
system uses request-reply processing. Even though communication in an
EDA relies on asynchronous calls, if multiple event processors share a
single database instance, they would all be contained within the same
architectural quantum. The same is true for request-reply processing:
even though the communication between the event processors is still
asynchronous, if a response is needed right away from the event
consumer, it ties those event processors together synchronously, forming
a single quantum.

For example, imagine that one event processor sends a request to another
event processor to place an order. The first event processor must wait
for an order ID from the other event processor to continue. If the
second event processor (the one that places the order and generates an
order ID) is down, the first event processor cannot continue. This means
they are part of the same architecture quantum and share the same
architectural characteristics, even though they are both sending and
receiving asynchronous messages.

Event-driven architecture rates very high (4 to 5 stars) for
performance, scalability, and fault tolerance, its primary strengths.
Its high performance is achieved by combining asynchronous
communications with highly parallel processing. High scalability is
realized through the programmatic load balancing of event processors
(also called competing consumers and consumer groups). As the request
load increases, additional event processors can be programmatically
added to handle the additional requests. The reason we only gave it four
stars (rather than five) is because of the database (see Chapter 16, on
space-based architectures, for an example of a five-star rating for
these characteristics). EDA achieves fault tolerance through its
decoupled, asynchronous event processors, which provide eventual
consistency and processing of event workflows. If other downstream
processors are unavailable, as long as the user interface or an event
processor making a request does not need an immediate response, the
system can process the event at a later time.

EDA rates relatively low on overall simplicity and testability, mostly
due to its nondeterministic and dynamic event flows. In request-based
models, deterministic flows are relatively easy to test because their
paths and outcomes are generally known. Such is not the case with the
event-driven model. Sometimes architects just don’t know how event
processors will react to dynamic events or what messages they might
produce. These are known as nondeterministic workflows. These systems’
“event tree diagrams” can be extremely complex, generating hundreds or
even thousands of scenarios, making it very difficult to govern and
test.

Finally, EDAs are highly evolutionary, hence the five-star rating.
Adding new features through existing or new event processors is
relatively straightforward. By providing hooks via triggered derived
events, the event and its corresponding data are already available for
other processing, so no changes are required in the infrastructure or
existing event processors to add that new functionality

EDA’s disadvantages include difficulty controlling the overall workflow
associated with an initiating event. Event processing is very dynamic
due to changing conditions, and it’s difficult to know when the business
transaction based on the initiating event has been completed.

Error handling is also a big challenge with EDA. Because there is
typically no mediator monitoring or controlling the business transaction
(except with the mediator topology), if a failure occurs, other services
will be unaware of the crash. The business process based on that
initiating event gets stuck and is unable to move without some sort of
automated or manual intervention, even as all other processes move along
without regard for the error. For example, if the Payment event
processor in our ordering system crashes and does not complete its
assigned task, the Inventory event processor still adjusts the
inventory, and all other further event processors react as though
everything is fine.

Restarting a business transaction (recoverability) is very difficult to
do in EDA. Because other actions have been taken asynchronously through
the processing of the initiating event, many times it’s simply not
feasible to resubmit the initiating event.

Choosing Between Request-Based and Event-Based Models

The request-based and event-based models are both viable approaches for
designing software systems. However, choosing the right model is
essential to success. We recommend choosing the request-based model for
well-structured, data-driven requests (such as retrieving customer
profile data), when the priority is certainty and control over the
workflow. We recommend choosing the event-based model for flexible,
action-based events that require high levels of responsiveness and
scale, with complex and dynamic user processing.

Understanding the event-based model’s trade-offs also helps in
determining the best fit. Table 15-2 lists the advantages and
disadvantages of the event-based model of EDA.

  Advantages over request-based              Trade-offs
  ------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------
  Better response to dynamic user content    Only supports eventual consistency
  Better scalability and elasticity          Less control over processing flow
  Better agility and change management       Less certainty over outcome of event flow
  Better adaptability and extensibility      Difficult to test and debug
  Better responsiveness and performance      
  Better real-time decision making           
  Better reaction to situational awareness   

  : Table 15-2. Trade-offs of the event-driven model
  {#table-style-eda-tradeoffs}

Examples and Use Cases

Any business problem focused on responding to things happening in the
system (either internal or external) is a good candidate for EDA. The
order-entry system example we’ve used throughout this chapter is a good
use case for EDA in that it allows for parallel, decoupled processing of
an order. Systems that require high levels of responsiveness,
performance, scalability, fault tolerance, and elasticity are also great
candidates for EDA.

Another good use case to demonstrate the power and effectiveness of EDA
is our ongoing Going, Going, Gone auction-system example, where users
bid on items put up for auction until a final bid goes uncontested and
the bidder wins that item. In these systems, the number of bidders is
usually unknown, requiring both scalability and elasticity—particularly
if the auction is timed and the bidding comes to a close. These systems
also need high levels of responsiveness. Perhaps the best reason that
online bidding systems and EDA are a good match, though, is that EDA
regards placing a bid not as a request made to the system, but as an
event that has happened.

As Figure 15-40 shows, lots of actions take place in the system when a
bidder places a bid. These actions can all be asynchronous, done either
at the same time or later, as backend processing (such as the
Bidder Tracker event processor). When a bidder places a bid, the
Bid Capture event processor receives that initiating event, determines
if it’s higher than the prior bid, and triggers a bid placed event. The
Auctioneer event processor responds to that event and updates the
website with the item’s new bid price. Simultaneously, the Bid Streamer
event processor responds to the same event, streaming the bid out to the
website bid history or even to the individual bidders (depending on the
UI). Finally, the Bidder Tracker event processor responds to the event
to persist the bidder and their bid for tracking and auditing purposes.

[Event-driven example]

Figure 15-40. An online bidding system example using EDA

Many other event processors are involved in the workflow of this
initiating event, and many other derived events are triggered, but this
small part of the system demonstrates a good use of the event-driven
architectural style, illustrating responsiveness, fault tolerance,
scalability, and elasticity.

Event-driven architecture is a very complicated architectural style, but
also a very powerful one. Closely analyze the workflows and processing
needed for the business problem to determine if dealing with EDA’s
complexity is worthwhile given its superpowers. If a majority of the
processing needed is request based, consider the microservices
architectural style (discussed in Chapter 18) instead.

Chapter 16. Space-Based Architecture Style

Most web-based business applications follow the same general request
flow: a request from a browser hits the web server, then an application
server, then finally the database server. While this typical request
flow works for a small set of concurrent users, bottlenecks start
appearing as the concurrent user load increases: first at the web-server
layer, then at the application-server layer, and finally at the
database-server layer.

The usual response when increased user load causes bottlenecks is to
scale out the web servers. This is relatively easy and inexpensive, and
sometimes it works. However, in most cases of high user load, scaling
out the web-server layer just moves the bottleneck down to the
application server. Scaling application servers can be more complex and
expensive than scaling web servers, and doing so usually just moves the
bottleneck down to the database server, which is even more difficult and
expensive to scale. Even if you can scale the database, what you
eventually end up with is a triangle-shaped topology, with the widest
part of the triangle being the web servers (easiest to scale) and the
smallest part being the database (hardest to scale), as illustrated in
Figure 16-1.

In any high-volume application with a large concurrent user load, the
database will usually be the final limiting factor in how many
transactions the application can process concurrently. While various
caching technologies and database-scaling products can help, scaling out
a normal application for extreme loads remains a very difficult
proposition.

[Scalability limits for web-based topologies]

Figure 16-1. Scalability limits within a traditional web-based topology

The space-based architecture style is specifically designed to address
problems involving high scalability, elasticity, and concurrency. It is
also a useful architecture style for applications that have variable and
unpredictable concurrent user volumes. It’s often better to solve
extreme and variable scalability architecturally, rather than try to
scale out a database or retrofit caching technologies into an
architecture that can’t scale as well.

Topology

Space-based architecture gets its name from the concept of tuple space,
the technique of using multiple parallel processors that communicate
through shared memory. Space-based systems achieve high scalability,
elasticity, and performance by replacing the central database as a
synchronous constraint in the system with replicated in-memory data
grids.

Application data is kept in-memory and replicated among all the active
processing units. When a processing unit updates data, it asynchronously
sends that data to the database through a data pump, usually via
messaging with persistent queues. Processing units start up and shut
down dynamically as user load increases and decreases, which addresses
variable scalability. Because no central database is involved in the
application’s standard transactional processing, the database bottleneck
is removed. This allows for near-infinite scalability within the
application.

Space-based architecture is a complicated architectural style consisting
of many different artifacts that work together to process a single
request. Its primary artifacts are:

Processing units

    Contain the application functionality

Virtualized middleware

    The collection of infrastructure-related artifacts that are used to
    manage and coordinate the processing units

Messaging grid

    Used to manage input requests and session state

Data grid

    Manages the synchronization and replication of data between
    processing units

Processing grid

    Used to manage request orchestration between multiple processing
    units

Deployment manager

    Manages the starting and tearing down of processing unit instances
    as load increases and decreases

Data pumps

    Asynchronously send updated data to the database

Data writers

    Perform the updates from the data pumps

Data readers

    Read database data and deliver it to processing units upon startup

Figure 16-2 illustrates these primary artifacts.

[Space-based architecture topology]

Figure 16-2. Space-based architecture’s basic topology

Style Specifics

The following sections describe these primary artifacts and how they
work in detail.

Processing Unit

The processing unit (illustrated in Figure 16-3) contains the
application logic (or portions of it), usually including web-based
components as well as backend business logic. The contents of the
processing unit vary based on the type of application. Smaller web-based
applications are usually deployed into a single processing unit, whereas
larger applications often split their functionality into multiple
processing units, based on the application’s functional areas. The
processing unit can also contain small, single-purpose services (much
like microservices). In addition, the processing unit also contains an
in-memory data grid and replication engine, which are usually
implemented through such products as Hazelcast, Apache Ignite, and
Oracle Coherence (see “Data Grid”).

[Space-based processing unit]

Figure 16-3. The processing unit contains the application’s functionality

Virtualized Middleware

The virtualized middleware, as shown in Figure 16-4, contains various
infrastructure-related artifacts and is used to manage and control the
processing units. At a minimum, this middleware artifact contains a
messaging grid to manage input requests and user session state, a data
grid to manage data replication and synchronization, and a deployment
manager to start and tear down processing unit instances as they are
needed and not needed. Optionally, the virtualized middleware also
contains a processing grid in the event two or more processing units
need to be orchestrated for a single business request. An architect can
add any other infrastructure-related function to the virtualized
middleware as needed, such as security functionality, metrics gathering
for observability, and so on.

Since no single product can perform all of the functions of the
virtualized middleware, it is usually implemented through third-party
products such as web servers, caching tools, load balancers, service
orchestrators, and deployment managers to manage monitoring, starting,
and tearing down the processing units. Each of these middleware
artifacts is described in detail in the following sections.

Messaging Grid

The messaging grid, shown in Figure 16-4, is part of the virtualized
middleware and manages input requests and session state. When a request
comes into the virtualized middleware, the messaging grid component
determines which active processing units are available to receive it,
then forwards the request to one of those processing units.

The complexity of the messaging grid can vary, from a simple round-robin
algorithm to a more complex next-available algorithm that keeps track of
which processing unit is most available. This component is usually
implemented using a typical web server with load-balancing capabilities
(such as HA Proxy or Nginx).

[Messaging grid]

Figure 16-4. The messaging grid handles requests and session state

Data Grid

The data grid is a component—perhaps the most crucial component—of the
virtualized middleware. In most modern implementations, the data grid is
implemented solely within the processing units as an in-memory
replicated cache (see “Replicated and distributed caching”). However,
for replicated caching implementations that require an external
controller, or that use a distributed cache, this functionality resides
in both the processing units and the data grid components of the
virtualized middleware.

Since the messaging grid can forward a request to any of the processing
units available, it is essential that each processing unit’s in-memory
data grid contains exactly the same data. As illustrated by the dotted
lines in Figure 16-5, data replication is typically done asynchronously
between processing units, usually completing data replication in less
than 100 ms.

[Data grid]

Figure 16-5. The data grid synchronizes the in-memory caches

Data is synchronized between processing units that contain the same
named data grid. For example, the following Java code uses Hazelcast to
create an internal replicated data grid for processing units that
contain customer profile information:

    HazelcastInstance hz = Hazelcast.newHazelcastInstance();
    Map<String, CustomerProfile> profileCache =
    	hz.getReplicatedMap("CustomerProfile");

All processing units that need access to customer-profile information
should contain this code. When any processing unit updates data in the
CustomerProfile cache, the data grid replicates the update to all other
processing units that contain that same named CustomerProfile cache. A
processing unit can contain as many in-memory replicated caches as it
needs to complete its work. Alternatively, one processing unit can make
a remote call to another processing unit to ask for data (choreography)
or leverage the processing grid (described in the next section) to
orchestrate the data request (see “Orchestration Versus Choreography” in
Chapter 20 for more information about orchestration and choreography).

Using data replication within the processing units allows additional
instances to start without having to read data from the database, as
long as at least one instance contains the named replicated cache. When
a new processing unit instance starts, it broadcasts a request through
the caching provider (such as Hazelcast) to join other processing units
with the same named cache. Once other processing units acknowledge the
broadcast request and connect to the new processing unit, one of them
(usually the first one to connect to the new processing unit) sends the
cache data to the the new instance so it’s in sync with all other
instances with the same named cache.

Each instance of a processing unit contains a member list containing the
IP addresses and ports of all other processing-unit instances containing
the same named cache. For example, suppose there is a single
processing-unit instance containing the customer profile functionality
and its in-memory replicated cached data. In this case there is only one
instance, so its member list contains only itself. This is illustrated
in the following logging statements, generated using Hazelcast:

    Instance 1:
    Members {size:1, ver:1} [
    	Member [172.19.248.89]:5701 - 04a6f863-dfce-41e5-9d51-9f4e356ef268 this
    ]

When another processing unit starts up with the same named cache, the
member lists of both services are updated to reflect the IP addresses
and ports of each processing unit:

    Instance 1:
    Members {size:2, ver:2} [
    	Member [172.19.248.89]:5701 - 04a6f863-dfce-41e5-9d51-9f4e356ef268 this
    	Member [172.19.248.90]:5702 - ea9e4dd5-5cb3-4b27-8fe8-db5cc62c7316
    ]

    Instance 2:
    Members {size:2, ver:2} [
    	Member [172.19.248.89]:5701 - 04a6f863-dfce-41e5-9d51-9f4e356ef268
    	Member [172.19.248.90]:5702 - ea9e4dd5-5cb3-4b27-8fe8-db5cc62c7316 this
    ]

When a third processing unit starts up, the member lists of instance 1
and instance 2 are both updated to reflect the new third instance:

    Instance 1:
    Members {size:3, ver:3} [
    	Member [172.19.248.89]:5701 - 04a6f863-dfce-41e5-9d51-9f4e356ef268 this
    	Member [172.19.248.90]:5702 - ea9e4dd5-5cb3-4b27-8fe8-db5cc62c7316
    	Member [172.19.248.91]:5703 - 1623eadf-9cfb-4b83-9983-d80520cef753
    ]

    Instance 2:
    Members {size:3, ver:3} [
    	Member [172.19.248.89]:5701 - 04a6f863-dfce-41e5-9d51-9f4e356ef268
    	Member [172.19.248.90]:5702 - ea9e4dd5-5cb3-4b27-8fe8-db5cc62c7316 this
    	Member [172.19.248.91]:5703 - 1623eadf-9cfb-4b83-9983-d80520cef753
    ]

    Instance 3:
    Members {size:3, ver:3} [
    	Member [172.19.248.89]:5701 - 04a6f863-dfce-41e5-9d51-9f4e356ef268
    	Member [172.19.248.90]:5702 - ea9e4dd5-5cb3-4b27-8fe8-db5cc62c7316
    	Member [172.19.248.91]:5703 - 1623eadf-9cfb-4b83-9983-d80520cef753 this
    ]

Now all three instances know about each other (including themselves, as
denoted by the word this at the end of the member line). Suppose
instance 1 receives a request from a customer to update their bill-to
address. When instance 1 updates the cache with a cache.put() or similar
cache update method, the data grid (such as Hazelcast) will
asynchronously update the other replicated caches with the same update,
ensuring that all three customer profile caches contain the new bill-to
address, thus always remaining in sync with one another with the same
data.

When processing-unit instances go down, all other processing-units’
member lists are automatically updated to reflect the change. For
example, if instance 2 goes down, the caching product immediately
updates the member lists of instance 1 and 3 to remove the lost
instance:

    Instance 1:
    Members {size:2, ver:4} [
    	Member [172.19.248.89]:5701 - 04a6f863-dfce-41e5-9d51-9f4e356ef268 this
    	Member [172.19.248.91]:5703 - 1623eadf-9cfb-4b83-9983-d80520cef753
    ]

    Instance 3:
    Members {size:2, ver:4} [
    	Member [172.19.248.89]:5701 - 04a6f863-dfce-41e5-9d51-9f4e356ef268
    	Member [172.19.248.91]:5703 - 1623eadf-9cfb-4b83-9983-d80520cef753 this
    ]

Replicated and distributed caching

Space-based architecture relies on caching to process transactions in
applications. Space-based architecture removes the need for direct reads
and writes to a database, which is how it can support high scalability,
elasticity, and performance. This architecture style mostly relies on
in-memory replicated caching, although it can use distributed caching as
well.

With replicated caching, as illustrated in Figure 16-6, each processing
unit contains its own in-memory data grid that is synchronized between
all processing units using that same named cache. When a cache within
any of the processing units is updated, the other processing units are
automatically updated with the new information.

[Replicated caching]

Figure 16-6. Replicated caching synchronizes in-memory caches between processing units

Not only is replicated caching extremely fast, it also supports high
levels of fault tolerance. Since there is no central server holding the
cache, replicated caching does not have a single point of failure.¹

While replicated caching is the standard caching model for space-based
architecture, there are some cases where it can’t be used. One such
situation is when the system must handle high data volumes. When
internal memory caches grow larger than 100 MB, each processing unit
must use so much memory that it can cause issues with elasticity and
scalability. Processing units are generally deployed within a virtual
machine or a container (such as Docker), each of which only has a
certain amount of memory available for internal cache usage. This limits
the number of processing-unit instances that can be started to process
high-throughput situations.

Another situation where replicated data caches don’t work well is when
the cache data is updated very frequently. As shown in “Data
Collisions”, if the update rate of the cache data is too high, the data
grid might be unable to keep up, which could harm data consistency
across all processing-unit instances. When these situations occur, most
architects choose to use a distributed cache instead.

Distributed caching, as illustrated in Figure 16-7, requires an external
server or service dedicated to holding a centralized cache. In this
model, the processing units do not store data in internal memory.
Instead, they use a proprietary protocol to access the data from the
central cache server. Distributed caching supports high levels of data
consistency, because the data is all kept in one place and does not need
to be replicated. However, this model doesn’t perform as well as
replicated caching because the cache data must be accessed remotely,
adding to the overall latency of the system.

[Distributed caching]

Figure 16-7. Distributed caching creates good data consistency between processing units

Fault tolerance is also an issue with distributed caching. If the cache
server containing the data goes down, none of the processing units can
access or update data. This single point of failure can be mitigated by
mirroring the distributed cache, but this could present consistency
issues if the primary cache server goes down unexpectedly and the data
does not make it to the mirrored cache server.

When the size of the cache is relatively small (under 100 MB) and the
update rate of the cache is low enough that the caching product’s
replication engine can keep up, the decision between using a replicated
cache and a distributed cache becomes a question of prioritizing data
consistency versus performance and fault tolerance. A distributed cache
will always offer better data consistency over a replicated cache,
because the data is in one place, not spread across multiple processing
units. However, performance and fault tolerance will always be better
with a replicated cache. Many times, the deciding factor ends up being
the type of data being cached in the processing units. If the system’s
primary need is for highly consistent data (such as inventory counts of
the available products), that usually warrants a distributed cache. If
data does not change often (such as reference data like name/value
pairs, product codes, and product descriptions), consider using a
replicated cache for quick lookup. Table 16-1 summarizes some criteria
for choosing when to use a distributed versus a replicated cache.

  Decision criteria   Replicated cache    Distributed cache
  ------------------- ------------------- -------------------
  Optimization        Performance         Consistency
  Cache size          Small (<100 MB)     Large (>500 MB)
  Type of data        Relatively static   Highly dynamic
  Update frequency    Relatively low      High update rate
  Fault tolerance     High                Low

  : Table 16-1. Distributed versus replicated caching
  {#table-style-space-based-caching}

When choosing which caching model to use with space-based architecture,
remember that in most cases, both models will be applicable. In other
words, neither replicated caching nor distributed caching solves every
problem. Different processing units can also use different models.
Rather than compromising by choosing a single consistent caching model
across the application, leverage each model for its strengths. For
example, for a processing unit that maintains the current inventory,
choose a distributed caching model for data consistency; for a
processing unit that maintains the customer profile, choose a replicated
cache for performance and fault tolerance.

Near-cache considerations

A near-cache is a hybrid caching model bridging in-memory data grids
with a distributed cache. In this model (illustrated in Figure 16-8) the
distributed cache is referred to as the full backing cache, and each
in-memory data grid contained within a processing unit is called a front
cache. The front cache always contains a smaller subset of the full
backing cache, and uses an eviction policy to remove older items so that
newer ones can be added. The front cache has three eviction policy
options: a most recently used cache, containing the most recently used
items; a most frequently used cache, containing the most frequently used
items; or a random replacement eviction policy, which removes items
randomly when space is needed. Random replacement is a good eviction
policy when there is no clear analysis of the data providing a reason to
keep either the latest used or the most frequently used.

[Near-cache model]

Figure 16-8. The near-cache model uses both a front cache and a backing cache

While the front caches are always kept in sync with the full backing
cache, the front caches contained within each processing unit are not
synchronized between other processing units that share the same data.
This means that multiple processing units that share the same data
context (such as a customer profile) will likely all have different data
in their front caches. This creates inconsistencies in performance and
responsiveness between processing units, so we do not recommend using a
near-cache model in a space-based architecture.

Processing Grid

The processing grid, illustrated in Figure 16-9, is an optional
component within the virtualized middleware that manages orchestrated
request processing when multiple processing units are involved in a
single business request. If a request requires coordination between more
than one type of processing unit (such as an order-processing unit and a
payment-processing unit), the processing grid mediates and orchestrates
the request between those two processing units.

[Processing grid]

Figure 16-9. The processing grid manages orchestration between processing units

Most modern space-based implementations (particularly those with
fine-grained services) implement their processing-grid functionality
through separate, fine-grained orchestration processing units rather
than a single coarse-grained orchestration engine, with each
orchestration processing unit handling a single major workflow. For an
ecommerce example, let’s say that when a customer places an order, three
processing units must coordinate: Order Placement, Payment, and
Inventory Adjustment. The architect could create an Order Placement
Orchestrator processing unit to orchestrate these three processing
units. They might also create separate orchestration processing units
for other major workflows, such as handling order returns and
replenishing stock.

Deployment Manager

The Deployment Manager component manages the dynamic startup and
shutdown of processing-unit instances based on load conditions. This
component continually monitors response times and user loads, starts up
new processing units when load increases, and shuts down processing
units when the load decreases. It is critical to achieving variable
scalability (elasticity) within an application. Most cloud-based
infrastructures handle this responsibility, as do service-orchestration
products such as Kubernetes.

Data Pumps

A data pump is a way of sending data to another processor, which then
updates a database. Space-based architectures need data pumps because
processing units do not read from and write to databases directly. Data
pumps in space-based architecture are always asynchronous, providing
eventual consistency between the in-memory cache and the database. When
a processing-unit instance receives a request and updates its cache,
that processing unit becomes the owner of the update, and therefore
responsible for sending it through the data pump so that the database
can be updated eventually.

Data pumps are usually implemented in a space-based architecture using
messaging, as shown in Figure 16-10.

[Data pump]

Figure 16-10. Data pumps are used to send data to a database

Messaging supports not only asynchronous communication, but also
guaranteed delivery, message persistence, and message order, through
first-in, first-out (FIFO) queuing. Furthermore, messaging decouples the
processing unit and the data writer so that if the data writer is
unavailable, processing within the processing units isn’t interrupted.

Most space-based architectures have multiple data pumps. Usually each
one is dedicated to a particular domain or subdomain (such as customer
or inventory), but they can be dedicated to each type of cache (such as
CustomerProfile, CustomerWishlist, and so on) or to a processing-unit
domain (such as Customer) that also contains a much larger general
cache.

Data pumps usually have contracts, including an action associated with
the contract data (add, delete, or update). The contract can be a JSON
schema, XML schema, an object, or even a value-driven message (a map
message containing name-value pairs). For updates, the data pump’s
message payload usually only contains the new data values. For example,
if a customer changed a phone number on their profile, only the new
phone number would be sent, along with the customer ID and an action to
update the data.

Data Writers

The Data Writer component accepts messages from a data pump and updates
the database with the information in their payloads (see Figure 16-10).
Data writers can be implemented as services, applications, or data hubs
(such as Ab Initio). Their granularity can vary, based on the scope of
the data pumps and processing units.

A domain-based data writer contains the necessary database logic to
handle all updates within a particular domain (such as order
processing), regardless of the number of data pumps it is reading from.
The system in Figure 16-11 has four different processing units and four
different data pumps to represent the customer domains (Profile,
WishList, Wallet, and Preferences)—but only one data writer. That single
customer data writer listens to all four data pumps and contains the
database logic (such as SQL) to update customer-related data in the
database.

[Domain-based Data Writer]

Figure 16-11. Domain-based data writer

Alternatively, each class of processing unit can have its own dedicated
Data Writer component, as illustrated in Figure 16-12. In this model,
each data writer is dedicated to a corresponding data pump and contains
only the database processing logic for that particular processing unit
(such as Wallet). While this model tends to produce a lot of data-writer
components, it does provide better scalability and agility because it
aligns the processing unit, data pump, and data writer.

[Dedicated Data Writer]

Figure 16-12. Dedicated data writers for each data pump

Data Readers

While data writers are responsible for updating the database, data
readers read data from the database and send it to the processing units
via a reverse data pump (which we’ll discuss more in a moment). In
space-based architectures, data readers are only invoked in one of three
situations: all processing unit instances of the same named cache crash,
all processing units within the same named cache are redeployed, or
archive data not contained in the replicated cache must be retrieved.

If all instances come down due to a system-wide crash or redeployment,
data must be loaded in the cache from the database—something we
generally try to avoid in space-based architecture. When instances of a
class of processing unit start coming back up, each one will try to grab
a lock on the cache. The first one to get the lock becomes the temporary
cache owner; the others go into a wait state until the lock is released.
(This might vary based on the type of cache implementation, but
regardless, there is one primary owner of the cache in this scenario.)
To load the cache, the temporary cache owner sends a message to a queue,
requesting data. The Data Reader component accepts the read request and
then performs the necessary database-query logic to retrieve the needed
data. It sends that data to a different queue called a reverse data
pump, which sends it to the temporary cache owner processing unit. Once
it loads the cache, the temporary owner releases the lock. All other
instances are then synchronized, and processing can begin. This
processing flow is illustrated in Figure 16-13.

[Data reader]

Figure 16-13. Data readers send data to the processing units

Like data writers, data readers can be domain based or dedicated to a
specific class of processing unit (the latter is more common). Its
implementation is also the same as the data writers—service,
application, or data hub.

The data writers and data readers essentially form a data abstraction
layer (or data access layer, in some cases). The difference between the
two is in the amount of detailed knowledge the processing units have
with regard to the database schema (the structure of the tables). With a
data access layer, the processing units are coupled to the underlying
data structures in the database, and only access the database
indirectly, through the data readers and writers. With a data
abstraction layer, on the other hand, the processing unit is decoupled
from the underlying schemas through the use of separate contracts.

Space-based architecture generally relies on a data abstraction layer
model so that the replicated cache schema in each processing unit can be
different from the underlying database schemas. This means that
incremental changes to the database don’t necessarily affect the
processing units. To facilitate this incremental change, the data
writers and readers contain transformation logic. If a column type
changes or a column or table is dropped, the data readers and writers
can buffer the database change until the necessary changes can be made
to the processing-unit caches.

Data Topologies

Since processing units don’t interact with the database directly,
space-based architecture is tremendously flexible in the database
topologies it can use. The use of asynchronous data pumps combined with
data readers and writers means request processing (transactional) is
largely independent of the database, giving the architect a wide variety
of choices regarding the database topology and database type.

The choice of database topology is influenced by a host of factors. In a
space-based architecture, the primary deciding factor is how the system
will use the backing database. For example, if reporting and data
analytics are especially important, a monolithic database topology might
be more effective—unless the reporting and data analytics are done
through a data mesh, in which case a domain-based database topology
might be better.

Throughput and overall domain-based data consistency are also
considerations when choosing a database topology. A single monolithic
database might prove to be a bottleneck during synchronization, slowing
overall synchronization time and detracting from data consistency; a
domain-based database topology might offer better overall
synchronization time and hence data consistency, if the data can be
cleanly domain partitioned. Finally, if downstream systems need to use
the database for further processing, a monolithic database topology
might be a better fit.

Cloud Considerations

Space-based architecture offers some unique options when it comes to
deployment environments. The entire system—including the processing
units, virtualized middleware, data pumps, data readers and writers, and
the database—can be deployed within cloud-based environments or
on-premises (on-prem). However, this architecture style can also be
deployed in both of these environments at once (as illustrated in
Figure 16-14), a unique, powerful feature not found in other
architecture styles. In this hybrid topology, applications are deployed
via processing units and virtualized middleware in managed cloud-based
environments, while the physical databases and corresponding data are
kept on-prem. This supports very effective cloud-based data
synchronization, thanks to the asynchronous data pumps and eventual
consistency model of this architecture style. Transactional processing
can take place in dynamic, elastic cloud-based environments, while
physical data management, reporting, and data analytics stay in secure
on-prem environments.

[Hybrid cloud]

Figure 16-14. Hybrid cloud-based and on-prem topology

The elastic nature of cloud infrastructure and cloud-based
services—hybrid or not—matches the shape of this architectural style
well, making cloud-based environments a good choice for space-based
architectures.

Common Risks

Not surprisingly, most of the risks associated with the space-based
architectural style have to do with data, given its use of caching and
background data synchronization. The following sections describe some
common risks.

Frequent Reads from the Database

Space-based architecture achieves high scalability and concurrency by
using caching for all transactional data. This prevents the system from
doing excessive database reads and writes, which can lower the system’s
overall scalability, elasticity, and responsiveness, making it difficult
to realize the benefits of this architectural style.

Database reads typically only occur in two scenarios: reading archived
data (such as order history or past bank statements), or cold-starting a
processing unit (the initial start of a processing unit when no other
instances are running). If the cached data volumes are so high that most
data needs to be archived and retrieved from the backing database, or if
processing units crash or are redeployed frequently, this might not be
the right architecture for the problem domain.

Data Synchronization and Consistency

Because data pumps and data writers synchronize data between the
in-memory cache and the database, data will always be eventually
consistent in a space-based architecture. However, because this style is
typically used in situations with a very high concurrent user load,
bottlenecks in the data pump are common. These bottlenecks can
significantly delay data from making it to the backing database. This
can be a significant risk if downstream systems need to have updated
data quickly.

Another inherent risk related to data synchronization is data loss
within the data pump. This risk is usually mitigated by using persisted
queues (in which data in a queue is stored on disk as well as in memory)
and using client-acknowledgment mode in the data writers when reading
from the data pump. Client-acknowledgment mode keeps the message in the
queue until the data writer acknowledges to the message broker that it
has completed processing. During message processing, the message broker
ensures that no other data writer can read the in-process message. While
these techniques help prevent data loss in the data pump, they can also
slow down overall responsiveness and degrade data consistency.

High Data Volumes

Because all transactional memory is cached in the processing units, data
volumes need to remain relatively low, particularly as more instances of
a processing unit are added. This makes it critical to pay close
attention to the size of the in-memory cache to avoid a processing unit
running out of memory and hence crashing.

Data Collisions

A data collision occurs when data is updated in one cache instance
(cache A), and during replication to another cache instance (cache B),
the same data is updated by that cache (cache B). This can happen when
using replicated caching in an active/active state, meaning that
multiple processing units can update the same data at the same time.
Collisions typically occur when the update rate of the data in the cache
exceeds the replication latency (RL)—the time it takes to synchronize
each same-named cache. In this scenario, the local update to cache B
will be overridden by the old data from cache A, and the same data in
cache A will be overridden by the update from cache B. This makes the
data in each cache inconsistent.

To demonstrate the data collision problem, let’s assume there are two
service instances (A and B) of an order placement service, each
containing a replicated cache of product inventory (blue widgets). The
flow is as follows:

1.  The current inventory count is 500 units in each instance A and B.

2.  Instance A receives a request from a customer to purchase 10 units,
    and updates the inventory cache for blue widgets to 490 units.

3.  Before instance A’s data can be replicated to instance B, instance B
    receives a purchase request for 5 units, and updates the inventory
    cache for blue widgets to 495 units.

4.  The cache in instance B gets updated to 490 units due to replication
    from instance A’s update.

5.  The cache in instance A gets updated to 495 units due to replication
    from instance B’s update.

6.  Both caches are incorrect and out of sync: the inventory should be
    485 units in each of the instances.

Several factors that influence how many data collisions might occur: the
number of processing-unit instances that contain the same cache, the
cache’s update rate, the cache’s size, and the RL of the caching
product. We can probabilistically determine how many potential data
collisions might occur based on these factors, using the following
formula:

$${Collision}{Rate} = N*\frac{UR^{2}}{S}*RL$$

Here, N represents the number of service instances using the same named
cache. UR represents the update rate in milliseconds (squared), S is the
cache size (in number of rows), and RL is the caching product’s
replication latency (in milliseconds).

This formula is useful for determining the percentage of data collisions
that will likely occur based on updates within a given time frame (for
example, each hour), and thus how feasible it would be for this system
to use replicated caching. For example, consider the values shown in
Table 16-2 for the factors involved in this calculation.

  --------------------------- -------------------
  Update rate (UR):           20 updates/second
  Number of instances (N):    5
  Cache size (S):             50,000 rows
  Replication latency (RL):   100 milliseconds
                              
  Updates:                    72,000 per hour
  Collision rate:             14.4 per hour
  Percentage:                 0.02%
  --------------------------- -------------------

  : Table 16-2. Base values {#table-style-space-based-collisionsA}

Applying these factors to the formula yields 72,000 updates an hour,
with a high probability that 14 updates to the same data may collide.
Given the low percentage (0.02%), replication would be a viable option.

Variations in RL can have a significant impact on data consistency.
Replication latency depends on many factors, including the type of
network and the physical distance between processing units. RL values
must be calculated and derived from actual measurements in a production
environment, which is why they’re rarely published. The value of 100 ms
used in the prior example is a good planning number if the actual RL is
unavailable. For example, changing the RL from 100 ms to 1 ms yields the
same number of updates (72,000 per hour) but produces a much lower
probability of collisions occurring (0.1 collisions per hour). This
scenario is shown in Table 16-3.

  --------------------------- ----------------------------------
  Update rate (UR):           20 updates/second
  Number of instances (N):    5
  Cache size (S):             50,000 rows
  Replication latency (RL):   1 millisecond (changed from 100)
                              
  Updates:                    72,000 per hour
  Collision rate:             0.1 per hour
  Percentage:                 0.0002%
  --------------------------- ----------------------------------

  : Table 16-3. Impact on replication latency
  {#table-style-space-based-collisionsB}

The number of processing units that contain the same named cache (as
represented by N) also has a direct proportional relationship to the
number of possible data collisions. For example, reducing the number of
processing units from 5 instances to 2 instances yields a data-collision
rate of only 6 per hour, out of 72,000 updates per hour, as shown in
Table 16-4.

  --------------------------- --------------------
  Update rate (UR):           20 updates/second
  Number of instances (N):    2 (changed from 5)
  Cache size (S):             50,000 rows
  Replication latency (RL):   100 milliseconds
                              
  Updates:                    72,000 per hour
  Collision rate:             5.8 per hour
  Percentage:                 0.008%
  --------------------------- --------------------

  : Table 16-4. Impact on the number of processing-unit instances
  {#table-style-space-based-collisionsC}

The cache size is the only factor that is inversely proportional to the
collision rate: as the cache size decreases, collision rates increase.
In this example, reducing the cache size from 50,000 rows to 10,000 rows
(and keeping everything else the same as in the first example) yields a
collision rate of 72 per hour, significantly higher than with 50,000
rows, as shown in Table 16-5.

  --------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Update rate (UR):           20 updates/second
  Number of instances (N):    5
  Cache size (S):             10,000 rows (changed from 50,000)
  Replication latency (RL):   100 milliseconds
                              
  Updates:                    72,000 per hour
  Collision rate:             72.0 per hour
  Percentage:                 0.1%
  --------------------------- -----------------------------------

  : Table 16-5. Impact on cache size
  {#table-style-space-based-collisionsD}

Under normal circumstances, most systems do not have consistent update
rates over a long period of time (such as an eight-hour day). When using
this calculation, we recommend understanding your system’s maximum
update rate during peak usage and calculating minimum, normal, and peak
collision rates.

Governance

Space-based architecture, with its many moving parts, is a complicated
architectural style to design and implement. Proper governance is
critical to ensuring success—especially for controlling memory
consumption, given this style’s issues with internal memory usage (as we
noted earlier, in “Common Risks”).

To address these memory issues, we recommend writing a continuous,
automated governance fitness function to have each instance of a
processing unit make its current memory usage observable periodically.
Since all instances of a processing unit have the same replicated cache,
the fitness function only needs to report on the name of the processing
unit. Use a separate fitness function to record the number of instances
for each processing unit, allowing you to calculate the total memory
consumption per processing unit. Figure 16-15 shows an example of this
continuous fitness function’s output.

[Memory consumption fitness function]

Figure 16-15. An example fitness function to track memory consumption

Another useful governance strategy to maintain overall data consistency
is to track and measure synchronization time—specifically, how long it
takes a cache update to sync to the corresponding database. A good
method is to have each processing unit stream the request ID of an
update along with its corresponding timestamp, and have each data writer
stream the same request ID along with the timestamp after the database
commit. Then, write a fitness function to associate these request IDs
and subtract the timestamps to calculate the synchronization time. The
fitness function could track this at an atomic level, using times
associated with a particular processing unit, or holistically, by
averaging the overall synchronization times. Analyzing these trends
helps architects track the effects of changes to the architecture, such
as whether the changes are making synchronization times better or worse,
and whether the architecture is meeting the business’s synchronization
timing goals. Figure 16-16 illustrates this kind of governance through a
continuous fitness function.

[Data synchronization fitness function]

Figure 16-16. An example fitness function to track aggregated average synchronization times

As we’ve noted, because data pumps act as a backpressure point in
space-based architecture and because database writes take longer than
cache writes, data pumps can form a bottleneck in the overall system. To
govern this, we recommend tracking and measuring this kind of bottleneck
when it arises. First, to determine the extent of the bottleneck, write
a fitness function to track the queue depth of the queue used in the
data pumps. Too much of a bottleneck increases the synchronization time
(and thus data consistency) and also increases the chances of data loss
and data collisions, particularly during periods of high
user-concurrency levels. Like the previous fitness function, this
function can report atomically about each data-pump queue or aggregate
the overall system average. Figure 16-17 shows a bottleneck analysis for
an Order Placement processing unit and its corresponding data pump in a
typical order-processing system.

[Data-pump bottleneck fitness function]

Figure 16-17. An example fitness function to track data-pump bottlenecks

Other governance fitness functions for space-based architecture could
track the frequency of reads to the database (requests to data readers),
which can affect scalability, elasticity, and responsiveness. It’s also
a good idea to use fitness functions to measure scalability, elasticity,
and responsiveness: since these architectural characteristics are the
main reasons to use a space-based architecture, it makes sense to track
and measure them.

Team Topology Considerations

Although space-based architecture is largely considered a technically
partitioned architecture due to the many artifacts that make up any
particular domain or subdomain, it’s most effective with technically
partitioned teams that are aligned with its technical areas (such as
functionality, data pumps, data readers and writers, and backend
database management). However, it can still work well when teams are
aligned by domain area (such as cross-functional teams with
specialization). Here are some things to consider about aligning the
specific team topologies outlined in “Team Topologies and Architecture”
with space-based architecture:

Stream-aligned teams

    Depending on the size of the system, stream-aligned teams might find
    themselves struggling to implement domain-based changes based on the
    technical partitioning in this architectural style. For example, a
    stream-based change might impact one or more processing units, data
    pumps, data readers, data writers, cache contracts, or
    orchestrators, as well as the backing database. This can be a lot
    for a single stream-based team to manage, particularly if those
    artifacts are shared by other teams. The larger and more complex the
    system, the less effective stream-aligned teams will be with
    space-based architecture.

Enabling teams

    Because some of this style’s artifacts (data pumps, data readers,
    data writers, and virtualized middleware) may be shared or
    cross-cutting, it’s a good fit for enabling teams. Dedicating a team
    to a particular artifact (such as a data writer and its
    corresponding data pump) can allow its members to experiment and
    find ways of making these artifacts more efficient, independent of
    the team working on the primary functionality in a particular
    processing unit.

Complicated-subsystem teams

    Complicated-system teams can leverage the space-based architecture
    style’s technically partitioned nature to focus on one part of the
    system (such as the data grid or data pumps). Some of these
    artifacts can get extremely complex, so they lend themselves well to
    the complicated-subsystem team topology. Dealing with data
    collisions (see “Data Collisions”) and other sorts of asynchronous
    data synchronization errors in the data writers is quite complex;
    this is a great example of a complicated subsystem that functional
    domain-based teams working on processing units shouldn’t need to
    concern themselves about.

Platform teams

    As with most architectural styles, developers working on a
    space-based architecture can leverage the benefits of the
    platform-team topology by utilizing common tools, services, APIs,
    and tasks, especially if the infrastructure-related parts of the
    architecture (such as the data pumps and virtualized middleware) are
    considered platform related.

Style Characteristics

A one-star rating in the characteristics ratings table in Figure 16-18
means the specific architecture characteristic isn’t well supported in
the architecture, whereas a five-star rating means the architecture
characteristic is one of the strongest features in the architecture
style. Definitions for each characteristic identified in the scorecard
can be found in Chapter 4.

[Space-based ratings]

Figure 16-18. Space-based architecture characteristics ratings

Space-based architecture maximizes elasticity, scalability, and
performance—hence we’ve given all of these characteristics five-star
ratings. These are the driving characteristics and main advantages of
this architecture style. Leveraging in-memory data caching and removing
the database as a constraint can give systems built with this
architecture style the high levels of elasticity, scalability, and
performance they need to process millions of concurrent users.

The trade-offs for these advantages involve the system’s overall
simplicity and testability. Space-based architectures are very
complicated, due to their use of caching and eventual consistency of the
primary data store, which is the ultimate system of record. Given this
style’s numerous moving parts, architects should take special care to
avoid data loss in the event of a crash (see “Preventing Data Loss” in
Chapter 15).

Testability gets a one-star rating due to the complexity of simulating
the high levels of scalability and elasticity this style supports.
Testing hundreds of thousands of concurrent users at peak load is a very
complicated and expensive task, so most high-volume testing occurs
within production environments, with actual extreme load, incurring
significant risk for normal operations.

Cost is another trade-off. Space-based architecture is relatively
expensive, mostly due to its overall complexity, licensing fees for
caching products, and the resource utilization needed within cloud and
on-prem systems to support its high scalability and elasticity.

While processing units, being separately deployed, might lend themselves
to a level of domain partitioning, we have identified space-based as a
technically partitioned architecture, since any given domain is
represented by different technical components, such as processing units,
data pumps, data readers and writers, and the database.

The number of quanta within a space-based architecture can vary, based
on how the UI is designed and how processing units communicate. Because
the processing units do not communicate synchronously with the database,
the database itself is not part of the quantum equation. As a result,
quanta within a space-based architecture are typically delineated
through the associations between the various UIs and the processing
units. Processing units that synchronously communicate (with each other
or through the processing grid for orchestration) would all be part of
the same architectural quantum.

Examples and Use Cases

Space-based architecture is well suited for applications that experience
high spikes in user or request volume and applications that have
throughput in excess of 10,000 concurrent users. We’ll look at two
space-based architecture use cases here: an online concert-ticketing
application and an online auction system. Both require high levels of
performance, scalability, and elasticity.

Concert Ticketing System

Concert ticketing systems are a unique problem domain, in that
concurrent user volume is relatively low until a popular concert is
announced. Once tickets for an especially popular entertainer go on
sale, user volumes usually spike from several hundred concurrent users
to several thousand or even tens of thousands, depending on the concert,
all trying to acquire good seats! Tickets usually sell out in a matter
of minutes, so these systems really require the characteristics
supported by space-based architecture.

There are many challenges associated with this sort of system. First,
only a certain number of tickets are available in total, regardless of
the seating preferences. Seating availability must be updated
continually and as fast as possible, given the high number of concurrent
requests. Continually accessing a central database synchronously would
be unlikely to work—it would be very difficult for a typical database to
handle tens of thousands of concurrent requests through standard
transactions at this scale and with this update frequency.

Space-based architecture would be a good fit for a concert ticketing
system, due to its high elasticity requirements. The deployment manager
would immediately recognize a sudden increase in the number of
concurrent users and start up lots of processing units to handle the
large volume of ticket purchase requests. Optimally, the deployment
manager could be configured to start the necessary number of processing
units shortly before tickets go on sale, so they would be on standby
right before the significant increase in user load.

Online Auction System

Online auction systems (sites for bidding on items within an auction,
such as eBay) share many characteristics with the online
concert-ticketing systems we just described. Both require high levels of
performance and elasticity, and both have unpredictable spikes in user
and request load. When an auction starts, there is no way to determine
how many people join or how many concurrent bids will occur for each
asking price.

Space-based architecture is well suited for this problem domain because
it allows for multiple processing units to be started as the load
increases, then destroyed as the auction winds down and they’re no
longer needed. Individual processing units can be devoted to each
auction, ensuring consistency in the bidding data. Also, the
asynchronous nature of the data pumps means that bidding data can be
sent to other processing (such as bid history, bid analytics, and
auditing) without much latency, increasing the overall performance of
the bidding process.

Space-based architecture is a complicated but very powerful
architectural style. It is the only architectural style that maximizes
the combination of responsiveness, scalability, and elasticity,
primarily because of how it uses caching and its lack of direct database
access. As such, it can be considered a specialized architectural style,
used in situations that must maximize these particular architectural
characteristics.

¹ There may be exceptions to this rule based on the implementation of
the caching product used. Some caching products require an external
controller to monitor and control data replication between processing
units, but most are moving away from this model.

Chapter 17. Orchestration-Driven Service-Oriented Architecture

Architecture styles make sense to architects in the context of the era
when they evolved, but lose relevance in later eras, much like art
movements. Orchestration-driven service-oriented architecture (SOA)
exemplifies this tendency. The external forces that often influence
architecture decisions, combined with a logical but ultimately
disastrous organizational philosophy, doomed this architecture to
irrelevance. However, it provides a great example of how a particular
organizational idea can make logical sense yet hinder the most important
parts of the development process. It illustrates one of the dangers of
ignoring our First Law: everything in software architecture is a
trade-off.

Topology

The topology of orchestration-driven SOA is shown in Figure 17-1.

Not all examples of this style of architecture have these exact layers,
but they all follow the same idea of establishing a taxonomy of services
within the architecture, each layer with a specific, well-defined
responsibility.

Service-oriented architecture is a distributed architecture. The exact
demarcation of boundaries isn’t shown in Figure 17-1 because it varies
based on organization and tools: some of the parts of the taxonomy may
exist inside an application server. Orchestration-driven SOA centers on
a specific taxonomy of services, with different technical
responsibilities within the architecture and roles dedicated to specific
layers.

[]

Figure 17-1. Topology of orchestration-driven service-oriented architecture

Style Specifics

Orchestration-driven SOA is mostly of historical interest to current-day
architects; the lessons learned from building these architectures are an
important part of the field’s evolution. However, architects still find
parts of it relevant in some integration architecture scenarios.

Service-oriented architecture appeared in the late 1990s, just as small
companies of all kinds were growing into enterprises at a breakneck
pace, merging with smaller companies, and requiring more sophisticated
IT to accommodate this growth. However, computing resources were scarce,
precious, and commercial. Distributed computing had just become possible
and necessary, and many companies needed its scalability and other
beneficial characteristics.

Many external drivers forced architects in this era toward distributed
architectures with significant system constraints. Before open source
operating systems were thought reliable enough for serious work,
operating systems were expensive and licensed per machine. Similarly,
commercial database servers came with Byzantine licensing schemes, which
sometimes caused application-server vendors (which offered database
connection pooling) to react by battling with database vendors. Given
that so many resources were expensive at scale, architects adopted a
common philosophy of reusing as much as possible.

These technical concerns wedded with organizational concerns about
duplication of both information and workflows—​because of frequent
mergers and growth, organizations struggled with the variety and
inconsistencies between core business entities. This made the goals of
SOA attractive. Consequently, architects embraced reuse in all forms as
the dominant philosophy in this architecture, the side effects of which
we cover in “Reuse…and Coupling”. This style of architecture also
exemplifies how far architects can push the idea of technical
partitioning, which can have good motivations but leads to bad
consequences when taken to extremes.

Why So Many Service Names?

Architects are often confused by the multitude of things in software
architecture called services. We cover three different “services” styles
even in this book: SOA in this chapter, microservices in Chapter 18, and
service-based architectures in Chapter 14. Part of the problem is the
inflexibility of language to describe architectures. The other part lies
in the constant evolution of the software-development ecosystem. Service
is a nice generic name for something that provides a, well, service, so
architects tend to reuse the name. As styles evolve, we change what we
mean by service. For example, an entity service in an
orchestration-driven SOA is different in virtually every way from a
service in a microservices architecture (which is distinct from a
service-based architecture). As annoying as it is, architects must often
parse the context when the word service appears in a name; the term
itself has suffered from semantic diffusion.

Taxonomy

The driving philosophy behind this architecture is a specific type of
abstraction and enterprise-level reuse. Many large companies were
annoyed at how much they had to continually rewrite software. They
arrived at a strategy that seemed to solve that problem gradually by
creating a strict service taxonomy, with well-defined layers and
corresponding responsibilities. Each layer of the taxonomy supports the
dual goals of ultimate abstraction and reuse.

Business services

Business services sit at the top of this SOA and provide the entry point
for business processes. For example, services like ExecuteTrade or
PlaceOrder represent the correct scope of behavior for these services.
One litmus test common at the time was: can an architect answer “yes” to
the question “Are we in the business of…​” for each of these services? If
so, then the service is at the appropriate level of granularity.
However, while a developer might need a method like CreateCustomer to
carry out a business process like ExecuteTrade, CreateCustomer is at the
wrong level of abstraction for a business service. The company isn’t in
the business of creating customers, but it needs to create customers in
order to execute trades.

These service definitions contain no code—just input, output, and
sometimes schema information. Business users and/or analysts define
these service signatures, hence the name business services.

Enterprise services

The enterprise services contain fine-grained shared implementations.
Typically, a team of developers builds atomic behavior around particular
business domains, such as CreateCustomer or CalculateQuote, and
transactional entities, such as Customer, Order, and Lineitem. These
enterprise services are the building blocks that make up the business
services, tied together via the orchestration engine.

It is worth noting the abstraction differences between business and
enterprise services. While business services are quite coarse-grained,
enterprise services are fine-grained and meant to capture different
types of abstractions, workflows, and entities. The architect’s goal in
creating enterprise services is to create perfectly encapsulated
building blocks of isolated business functionality that can be freely
composed into more complex business workflows.

While that’s a laudable goal, architects find that the ideal sweet spot
of abstraction between all these forces is elusive at best and likely
impossible because of numerous competing trade-offs. Ultimately, like
other technically partitioned architectures, this architecture attempts
a strict separation of responsibility, which flows from the imperative
of reuse. The idea is that if developers can build fine-grained
enterprise services at just the correct level of granularity, the
business won’t have to rewrite that part of the business workflow again.
Gradually, the business will build up a collection of reusable assets in
the form of reusable enterprise services—​in theory, anyway.

Unfortunately, the dynamic nature of reality and the evolutionary impact
of the software development ecosystem defy these attempts. Business
components aren’t like construction materials, where solutions last
decades. Markets, technology changes, engineering practices, and a host
of other factors confound attempts to impose stability on the software
world.

Application services

Not all services in the architecture require the same level of
granularity or reuse as the enterprise services. Application services
are one-off, single-implementation services. For example, perhaps one
application needs geolocation, but the organization doesn’t want to take
the time or effort to make that a reusable service. An application
service, typically owned by a single application team, solves that
problem.

Infrastructure services

Infrastructure services supply operational concerns, such as monitoring,
logging, authentication, authorization, and so on. These services tend
to be concrete implementations, owned by a shared infrastructure team
that works closely with operations. Architects’ philosophy in building
this architecture revolves around technical partitioning, so it makes
sense that they would build separate infrastructure services.

Orchestration engine and message bus

The orchestration engine forms the heart of this distributed
architecture, stitching together the business service implementations
using orchestration, including features like transactional coordination
and message transformation. The orchestration engine defines the
relationship between the business and enterprise services, how they map
together, and where transaction boundaries lie. It also acts as an
integration hub, allowing architects to integrate custom code with
package and legacy software systems. This combination of features
highlights the modern-day use of tools like enterprise service buses
(ESBs). While most architects consider it a bad idea to build an entire
architecture around ESBs, they are immensely useful in integration-heavy
environments. Where architects must combine an integration hub and
orchestration engine, why not use a tool that already includes them?
(This points to another important skill to develop as an architect—​how
to discern the true uses of tools, separate from the hype, both good and
bad.)

Because the message bus forms the heart of the architecture, Conway’s
Law (see “Conway’s Law”) correctly predicts that the team of integration
architects responsible for this engine tends to become a political force
within an organization—and eventually a bureaucratic bottleneck.

While this centralized, taxonomized approach might sound appealing, in
practice it has mostly been a disaster. Offloading transaction behavior
to an orchestration tool sounds good, but architects struggle to find
the correct level of granularity. While they can build a few services
wrapped in a distributed transaction, the architecture becomes
increasingly complex. Developers must figure out where the appropriate
transaction boundaries between services lie as entities become involved
in numerous workflows. Despite managers predicting and hoping that
organizations could successfully build transactional building blocks as
enterprise services, it has proved difficult in practice.

Message flow

All requests go through the orchestration engine, where this
architecture’s logic resides. Thus, message flow goes through the engine
even for internal calls, as shown in Figure 17-2.

[]

Figure 17-2. Message flow with service-oriented architecture

In Figure 17-2, the CreateQuote business-level service calls the service
bus, which defines the workflow. The workflow consists of calls to both
CreateCustomer and CalculateQuote, each of which also makes calls to
application services. The service bus acts as the intermediary for all
calls within this architecture, serving as both an integration hub and
orchestration engine.

Reuse…and Coupling

One of the primary goals of the architects who first utilized this
architecture was reuse at the service level—​the ability to gradually
build business behavior that they could incrementally reuse over time.
They were instructed to find reuse opportunities as aggressively as
possible.

For example, consider the situation illustrated in Figure 17-3. An
architect realizes that each of six divisions within an insurance
company contains a notion of Customer.

[]

Figure 17-3. Seeking reuse opportunities in service-oriented architecture

Therefore, the proper SOA strategy entails extracting the Customer parts
into a reusable service and then allowing the original services to
reference the canonical Customer service. This is shown in Figure 17-4:
here the architect has isolated all customer behavior into a single
Customer service, achieving the obvious reuse goals.

[]

Figure 17-4. Building canonical representations in service-oriented architecture

Architects only slowly realized the negative trade-offs of this design.
First, when a team builds a system primarily around reuse, it also
incurs a huge amount of coupling between components. After all, reuse is
implemented via coupling. For example, in Figure 17-4, a change to the
Customer service ripples out to all the other services. This makes even
incremental change risky: each change has a potentially huge ripple
effect. That in turn requires coordinated deployments, holistic testing,
and other drags on engineering efficiency.

Another negative side effect of consolidating behavior into a single
place: consider the case of auto and disability insurance in
Figure 17-4. To support a single Customer service, each division must
include all the details the organization knows about its customers. Auto
insurance requires a driver’s license, which is a property of the
person, not the vehicle. Therefore, the Customer service will have to
include details about driver’s licenses that the disability insurance
division cares nothing about. Yet the disability insurance team must
deal with the extra complexity of a single customer definition. In many
ways, DDD’s insistence on avoiding holistic reuse derives from
experiences with these kinds of architectures.

Perhaps the most damaging revelation about orchestration-driven SOA is
the impracticality of building an architecture so focused on technical
partitioning. While this makes sense from a separation and reuse
philosophy standpoint, it is a practical nightmare.

For example, developers commonly work on tasks like “add a new address
line to CatalogCheckout.” Domain concepts like CatalogCheckout are
spread so thinly throughout this architecture that they were virtually
ground to dust. In an SOA, this task could involve dozens of services in
several different tiers, plus changes to a single database schema.
What’s more, if the current enterprise services aren’t defined at the
correct transactional granularity, the developers will either have to
change their design or build a nearly identical new service to change
the transactional behavior. So much for reuse.

Data Topologies

Unlike many of the architecture styles we discuss in this book, the data
topologies for orchestration-driven SOA aren’t very interesting, given
this style’s historical origins. Even though it is a distributed
architecture consisting of many parts, it generally uses a single (or a
few) relational databases, which was the common practice in all
distributed architectures in the late 1990s. Even transactionality was
generally relegated to this architecture and away from databases: the
message bus often included declarative transactional interactions for
each of the entities within the topology, allowing developers,
architects, or others to determine transactional behavior independently
of the database or even the situational reuse of the entity.

Architects in this era considered data a foreign country. While it is an
inevitable part of the plumbing in both SOA and event-driven
architectures, back then, they treated it more as an integration point
than as part of the problem domain.

Really? Declarative Transactions?!?

Yes, really. One of the “features” of many application servers in the
heyday of orchestration-driven SOA was allowing configuration managers
to change the transactional scope of individual entities, depending on
the transactional context within which they wanted to operate. (This was
declared, of course, in XML, given the era and its love for verbose but
easy-to-parse configuration formats.) A portion of the declaration of an
entity (called EntityBeans, a specialized type of JavaBean) determines
transactional scope as it participates in workflows, which architects
themselves declare to be transactional or not. In turn, the application
server interacts with the database to create and manage database
transactions that match the desired behavior of the entities and/or
workflows.

This has largely failed, for two reasons. First, if a developer doesn’t
know what the transactional behavior will be at runtime, it adds
considerable complexity to entities and dependencies. This forces
developers to create almost identical versions of the entities,
differing only in their transactional scope. Second, no matter how much
sophistication vendors build into their message buses, edge cases
constantly appear where the myriad failure modes prevent the system from
cleanly managing transactions, creating tangled messes of inconsistency
for humans to untangle. Some complex, multifaceted features of systems
(like transactions) cannot be cleanly abstracted away. Too many leaks in
the abstraction prevent it from achieving reliability.

Cloud Considerations

Orchestration-driven SOA predates the cloud by several decades, so no
consideration exists for building this architecture (in its original
incarnation) in the cloud.

However, the current-day use of this style makes it a good integration
architecture for cloud and on-premises services that must integrate and
participate in workflows. As primarily an integration architecture, it
works well with cloud-based services and facilities.

Common Risks

At the end of the last century and the beginning of this one, the big
risks for this architecture were primarily about how much it cost, how
long it took to implement, and (a shocking surprise) how difficult these
systems are to maintain and update. Many of these projects were very
expensive multiyear endeavors, with critical decisions made high in the
company hierarchy. Rather than call these projects “failures,” companies
mostly just transformed them into integration architectures with better
boundaries, more closely aligned with the ideas of DDD.

When architects use an ESB in a modern system as an integration
facility, the biggest risk is the slippery slope of allowing the ESB to
gradually encapsulate the entire architecture. This is called the
Accidental SOA antipattern: where an architect gradually and
unintentionally builds a fully orchestration-driven SOA without
realizing it. To avoid Accidental SOA, an architect must ensure
reasonable encapsulation boundaries for orchestration and pay close
attention to issues like transactional boundaries.

Governance

When this architecture was popular, modern-day holistic testing was
uncommon. Teams rarely tested SOA outside of formal
quality-assurance-level testing, so tool and framework creators gave
little consideration to facilitating testing the individual parts. Some
testing frameworks emerged to create mocks and stubs for the massive
machinery of the message bus and its related moving parts, but they were
always cumbersome and inconsistent.

Governance suffered from the same limitations. The idea of automating
architectural governance was even more foreign than automating testing.
In this era, “governance” meant heavyweight frameworks, meetings, and
code reviews—all manual.

However, architects still use ESBs strategically within organizations
that need the particular mix of capabilities they offer. In particular,
many companies have legacy systems that must interact with more modern
systems, often combining results and aggregating behavior—all of which
describes the central functionality of an ESB. In these scenarios,
fitness functions can serve a critical role in preventing data or
bounded contexts from “leaking” across parts of the ecosystem where they
shouldn’t appear.

For example, consider a system that uses an ESB to coordinate between an
enterprise resource planning (ERP) package, an online sales tool, and
more modern microservices-based Accounting services. In this scenario,
the system should only read from the ERP and sales systems and should
write to the Accounting microservices. Architects can first build a
fitness function that ensures that all communication is written
consistently to logs, then write something like the following fitness
function (given here in pseudocode):

    READ logs for ERP into ERP-logs for past 24 hours
    READ logs for Sales into Sales-logs for past 24 hours
    FOREACH entry IN ERP-logs
        IF 'operation' is 'update' and 'target' != 'accounting' THEN
           raise fitness function violation
           	     "Invalid communication between integration points"
        END IF
    FOREACH entry IN Sales-logs
        IF 'operation' is 'update' and 'target' != 'accounting' THEN
           raise fitness function violation
           	     "Invalid communication between integration points"
        END IF    

This fitness function reads the log entries from both integration points
to ensure that no update operations take place whose target isn’t the
Accounting system.

Using such fitness functions, architects can use tools like ESBs
strategically while building guardrails around the places where teams
typically misuse them.

Team Topology Considerations

Just as architects did not consider data topologies for
orchestration-driven SOA, the same is true for team topologies, which
was an unknown topic when this architecture style was popular.

In fact, the strict taxonomy of this style serves as a communication
antipattern that led architects to develop the principles of team
topologies. The goal in this architecture is extreme separation of
responsibilities, with a corresponding separation of team members. Among
the companies that adopted it, it was rare indeed for someone building
business services to chat with someone building enterprise services.
They were expected to communicate through technical artifacts, such as
contracts and interfaces. The level of abstraction in this style creates
many integration layers, each implemented by different teams, using
enterprise-level ticketing tools to communicate. It should be easy to
see why developers find it time-consuming to build features in this
style.

Style Characteristics

Many of the criteria we now use to evaluate architecture styles were not
priorities when orchestration-driven SOA was popular. The Agile software
movement had just started and had not yet penetrated the large
organizations likely to use this architecture.

A one-star rating in the characteristics ratings table in Figure 17-5
means the specific architecture characteristic isn’t well supported in
the architecture, whereas a five-star rating means the architecture
characteristic is one of the style’s strongest features. Definitions for
the characteristics identified in the scorecard can be found in
Chapter 4.

SOA is perhaps the most technically partitioned general-purpose
architecture ever attempted! In fact, the backlash against the
disadvantages of this structure led to more modern architectures, such
as microservices. SOA has a single quantum, even though it is a
distributed architecture, for two reasons. First, it generally uses a
single database or just a few, creating coupling points across many
different concerns. Second, and more importantly, the orchestration
engine acts as a giant coupling point—​no part of the architecture can
have different characteristics than the mediator that orchestrates all
behavior. Thus, this architecture manages to find the disadvantages of
both monolithic and distributed architectures.

[Ratings for service-oriented architecture]

Figure 17-5. Service-oriented architecture characteristics ratings

Modern engineering goals such as deployability and testability score
disastrously in this architecture, both because they are poorly
supported and because those were not important (or even aspirational)
goals when it was developed.

This architecture does support some goals, such as elasticity and
scalability, despite the difficulties in implementing them. Tool vendors
poured enormous effort into making these systems scalable by building
session replication across application servers and other techniques.
However, this being a distributed architecture, performance has never
been a highlight, because each business request is split across so much
of the architecture.

Because of all these factors, simplicity and cost have the inverse of
the relationship most architects would prefer. Orchestration-driven SOA
was an important milestone because it taught architects the practical
limits of technical partitioning and how difficult distributed
transactions can be in the real world.

Examples and Use Cases

The primary examples of this architecture existed in the late 1990s and
early 2000s in many large enterprises. They have gradually been
displaced by more agile and domain-based distributed architectures, like
microservices. Even large enterprises have realized that change is
inevitable and that software isn’t static and needs to change with
market forces and new capabilities.

Architects built orchestration-driven SOA architectures to try to
achieve effective reuse across large organizations, but eventually
realized how difficult their strict and elaborate taxonomy makes
implementing common changes and updates. For example, a common domain
change might be to update details about a single entity. On a lucky day,
developers might only need to change components in the enterprise
services layer to do the job. However, on a bad day (one where
enterprise architects and/or business stakeholders didn’t anticipate
this type of change), developers might have to update four or five
layers in the architecture, making highly coupled changes in each.
Architects working in this style dread hearing the word change because
it requires deep analysis, and the scope of the work is so variable.

As we mentioned in “Governance”, architects still use the building
blocks of orchestration-driven SOA (such as the ESB), particularly for
integration architectures. For example, an ESB includes both an
integration hub (to facilitate communication, protocol, and contract
transformation) and an orchestration engine (to allow architects to
build workflows between various integration endpoints). Because the
orchestration-driven SOA includes many layers of indirection, it allows
architects to implement enterprise services as integration points, as
package software, or as bespoke code, among other possibilities, as
illustrated in Figure 17-6.

Client requests use the message bus to determine which enterprise
services to call, in what order to call them, and what information to
aggregate. The enterprise services, in turn, communicate via APIs to
custom code, old systems, or package software, and so on.

Orchestration-driven SOA represents an interesting innovation for how
architects handle problems of integration at scale within the
constraints of their ecosystem. For example, since most organizations
weren’t using open source operating systems when this architecture was
popular, alternative architectures like microservices were impossibly
expensive. Architects should learn from past approaches. We can continue
using the parts that still make sense, while internalizing the lessons
of what failed and why.

[The layers of abstraction in this architecture style allows for
implementation flexibility]

Figure 17-6. The layers of abstraction in this architecture style allow for implementation flexibility

Chapter 18. Microservices Architecture

Microservices is an extremely popular architecture style that has gained
significant momentum in recent years. In this chapter, we provide an
overview of the important characteristics that set this architecture
apart, both topologically and philosophically.

Most architecture styles are named after they are created by architects
who notice that a particular pattern keeps reappearing. There is no
secret group of architects who decide what the next big movement will
be—architects make decisions as the software development ecosystem
shifts and changes, and of the most common ways of dealing with and
profiting from those shifts, those that emerge as the best become
architecture styles that others emulate.

Microservices differs in this regard—​it was named fairly early in its
usage. Martin Fowler and James Lewis popularized it in a famous 2014
blog post in which they recognized and delineated the characteristics of
this relatively new architectural style. Their blog post shaped the
definition of the architecture and helped curious architects understand
the underlying philosophy.

Microservices is heavily inspired by the ideas in domain-driven design
(DDD), a logical design process for software projects. One concept in
particular from DDD, the bounded context, decidedly inspired
microservices. The concept of a bounded context represents a decoupling
style (as discussed previously in “Domain-Driven Design’s Bounded
Context” in Chapter 7), which is why microservices is sometimes called a
“share nothing” architecture.

When a developer defines a domain, that domain includes many entities
and behaviors, identified in artifacts such as code and database
schemas. For example, an application might have a domain called
CatalogCheckout that includes notions such as catalog items, customers,
and payment. In a traditional monolithic architecture, developers would
share many of these concepts, building reusable classes and linked
databases. Within a bounded context, internal parts such as code and
data schemas can be coupled together to produce work, but they are never
coupled to anything outside the bounded context, such as a database or
class definition from another bounded context. This allows each context
to define only what it needs rather than accommodating other
constituents, limiting reuse between bounded contexts.

While reuse is generally beneficial, remember the First Law of Software
Architecture? Everything’s a trade-off. The downside of reuse is that
achieving it usually requires increasing the system’s coupling, either
by inheritance or composition.

If the architect’s goal is a highly decoupled system—the primary goal of
microservices—then they will favor duplication over reuse, physically
modeling the logical notion of bounded context to include a service and
its corresponding data.

Topology

The basic topology of microservices is shown in Figure 18-1. Due to its
single-purpose nature, services in this architecture style are much
smaller than in other distributed architectures, such as
orchestration-driven SOA (Chapter 17), event-driven architecture
(Chapter 15), and service-based architecture (Chapter 14). Architects
expect each service to include all parts necessary for it to operate
independently, including databases and other dependent components.

Microservices is a distributed architecture style: each service runs in
its own process, in either a virtual machine or container. Decoupling
the services to this degree allows for a simple solution to a common
problem in architectures that heavily feature multitenant infrastructure
for hosting applications. For example, when the system is using an
application server to manage multiple running applications, the
application server allows operational reuse of network bandwidth,
memory, and disk space, among other things. However, if all the
supported applications continue to grow, eventually some resource on the
shared infrastructure will become constrained.

Another problem concerns improper isolation between shared applications.
Separating each service into its own process solves all the problems
brought on by sharing. Before the evolution of freely available open
source operating systems and automated machine provisioning, it was
impractical for each domain to have its own infrastructure. Now,
however, with cloud resources and container technology (see “Cloud
Considerations”), teams can reap the benefits of extreme decoupling,
both at the domain and operational level.

[Microservices topology]

Figure 18-1. The topology of the microservices architecture style

Performance is often the downside of microservices’ distributed nature.
Network calls take much longer than method calls, and security
verifications at every endpoint add additional processing time,
requiring architects to think carefully about the implications of
granularity.

Because microservices is a distributed architecture, experienced
architects advise against using transactions across service boundaries.
Determining the granularity of services is really the key to success in
this architecture.

Style Specifics

The following sections, while not exhaustive, describe some of the
important aspects of the microservices topology, including some unique
elements that are unique to microservices.

Bounded Context

Let’s dive more deeply into the notion of bounded context, which we
mentioned as the driving philosophy of microservices. Each service
models a particular function, subdomain, or workflow. Each bounded
context, then, includes everything necessary to operate within that
function or subdomain—including services consisting of logical
components and classes, database schemas, and the corresponding database
the service requires to carry out its functions. Each service is meant
to represent a particular subdomain or function.

This philosophy drives many of the decisions architects make within
microservices. For example, in a monolith, it is common for developers
to share common classes, such as Address, between disparate parts of the
application. However, because microservices architectures try to avoid
coupling, an architect building in this architecture style would use
duplication rather than coupling to keep all code within the bounded
context of that function or subdomain.

Microservices takes the concept of a domain-partitioned architecture to
the extreme; in many ways, this architecture physically embodies the
logical concepts in domain-driven design.

Granularity

Architects designing microservices often struggle to find the correct
level of granularity, and end up making their services too small by
taking the term micro literally. Then they have to build communication
links back between the services to do useful work, which negates the
point and results in a Big Ball of Distributed Mud.

  The term microservice is a label, not a description.

  Martin Fowler

In other words, the originators of the term needed to call this new
style something, and they chose microservices to contrast it with the
dominant architecture style at the time (circa 2007), the
service-oriented architecture, which could have been called “gigantic
services.” However, many developers take the term microservices as a
commandment, not a description, and create services that are too
fine-grained.

The purpose of service boundaries in microservices is to capture a
domain or workflow. In some applications, those natural boundaries might
be large for parts of the system, simply because some business processes
are more highly coupled than others. Here are some guidelines architects
can use to help find the appropriate boundaries:

Purpose

    The most obvious boundary relies on the inspiration for the
    architecture style: the problem domain. Ideally, each microservice
    should be functionally cohesive, contributing one significant
    behavior on behalf of the overall application.

Transactions

    Bounded contexts are business workflows, and often the entities that
    need to cooperate in a transaction suggest a good service boundary.
    Because transactions cause issues in distributed architectures,
    designing systems with the goal of avoiding them tends to result in
    better designs.

Choreography

    A set of services offers excellent domain isolation but requires
    extensive communication to function. The architect may consider
    bundling these services back into a larger service to avoid the
    communication overhead.

Iteration is the only way to ensure good service design. Architects
rarely discover the perfect granularity level, data dependencies, and
communication styles on their first pass: they iterate over the options
to refine their designs, particularly as they learn more about the
system and its business functionality.

Data Isolation

Another requirement of microservices, also driven by the bounded-context
concept, is data isolation. Many architecture styles use a single
database for persistence. However, microservices tries to avoid all
kinds of coupling, including using shared schemas and databases as
integration points.

Data isolation is another factor to consider when looking at service
granularity. Be wary of the Entity Trap (discussed in “The Entity
Trap”)—don’t simply model services to resemble single entities in a
database. Architects are accustomed to using relational databases to
unify values within a system, creating a single source of truth, but
that’s no longer an option when you’re distributing data across the
architecture. So every architect must decide how they want to handle
this problem: either identifying one domain as the source of truth for
some fact and coordinating with it to retrieve values, or distributing
information through database replication or caching.

While this level of data isolation creates headaches, it also provides
opportunities. Now that they aren’t forced to unify around a single
database, each team can choose the most appropriate database technology
for their service’s budget, storage structure type, operational
characteristics, process characteristics, and so on. Another advantage
of a highly decoupled system is that any team can change course and
choose a more suitable database (or other dependency) without affecting
other teams, which aren’t allowed to couple to implementation details.
(We cover data isolation and database considerations in more detail in
“Data Topologies”.)

API Layer

Most microservices architectures include an API layer (usually called an
API Gateway) between the consumers of the system (either user interfaces
or calls from other systems) and the microservices. The API layer can be
implemented as a simple reverse-proxy or a more sophisticated gateway
containing cross-cutting concerns such as security, naming services, and
so on (these are covered in more detail in “Operational Reuse”).

While API layers have many uses, to stay true to the underlying
philosophy of this architecture, they should not be used as mediators or
orchestrators. All interesting business logic in this architecture
should reside inside a bounded context, and putting orchestration or
other business logic into a mediator violates that rule. Architects
typically use mediators in technically partitioned architectures,
whereas microservices is firmly domain partitioned.

Tip

When using an API layer in a microservices architecture, only include
request routing and cross-cutting concerns, such as security,
monitoring, logging, and so on. Be careful to avoid putting any
business-related logic within the API layer.

Operational Reuse

Given that microservices prefers duplication to coupling, how do
architects handle the parts of this architecture that really do benefit
from coupling, such as operational concerns like monitoring, logging,
and circuit breakers? Traditional service-oriented architecture
philosophy was to reuse as much functionality as possible, domain and
operational alike. In microservices, however, architects try to split
these two concerns.

Once a team has built several microservices, its members start to
realize that each microservice has common elements that benefit from
similarity. For example, if an organization allows each service team to
implement monitoring independently, how can it ensure that each team
does so? And how does the organization handle concerns like
upgrades—does each team become responsible for upgrading to the new
version of the monitoring tool, and how long will that take? The Sidecar
pattern offers a solution to this problem (Figure 18-2).

[Sidecar pattern]

Figure 18-2. The Sidecar pattern in microservices

In Figure 18-2, the common operational concerns (circuit breaker,
logging, monitoring) appear within each service as separate components,
each of which can be owned by individual teams or by a shared
infrastructure team. The Sidecar component handles all the operational
concerns that benefit from coupling, so when it comes time to upgrade
the monitoring tool, the shared infrastructure team can update the
sidecar, and each microservice will receive the new functionality (see
“Team Topology Considerations”).

When each service includes a common Sidecar component, the architect can
build a service mesh to allow teams unified control of these common
concerns across the architecture. The sidecar components connect to form
a consistent operational interface across all microservices, as shown in
Figure 18-3.

[Service plane]

Figure 18-3. The service plane connects the sidecars in a service mesh

In Figure 18-3, each sidecar wires into the service plane. A service
plane is integration software (usually in the form of a product such as
Istio) that connects each sidecar using a consistent interface, thus
forming the service mesh.

Each service forms a node in the overall mesh, as shown in Figure 18-4.
The service mesh forms a console that allows teams to globally control
operational coupling, such as monitoring levels, logging, and other
cross-cutting operational concerns.

[Service mesh]

Figure 18-4. The service mesh forms a holistic view of the operational aspect of microservices

Architects use service discovery as a way to build elasticity into
microservices architectures. Service discovery is a way of automatically
detecting and locating services within a network. When a request comes
in, rather than invoking a single service, it goes through a service
discovery tool, which can monitor the number and frequency of requests
and spin up new instances of services to handle scale or elasticity
concerns. Architects often include service discovery in the service
mesh, making it part of every microservice. The API layer is often used
to host service discovery, allowing a single place for user interfaces
or other calling systems to find and create services in an elastic,
consistent way.

Frontends

Microservices favors decoupling, which would ideally encompass the user
interfaces as well as backend concerns. In fact, the original vision for
microservices included UI as part of the bounded context, faithful to
the bounded-context principle in DDD. However, the practicalities of the
partitioning required by web applications (and other external
constraints) make that a difficult goal. That’s why we commonly see two
UI styles for microservices architectures.

The first style, shown in Figure 18-5, is the monolithic frontend, which
features a single UI that calls through the API layer to satisfy user
requests. This frontend could be a rich desktop, mobile, or web
application. For example, many web applications now use a JavaScript web
framework to build a single UI.

[Monolithic UI]

Figure 18-5. Microservices architecture with a monolithic user interface

The second UI option is micro-frontends, shown in Figure 18-6.

[Micro-frontend pattern]

Figure 18-6. Micro-frontend pattern in microservices

The micro-frontend approach uses components at the UI level to create a
synchronous level of granularity and isolation in the UI and the backend
services, thus forming relationships between the UI components and
corresponding backend services.

To learn more about micro-frontends, we highly recommend the book
Building Micro-Frontends, 2nd Edition, by Luca Mezzalira (O’Reilly,
2025).

Communication

In microservices, architects and developers struggle to find the
appropriate service granularity, which affects both data isolation and
communication. Finding the correct communication style helps teams keep
services decoupled, yet still coordinate them in useful ways.

Fundamentally, architects must decide on synchronous or asynchronous
communication. Synchronous communication requires the sender to wait for
a response from the receiver. Microservices architectures typically
utilize protocol-aware heterogeneous interoperability when communicating
to and between services. Let’s break that complicated term down into its
parts to better understand what it means and why it’s important:

Protocol-aware

    Because microservices don’t include a centralized integration hub,
    each service needs to know how to call other services. Thus,
    architects commonly standardize on how particular services call each
    other: a certain level of REST, message queues, and so on. That
    means that services must know (or discover) which protocol to use to
    call other services.

Heterogeneous

    Because microservices is a distributed architecture, each service
    could be written in a different technology stack. Heterogeneous
    indicates that microservices fully supports polyglot environments,
    in which different services use different platforms.

Interoperability

    Describes services calling one another. While architects in
    microservices try to discourage transactional method calls, services
    commonly call other services via the network to collaborate and
    exchange information.

Enforced Heterogeneity

A well-known architect who was a pioneer in the microservices style was
the chief architect at a startup, building personal-information
management software for mobile devices. Because mobile is such a
fast-moving problem domain, the architect wanted to ensure that none of
the development teams would accidentally create coupling points that
could hinder their ability to move independently. It turned out that the
teams had a wide mix of technical skills, so the architect mandated a
new rule: each development team had to use a different technology stack.
If one team was using Java and the other was using .NET, it would be
impossible for them to share classes accidentally!

This approach is the polar opposite of most enterprise governance
policies, which insist on standardizing on a single technology stack. In
the microservices world, the goal isn’t to create the most complex
ecosystem possible, but to choose the correct scale of technology for
the narrow scope of the problem. Not every service needs an
industrial-strength relational database, and forcing one on a small team
is more likely to slow them down than to benefit them. This concept
leverages the highly decoupled nature of microservices.

For asynchronous communication, architects often use events and
messages, similar to what we described in event-driven architecture in
Chapter 15.

Choreography and Orchestration

Choreography utilizes the same communication style as EDA. Choreographed
architectures have no central coordinator, respecting the bounded
context philosophy and making it natural to implement decoupled events
between services.

In choreography, each service calls other services as needed, without a
central mediator. For example, consider the scenario shown in
Figure 18-7. The user requests details about another user’s wish list.
Because the CustomerWishList service doesn’t contain all the information
it needs, it makes a call to CustomerDemographics to retrieve the
missing information, then returns the result to the user.

[Simple choreography]

Figure 18-7. Using choreography in microservices to manage coordination

Because microservices architectures don’t include a global mediator like
other service-oriented architectures, if an architect needs to
coordinate across several services, they can create their own localized
mediator (usually called an orchestration service).

In Figure 18-8, the developers create a service whose sole
responsibility is coordinating calls. For instance, the user calls the
ReportCustomerInformation mediator, which calls all necessary other
services to get the requested information.

[Simple orchestration]

Figure 18-8. Using orchestration in microservices

The First Law of Software Architecture suggests that neither of these
solutions is perfect—​each has trade-offs. Choreography preserves the
highly decoupled philosophy of microservices to reap its maximum
benefits. However, it also makes common problems like error handling and
coordination more complex.

Consider an example with a more complex workflow. In Figure 18-9, the
first service called must coordinate across a wide variety of other
services, basically acting as a mediator in addition to its other domain
responsibilities. This is called the Front Controller pattern, where a
nominally choreographed service becomes a more complex mediator for some
problem. The downside to this pattern is that the service taking on
multiple roles adds complexity.

[Complex choreography]

Figure 18-9. Using choreography for a complex business process

Alternatively, architects may choose to use orchestration for complex
business processes, illustrated in Figure 18-10. The architect builds a
mediator service to coordinate the business workflow creating coupling
between these services, but also allowing the architect to focus
coordination into a single service, leaving the others less affected.
Domain workflows are often inherently coupled, so the architect’s job
entails finding a way to represent that coupling that best supports the
goals of both the domain and the architecture.

[Complex orchestration]

Figure 18-10. Using orchestration for a complex business process

Transactions and Sagas

Architects aspire to extreme decoupling in microservices, but often
encounter the problem of how to coordinate transactions across services.
Because microservices encourages the same level of decoupling in the
databases as in the architecture, the atomicity that was trivial in
monolithic applications becomes a problem in distributed ones.

Building transactions across service boundaries violates the core
decoupling principle of microservices, and also creates the worst kind
of dynamic connascence, Connascence of Values (see “Connascence”). The
best advice we can offer architects who want to do transactions across
services is: don’t! Fix the service granularity instead. If you’re
finding that you need to wire your microservices architecture together
with transactions, that’s a sign that your design is too granular.

Tip

Try to avoid transactions that span multiple microservices—​fix the
service granularity instead!

In keeping with the “it depends” rule, there are always exceptions. For
example, a situation could arise where two different services need
vastly different architecture characteristics that require distinct
service boundaries, yet still need transactional coordination. The
architect in that case could, after considering the trade-offs
carefully, leverage certain transactional patterns to orchestrate
transactions.

Distributed transactions in microservices are usually handled by what is
known as a Saga pattern. In literature, a saga is an epic story
describing a long sequence of events that leads to some sort of heroic
conclusion, hence the name of this transactional pattern.

In Figure 18-11, a service acts as a mediator across multiple service
calls to coordinate a transaction. The mediator calls each part of the
transaction, records success or failure, and coordinates the results. If
everything goes as planned, all the values in the services and their
contained databases update synchronously. If there’s an error condition
and one part of the transaction fails, the mediator must ensure that no
part of the transaction succeeds. Consider the situation shown in
Figure 18-12.

[Saga pattern happy path]

Figure 18-11. The Saga pattern in microservices architecture

If the first part of the transaction succeeds but the second part fails,
the mediator must send a request to all other participating services of
the transaction that were successful and tell them to undo the previous
request. This style of transactional coordination is called a
compensating transaction framework. Developers usually implement this
pattern by having each request from the mediator enter a pending state
until the mediator indicates overall success. However, juggling
asynchronous requests can become complex, especially if new requests
appear that are contingent on pending transactional state. Regardless of
the protocol used, compensating transactions create a lot of
coordination traffic at the network level.

[Saga pattern error]

Figure 18-12. Saga pattern compensating transactions for error conditions

Tip

It’s sometimes necessary for a few transactions to cross services;
however, if it’s the dominant feature of the architecture, then
microservices is likely not the right choice!

Managing transactions in microservices is complicated, and you can dive
much deeper. We’ve identified eight different transactional Saga
patterns to solve a variety of scenarios, which you can find in Chapter
12 of our book Software Architecture: The Hard Parts (O’Reilly, 2021),
coauthored with Pramod Sadalage and Zhamak Dehghani.

Data Topologies

As we’ve discussed throughout this chapter, data plays a critical role
in microservices architectures. As a matter of fact, microservices is
the only architectural style that requires architects to break apart
data. While it’s possible (if not always effective) to use a monolithic
database in other distributed architectures, it’s simply not an option
in microservices. Neither are domain databases, as we discuss in “Data
Topologies” and also in “Data Topologies”. This is due to the
fine-grained nature of microservices, bounded context, and the large
number of services found in most microservices ecosystems.

To illustrate why a monolithic database isn’t feasible in microservices,
consider a scenario where 60 services share the same database. The first
issue that arises will be about controlling change within the
architecture. As Figure 18-13 illustrates, changing the structure of
that database (such as by changing a column name or dropping a table)
would require corresponding changes to all 60 services using that data.
Imagine trying to coordinate the maintenance, testing, and release of
five dozen separately deployed services while at the same time releasing
the database changes! This task would be daunting, to say the least, and
would likely end in disaster.

[Change control issues]

Figure 18-13. Controlling change with a monolithic database is a very challenging task

Perhaps the biggest issue with combining a monolithic data topology with
microservices is that it breaks the entire notion of a physical bounded
context. Recall that the bounded context includes all functionality
required to execute a particular business function or subdomain,
including the database and corresponding data structures. If every
service shares the same database and data structures, the bounded
context goes away.

Another issue with monolithic data is about scalability and elasticity.
While many operational tools and products automatically monitor
concurrent load and adjust the number of service instances to address
increases, there aren’t many databases that scale accordingly. This
imbalance can cause overall responsiveness issues and request timeouts.
Managing the database connections, which are typically located in each
service instance, is another concern. As the number of services and
service instances increase, the services can quickly run out of
available database connections, resulting in further connection waits
and request timeouts.

Last, if the database becomes unavailable due to a crash, planned
maintenance, or backups, the entire microservices ecosystem goes down—as
would any architectural style using a monolithic database. While not as
extreme, a domain-based database topology can suffer from the same
issues of scalability, database connection pool management,
availability, and fault tolerance.

For these reasons, the standard database topology for microservices is
the Database-per-Service pattern. With this database topology, each
microservices owns its own data, which is contained as tables within a
separate database or schema, as illustrated in Figure 18-14.

[Database-per-Service topology]

Figure 18-14. The Database-per-Service pattern is the typical database topology for microservices

This topology preserves the bounded context, making it easier for
architects to control change. Because other services that need data must
request it from the owning service through some sort of contract, they
are decoupled from the data’s internal structure. Changing the database
structure only affects the owning service within the bounded context.
This allows architects the freedom to change the database type (such as
from a relational database to a document database) without affecting
other services.

The Database-per-Service topology also provides excellent scalability,
elasticity, availability, and fault tolerance, architectural
characteristics that all suffer under the monolithic or domain-based
database topologies. Furthermore, managing connections to the database
within a bounded context is much easier than with a monolithic or
domain-based database.

While the Database-per-Service topology is widely used within
microservices, it does have its drawbacks. For example, what if two or
more services write to the same database table? What if a service
outside of the bounded context must query the database directly, for
performance reasons? In these cases (which tend to be fairly common), it
is possible for a couple of services to share a database, as shown in
Figure 18-15. We recommend that no more than five or six services share
a single database (or schema). Any more than that and you’ll start to
experience the same issues with change control, scalability, elasticity,
availability, fault tolerance, and so on.

[Sharing data]

Figure 18-15. It’s possible to share data between a few microservices

The box around the services and database in Figure 18-15 denotes the
bounded context. Just because services share a database doesn’t mean
there is no bounded context; it just means the architect has formed a
broader bounded context. For example, they may have valid reasons for
breaking payment processing apart into different payment types (such as
credit card, gift card, PayPal, rewards points, and so on), but these
individual services still need to update and access the same data.
Similarly, an architect may break up a single shipping service into
separately deployed services, one for each shipping method, but those
services will all still require updates from and access to the same
data.

The primary trade-off of sharing data between microservices within a
broader bounded context is controlling database changes. When the
database schema changes, the architect must now coordinate the change
and deployment of multiple services, making database changes riskier and
less agile. There might also be negative consequences for scalability,
elasticity, and fault tolerance, depending on the business problem and
the situation.

Cloud Considerations

While microservices can certainly be deployed in on-prem systems,
particularly with the popularity of service orchestration platforms such
as Kubernetes and Cloud Foundry, this architectural style is very well
suited for cloud-based deployments—so much so that microservices is
sometimes referred to as a “cloud-native” architecture. On-demand
provisioning of virtual machines, containers, and databases, combined
with the services-based approach found in cloud environments (such as
AWS), fits well with the microservices architectural style.

The attentive reader might wonder why we didn’t include serverless as an
architecture style. Serverless refers to a cloud-computing model where
functions are triggered upon request, allocating necessary machine
resources on an on-demand basis. Serverless functions include such
artifacts as AWS Lambdas, Google cloud functions, and Azure cloud
functions. We believe that serverless is not an architectural style, but
a deployment model of the microservices architectural style.

Recall from earlier in the chapter that a microservice is defined as a
single-purpose, separately deployed unit of software that does one thing
really well (hence the prefix micro). As such, microservices tends to be
relatively finer-grained than services in other architectural styles.
This also essentially describes a serverless function, which is why we
consider serverless part of microservices.

That said, microservices in cloud environments does not have to be
deployed as serverless functions; it can be deployed as containerized
services just as easily. Most cloud vendors have adopted Kubernetes (or
some form of the Kubernetes platform), allowing developers to deploy
containerized microservices as easily as serverless ones.

Common Risks

One of the biggest risks in microservices is making services too small.
In 2016 one of your authors (Mark) coined the name Grains of Sand for
the antipattern of making services too fine-grained, just like grains of
sand on a beach. As we previously mentioned, the micro in microservices
refers to what the service does, not how big it is. Service granularity
is such an important aspect of microservices that we devote an entire
chapter to it (Chapter 7) in our book Software Architecture: The Hard
Parts.

Another common risk in microservices is creating too much communication
between services. The fine-grained nature of microservices, combined
with tight bounded contexts, necessitates that services within a
microservices ecosystem will invariably need to communicate with one
another. This communication may be due to workflow processing (such as
choreography or AWS step functions for serverless microservices) or
needing another service’s data (due to the bounded context within each
service and its data). Regardless of the reason, take care to avoid too
much dynamic coupling and interservice communication. Again, this is
often the result of making services too fine-grained, and can be fixed
by combining services together into coarser-grained microservices.

Another risk in microservices is going overboard with sharing data.
While we’ve mentioned that it is possible (and sometimes necessary) to
share data in microservices, too much data sharing creates risks to the
system’s in change control, scalability, fault tolerance, and overall
agility—the things microservices does really well (see “Style
Characteristics”). Know when it’s necessary to share data and when to
fix data sharing through service consolidation.

A last risk often overlooked in the microservices architectural style is
that of reusing code and sharing functionality. Code reuse is a
necessary part of software development. However, reusing code and
functionality goes directly against the principles of microservices,
hence the term “share nothing” architecture described earlier in this
chapter. When an architect shares common functionality between services
through custom libraries (such as JAR files or DLLs), a part of the
bounded context falls apart. In other words, reused code is spread
across multiple bounded contexts, meaning that not all of the
functionality for that particular function or subdomain is contained
within its bounded context, and thus a change to shared code could break
services in other bounded contexts. While versioning does help address
this issue, sharing code nevertheless adds significant complication to a
microservices ecosystem.

Governance

Many of the governance rules and techniques used in microservices
address the common risks we described in the previous section.
Governance within a microservices architecture is largely about avoiding
structural decay.

First and foremost, architects should apply governance to monitor and
control the amount of static and dynamic coupling between services.
Recall from Chapter 7 that static coupling occurs when microservices
share common custom or third-party libraries, as well as in the form of
contracts when services need to communicate. Contracts are particularly
important: while architects can use asynchronous communication protocols
to dynamically decouple services, they might nevertheless still be
statically coupled by the contract used between them (regardless of
communication type).

A software bill of materials, deployment scripts, and
dependency-management tools can help architects to better understand and
govern the number of artifacts shared between services. While we cannot
prescribe exactly how much static coupling is too much, we recommend
striving to minimize coupling between services.

Governing dynamic coupling is much more difficult than governing static
coupling. Gathering proper metrics requires some creativity and
consistency. One common governance technique is to use logs to identify
calls to other services. As services make calls to internal or
third-party services, those services log the interactions along with
information about what service is being invoked, the protocol used, and
so on. Architects can analyze this information through fitness functions
to better understand dynamic coupling levels throughout the
microservices ecosystem. This approach, however, requires keen
governance to ensure each service is exposing this information through
logging in a consistent manner. A custom library (such as a JAR file or
DLL) is one way to provide a consistent API that all services can bind
to at compile time and use to ensure consistent logging.

Another way to gather dynamic coupling metrics in microservices is
through registry entries. Whenever the first instance of a service
starts, that service registers its interservice calls through some sort
of contract (such as JSON) to a custom configuration service or
configuration server, such as Apache ZooKeeper. The architect can then
query the configuration server to get a map of all interservice calls
throughout the microservices ecosystem, which they can use to govern and
control the amount of communication between services.

Team Topology Considerations

Since microservices architectures are domain partitioned, they work best
when teams are also aligned by domain area (such as cross-functional
teams with specialization). When a domain-based requirement comes along,
a domain-focused cross-functional team can work together on that feature
within a specific domain service, without interfering with other teams
or services. Conversely, technically partitioned teams (such as UI
teams, backend teams, database teams, and so on) do not work well with
this architectural style because of its domain partitioning. Assigning
domain-based requirements to a technically organized team requires a
level of interteam communication and collaboration that proves difficult
in most organizations.

Here are some considerations for architects who want to align a
microservices architecture with the specific team topologies outlined in
“Team Topologies and Architecture”:

Stream-aligned teams

    If the domain boundaries are properly aligned, stream-aligned teams
    work well with this architectural style, particularly if their
    streams are focused on a specific domain. However, microservices
    architecture becomes more challenging for teams whose streams cross
    multiple bounded contexts and services, outside of a particular
    subdomain or domain. In this case, we recommend analyzing the
    microservices’ bounded contexts and granularity and either
    realigning them to the streams or choosing a different architectural
    style.

Enabling teams

    Enabling teams are most effective within a microservices
    architecture when they can use shared services for specialized or
    cross-cutting concerns. Due to the high degree of modularity found
    in microservices, enabling teams can work independently from
    stream-aligned teams to provide additional specialized and shared
    functionality without getting in the way. Working with platform
    teams, they can also assist with creating the sidecar components
    that make up a service mesh (see “Operational Reuse”).

Complicated-subsystem teams

    Complicated-subsystem teams can leverage this architecture style’s
    service-level modularity to focus on complicated domain or subdomain
    processing, staying independent of other team members (and
    services).

Platform teams

    The high degree of modularity found in microservices helps
    stream-aligned teams leverage the benefits of the platform-teams
    topology by utilizing common tools, services, APIs, and tasks. In
    many cases, platform teams (sometimes working with enabling teams)
    focus on creating and maintaining the cross-cutting operational
    functionality found in sidecars (see “Operational Reuse”) and the
    service mesh, freeing stream-aligned teams from these operational
    concerns.

Style Characteristics

The microservices architecture style offers several extremes on our
standard ratings scale, shown in Figure 18-16. A one-star rating means
the specific architecture characteristic isn’t well supported in the
architecture, whereas a five-star rating means the architecture
characteristic is one of the strongest features in the architecture
style. Definitions for each characteristic identified in the scorecard
can be found in Chapter 4.

Microservices offers notably high support for modern engineering
practices such as automated deployment and testability. Microservices
couldn’t exist without the DevOps revolution, with its relentless march
toward automating operational concerns.

[Microservices ratings]

Figure 18-16. Microservices characteristics ratings

The independent, single-purpose, and hence fine-grained nature of
services in this architectural style generally leads to high fault
tolerance, hence the high rating for this characteristic.

The other high points of this architecture are scalability, elasticity,
and evolvability. Some of the most scalable systems ever written have
used microservices to great success. Similarly, because this style
relies heavily on automation and intelligent integration with
operations, architects can build in support for elasticity. Because this
architecture favors high decoupling at an incremental level, it also
supports the modern business practice of evolutionary change, even at
the architecture level. Modern businesses move fast, and software
development has struggled to keep pace. An architecture structured with
extremely small, highly decoupled deployment units can support a faster
rate of change.

Performance is often an issue in microservices. Distributed
architectures must make many network calls to complete work, and that
has a high performance overhead. They must also invoke security checks
to verify identity and access for each endpoint, incurring more latency.
Microservices also suffers from data latency: when a request requires
multiple services to coordinate, that means multiple database calls.

For this reason, the microservices world has many architecture patterns
to increase performance, including intelligent data caching and
replication to prevent an excess of network calls. Performance is
another reason that microservices often use choreography rather than
orchestration: less coupling allows for faster communication and fewer
bottlenecks.

Microservices is decidedly a domain-partitioned architecture, where each
service boundary should correspond to domains. Thanks to the bounded
context, it also has the most distinct quanta of any modern
architecture—​in many ways, it exemplifies what the quantum measure
evaluates. The driving philosophy of extreme decoupling creates
headaches, but yields tremendous benefits when done well. As in any
architecture, architects must understand the rules to break them
intelligently.

Examples and Use Cases

Systems that have a high degree of functional and data modularity are
good candidates for the microservices architecture. A good use case that
exemplifies this style’s power is a medical monitoring system that
monitors a patient’s vital signs: their heart rate, blood pressure,
oxygen levels, and so on. Each vital sign the system monitors is a
separate, independent function that manages its own data, which fits
well with this architectural style and the bounded-context concept.

This patient-monitoring system reads inputs from patient-monitoring
devices, records vital signs, analyzes those vital signs for any issues
or discrepancies, and alerts a medical professional if it finds
problems. Each vital sign can be represented by a separate microservice
that is largely independent of other services and data. One exception to
this independence, however, would be if a particular vital sign (such as
heart rate) needed additional information from another vital sign (such
as a sleep-monitor service) to analyze its vital sign for warnings or
issues.

Figure 18-17 illustrates how this system might be designed using a
microservices architecture. Notice how each vital sign is implemented as
a separate microservice, with each maintaining its own data store for
vital-sign readings and historical data.

The alert functionality, which is common to all vital-signs services, is
represented by a shared service called Alert Staff. It alerts a nurse or
doctor if a particular service notices something wrong with a reading.
Each service asynchronously sends its latest vital-signs reading to a
monitor located in the patient’s room, represented by the
Display Vital Signs shared service.

[]

Figure 18-17. A patient medical-monitoring system implemented using a microservices architecture

This example clearly illustrates some of the strengths and advantages of
the microservices architecture. Take fault tolerance: if one of the
vital-sign services happens to crash or become unresponsive, all other
vital-sign monitoring services remain fully operational. This is
especially important in medical monitoring. Another superpower is
testability. If a developer performs some maintenance on the
blood-pressure monitoring service, the scope of testing is small enough
that they can be assured that this particular vital sign is fully
tested, and that the maintenance didn’t impact other vital-sign
services. Finally, a sign of evolvability (another microservices
superpower) is that the architect could easily add another vital-sign
monitor without affecting the other services.

We’ve touched on many of the significant aspects of microservices
architecture in this chapter, and there are many excellent resources you
can use to learn more. For a microservices deep dive, we recommend the
following:

- Building Microservices, 2nd Edition, by Sam Newman (O’Reilly, 2021)

- Building Micro-Frontends, 2nd Edition, by Luca Mezzalira (O’Reilly,
  2025)

- Microservices vs. Service-Oriented Architecture by Mark Richards
  (O’Reilly, 2016)

- Microservices AntiPatterns and Pitfalls by Mark Richards (O’Reilly,
  2016)

Chapter 19. Choosing the Appropriate Architecture Style

It depends! With all the choices available (and new ones arriving almost
daily), we would like to tell you which architecture style you should
use—​but we can’t. Nothing is more contextual to a number of factors
within an organization and what software it builds. Choosing an
architecture style represents the culmination of a whole process of
analysis and thought about trade-offs for architecture characteristics,
domain considerations, strategic goals, and a host of other things.
That’s why, as we said back in Chapter 2, it depends.

However contextual the decision is, this chapter offers some general
advice around choosing an appropriate architecture style.

Shifting “Fashion” in Architecture

The software industry’s preferences in architecture styles shift over
time, driven by a number of factors. These include:

Observations from the past

    New architecture styles generally arise from observations about past
    experiences, especially observations about pain points. Architects’
    experiences working with systems—which are often what lead us to
    become architects in the first place—influence our thoughts about
    future systems. New architecture designs often reflect fixes for the
    specific deficiencies encountered in past architecture styles. For
    example, after building architectures that centered on code reuse,
    architects realized the negative trade-offs and seriously rethought
    the implications of reusing code.

Changes in the ecosystem

    In the software development ecosystem, everything changes all the
    time. This constant change is so chaotic that it’s impossible to
    even predict what type of change will come next. Not too many years
    ago, no one knew what Kubernetes was, and now it is a daily feature
    of many developers’ lives. In a few more years, Kubernetes may be
    replaced with some other tool that hasn’t been written yet.

New capabilities

    Architects must keep a keen eye open not only for new tools but for
    new paradigms. When new capabilities arise, architecture can shift
    to an entirely new paradigm, rather than merely replacing one tool
    with another. For example, few anticipated the tectonic shift in the
    software development world caused by the advent of containers such
    as Docker. While that was an evolutionary step, it had an astounding
    impact on architects, tools, engineering practices, and so much
    more. Constant change in the ecosystem also regularly delivers new
    tools and capabilities. Even something that looks like a new
    one-of-something-we-already-have could include nuances that make it
    a game changer. New features don’t even have to rock the entire
    development world: a minor change that aligns exactly with an
    architect’s goals can change everything.

Acceleration

    Not only does the ecosystem constantly change, but change keeps
    getting faster and more pervasive. New tools create new engineering
    practices, which lead to new designs and capabilities, keeping
    software architects in a constant state of flux. The rise and
    influence of generative AI is an outstanding example of this
    constant evolution and corresponding unpredictability.

Domain changes

    The domains for which we write software constantly shift and change,
    as businesses evolve or merge with other companies.

Technology changes

    Organizations try to keep up with at least some technological
    changes, especially those with obvious bottom-line benefits.

External factors

    Many external factors only peripherally associated with software
    development can drive change within an organization. For example,
    architects and developers might be perfectly happy with a particular
    tool, but if its licensing cost becomes prohibitive, the business
    might be forced to migrate to another option.

Architects should understand current industry trends so they can make
intelligent decisions about which trends to follow and when to make
exceptions, regardless of how closely their organization follows current
architecture fashion.

Decision Criteria

When choosing an architectural style, architects must account for all
the various factors that contribute to the domain design structure.
Fundamentally, an architect designs two things: whatever domain has been
specified, and the structural elements required to make the system a
success (provided by architectural characteristics).

Only approach choosing an architectural style when you have sufficient
knowledge about the following factors:

The domain

    Understand as many important aspects of the business domain as you
    can, especially those that affect operational architecture
    characteristics. Architects don’t have to be subject matter experts,
    but should at least have a good general understanding of the major
    aspects of the domain under design. Other specialists, such as
    business analysts, can help you fill any gaps in your domain
    knowledge.

Architecture characteristics that impact structural decisions

    Identify and elucidate which architecture characteristics are needed
    to support the domain and other external factors by conducting an
    architectural characteristics analysis, one of the core activities
    in choosing a style.

    It’s possible to implement any of the generic architecture styles in
    pretty much any problem domain—generic implies that they are
    general-purpose, after all. The exceptions are domains that require
    special operational architectural characteristics, like a highly
    scalable auction site. However, in most cases, the real differences
    between architectural styles concern not the domain, but how well
    each style supports various architectural characteristics.

    You may have noticed that the star charts we’ve used in Part II of
    this book to compare each architecture style focus on architectural
    characteristics, not domains. This reflects the importance of
    understanding architectural characteristics when choosing a style.

Data architecture

    Architects and data developers must collaborate on databases,
    schemas, and other data-related concerns. Data architecture is a
    specialization in its own right, and we don’t cover it much in this
    book, outside of style-specific considerations. However, you need to
    understand the impact a given data design might have on your
    architectural design, particularly if the new system must interact
    with an older data architecture or one that’s already in use.

Cloud deployments

    Using the cloud as an architectural destination is the latest in a
    long line of fundamental shifts in where computation and data
    reside. The trade-offs involved in designing an application to run
    on-premises are quite different from those involved in designing one
    for the cloud. It’s important to know how much data the application
    will need to store and how much data can move around (which can
    incur significant costs), among a host of other concerns.

    The cloud is a great example of how sophisticated capabilities
    become commodities over time. A decade ago, building a highly
    elastic and scalable on-prem system required esoteric skills and was
    seen as almost magical. Now, architects can achieve the same results
    just by changing their cloud provider’s configuration parameters.

Organizational factors

    Many external factors influence design. For example, the cost of a
    particular cloud vendor may prevent a business from adopting what
    would otherwise be the ideal design. Likewise, knowing that the
    company plans to engage in mergers and acquisitions might encourage
    an architect to gravitate toward open solutions and integration
    architectures.

Knowledge of process, teams, and operational concerns

    Many specific project factors influence architects’ designs: the
    software development process, an architect’s interaction (or lack
    of) with operations, and the QA process. For example, if an
    organization lacks maturity in Agile engineering practices,
    architecture styles that rely on those practices for success (such
    as microservices) will present difficulties.

Domain/architecture isomorphism

    Architecture isomorphism is a fancy term for the generic “shape” of
    an architecture—in other words, the way its components depend on
    each other within the overall topology. The word isomorphism means
    “a map that preserves sets and relations among elements”; it derives
    from the Greek isos, meaning “equal,” and morph, meaning “form” or
    “shape.”

Architects think about the generic shape of the architecture when
considering how suitable it is. For example, consider the differences
between the two architecture isomorphism diagrams for the layered and
modular monolith architectural styles shown in Figure 19-1. The internal
shape of each architecture is apparent: separation by layers versus by
domains.

[Comparison between the isomorphic representations of layered and
modular monoliths]

Figure 19-1. Comparison between the isomorphic representations of layered and modular monoliths

The difference between monolithic and distributed is similarly clear
from isomorphic drawings, as illustrated in Figure 19-2. Here, the
distribution of core components makes the macro-level structure of the
architecture clear.

[Comparing the monolithic and distributed architecture styles]

Figure 19-2. Comparing isomorphic representations of monolithic and distributed architecture styles

Some problem domains match the topology of the architecture. For
instance, the microkernel architecture style is perfectly suited to
systems that require customizability—​the architect can design
customizations as plug-ins. For another example, a system designed for
genome analysis, which requires a large number of discrete operations,
might be a good fit for space-based architecture, which offers a large
number of discrete processors.

Similarly, some problem domains may be particularly ill-suited for
certain architecture styles. Highly scalable systems struggle with large
monolithic designs, because it’s difficult for a highly coupled code
base to support a large number of concurrent users. A problem domain
that includes a huge amount of semantic coupling would match poorly with
a highly decoupled, distributed architecture: for instance, an insurance
application consisting of multipage forms, each based on the context of
previous pages, is a highly coupled problem. It would be difficult to
model in a decoupled architecture like microservices. An intentionally
coupled architecture like service-based architecture would suit this
problem better.

Taking all these things into account, you must make several
determinations in choosing an architecture style:

Monolith versus distributed?

    Will a single set of architecture characteristics suffice for the
    design, or do different parts of the system need differing
    architecture characteristics? A single set implies that a monolith
    would be suitable (although other factors may suggest a distributed
    architecture); different sets of architecture characteristics imply
    a distributed architecture. The concept of architecture quantum
    (Chapter 7) is useful in making this determination.

Where should data live?

    If the architecture is monolithic, architects commonly assume it
    will use a single relational database, or perhaps a few of them. In
    a distributed architecture, you must decide which services should
    persist data, which also implies thinking about how data will flow
    through the architecture to build workflows. Consider both structure
    and behavior when designing architecture, and don’t be afraid to
    iterate on your design to find better combinations.

Should services communicate synchronously or asynchronously?

    Once you’ve determined where data should live, the next design
    consideration is communication between services—should it be
    synchronous or asynchronous? Synchronous communication is often more
    convenient, but it can mean trading off on scalability, reliability,
    and other desirable characteristics. Asynchronous communication can
    provide unique benefits in terms of performance and scale, but also
    plenty of headaches around data synchronization, deadlocks, race
    conditions, debugging, and so on. (We cover many of these issues in
    Chapter 15.)

Because synchronous communication presents fewer design, implementation,
and debugging challenges, we recommend defaulting to synchronous when
possible, and using asynchronous communication only when necessary.

Tip

Use synchronous communication by default, asynchronous when necessary.

The output of this design process is an architecture topology that
encompasses the chosen architecture style (and any hybridizations),
Architectural Decision Records (ADRs) about the parts of the design that
require the most effort, and architecture fitness functions to protect
important principles and operational architecture characteristics.

Monolith Case Study: Silicon Sandwiches

In the Silicon Sandwiches architecture kata in Chapter 5, after our
architecture characteristics analysis, we determined that a single
quantum was sufficient to implement the system. Since we were looking at
a simple application without a huge budget, the simplicity of a monolith
was appealing.

However, we created two different component designs for Silicon
Sandwiches: one domain partitioned, and another technically
partitioned—you might want to flip back to Chapter 5 if you want a
refresher. In this chapter, we return to those simple solutions to
create designs for each option and discuss their trade-offs. We’ll begin
with a monolithic architecture.

Modular Monolith

A modular monolith builds domain-centric components with a single
database, deployed as a single quantum; the modular monolith design for
Silicon Sandwiches appears in Figure 19-3.

This is a monolith with a single relational database, implemented with a
single web-based UI (with careful design considerations for mobile
devices) to keep overall cost down. Each of the domains we identified
appears as a component. If time and resources are sufficient, consider
separating the tables and other database assets in the same way as the
domain components, which would make it much easier to migrate this
architecture to a distributed architecture if future requirements
warrant it.

[Modular Silicon Sandwiches]

Figure 19-3. A modular monolith implementation of Silicon Sandwiches

Because the architecture style itself doesn’t inherently handle
customization, that feature should become part of the domain design. In
this case, the architect designs an Override endpoint, where developers
can upload individual customizations. Correspondingly, they must ensure
that every domain component references the Override component for each
customizable characteristic. (Checking this would be a perfect job for
an architectural fitness function.)

Microkernel

One of the architecture characteristics we identified in Silicon
Sandwiches was customizability. Figure 19-4 uses domain/architecture
isomorphism to show how this could be implemented using a microkernel
architecture.

[Microkernel Silicon Sandwiches]

Figure 19-4. A microkernel implementation of Silicon Sandwiches

In Figure 19-4, the core system consists of the domain components and a
single relational database. As in the modular monolith design, careful
synchronization between the domains and the data design will facilitate
migrating the core to a distributed architecture in the future. Each
customization appears in a plug-in; the common ones appear in a single
set of plug-ins (with a corresponding database) and a series of local
ones, each with its own data. Because none of the plug-ins need to be
coupled to the other plug-ins, they can each maintain their data and
remain decoupled.

The other unique element of this design is that it utilizes the Backends
for Frontends (BFF) pattern, making the API layer a thin microkernel
adapter in addition to the core architecture. The API layer supplies
general information from the backend, which the BFF adapters translate
into a suitable format for the frontend device. For example, the BFF for
iOS takes the generic backend output and customizes the data format,
pagination, latency, and other factors to fit what the iOS native
application expects. Building each BFF adapter allows for the richest
possible user interfaces and makes it possible to expand the
architecture to support other devices in the future—​one of the benefits
of the microkernel style.

Communication within either of these two Silicon Sandwich architectures
can be synchronous, since the architecture doesn’t require extreme
performance or elasticity requirements, and none of the operations will
be lengthy.

Distributed Case Study: Going, Going, Gone

The Going, Going, Gone (GGG) kata from Chapter 8 presents some more
interesting architectural challenges. Based on the component analysis in
“Case Study: Going, Going, Gone—Discovering Components”, we know that
different parts of this architecture need different characteristics. For
example, the need for availability and scalability will differ between
roles like auctioneer and bidder.

The system requirements for GGG also explicitly state some ambitious
expectations for scale, elasticity, performance, and other tricky
operational architecture characteristics. The architecture pattern
should allow for a high degree of customization at a fine-grained level.
Of the candidate distributed architectures, low-level event-driven
architecture and microservices are the two that best match most of the
required architecture characteristics. Of the two, microservices is
better at supporting variation among operational architecture
characteristics. (Purely event-driven architectures typically separate
pieces not by their architecture characteristics, but by whether they
use orchestrated or choreographed communication.)

Achieving the stated performance goal would be a challenge in
microservices, but the best way to address any weak point of an
architecture is by designing to accommodate it. For example, while
microservices by its nature offers a high degree of scalability, it
often develops specific performance issues caused by too much
orchestration or too aggressive data separation, among other issues.

[Microservices version of Going, Going, Gone]

Figure 19-5. A microservices implementation of Going, Going, Gone

In Figure 19-5, each identified component becomes a service in the
architecture, matching components with service granularity. GGG has
three distinct user interfaces:

Bidder

    The numerous bidders for the online auction.

Auctioneer

    One per auction.

Streamer

    A service responsible for streaming video and bids to the bidders.
    This is a read-only stream, which allows for optimizations that
    wouldn’t be available if updates were necessary.

The following services appear in this design for the GGG architecture:

Bid Capture

    Captures online bidder entries and asynchronously sends them to
    Bid Tracker. This service needs no persistence because it acts as a
    conduit for the online bids.

Bid Streamer

    Streams the bids back to online participants in a high-performance,
    read-only stream.

Bid Tracker

    Tracks bids from both Auctioneer Capture and Bid Capture, unifying
    these two information streams and ordering the bids in as close to
    real time as possible. Both inbound connections to this service are
    asynchronous, allowing the developers to use message queues as
    buffers to handle very different message flow rates.

Auctioneer Capture

    Captures bids for the auctioneer. The analysis in “Case Study:
    Going, Going, Gone—Discovering Components” showed that the
    architecture characteristics of Bid Capture and Auctioneer Capture
    are quite different, leading us to separate them.

Auction Session

    Manages the workflow of individual auctions.

Payment

    Third-party payment provider that handles payment information after
    Auction Session completes the auction.

Video Capture

    Captures the video stream of the live auction.

Video Streamer

    Streams the auction video to online bidders.

We were careful to identify both synchronous and asynchronous
communication styles in this architecture. The choice of asynchronous
communication was primarily to accommodate operational architecture
characteristics varying between services. For example, if the Payment
service can only process a new payment every 500 ms, and a large number
of auctions end at the same time, using synchronous communication
between the services would cause timeouts and other reliability
headaches. Message queues add reliability to a critical but fragile part
of the architecture.

[]

Figure 19-6. The quantum boundaries for GGG

In the final analysis, this design resolved to five quanta, identified
in Figure 19-6, roughly corresponding to the services: Payment,
Auctioneer, Bidder, Bidder Streams, and Bid Tracker. Multiple instances
are indicated in the diagram by stacks of containers. Using quantum
analysis at the component-design stage made it easier to identify
service, data, and communication boundaries.

Note that this isn’t the “correct” design for GGG, and it’s certainly
not the only one. We don’t even suggest that it’s the best possible
design—but it seems to have the least worst set of trade-offs. Choosing
microservices, then using events and messages intelligently, allows this
architecture to get the most out of a generic architecture pattern while
still building a foundation for future development and expansion.

Chapter 20. Architectural Patterns

We distinguish between architectural styles and architectural patterns
in Chapter 9: to recap, styles are named topologies that architects
distinguish by differences in topologies, physical architectures,
deployments, communication styles, and data topologies. Architecture
patterns, inspired by the often-mentioned book Design Patterns, are
contextualized solutions to problems.

It’s important to distinguish between architecture patterns and “best
practices” (discussed in more depth in Chapter 21). Calling something a
“best practice” implies that the architect has a clear duty, anytime a
particular situation arises, to utilize that practice. Calling it a
better practice would at least brook some argument, but no—we call it
the best practice, allowing architects to shut off their brains and
always follow the same solution.

It’s also important to distinguish between patterns and solutions. Many
tools, frameworks, libraries, and other software-development artifacts
encapsulate one or more patterns—depending on how they are implemented,
with differing degrees of fidelity and intermingling with other
patterns. Focus on identifying the most appropriate pattern first, then
choose the most appropriate implementation for it.

We provide a smattering of representative patterns in this chapter to
contrast and provide context for the styles we’ve introduced in Part II
of this book. Our first example, an architecture reuse pattern,
clarifies the difference between patterns and implementations.

Reuse

The split between domain coupling and operational coupling is a common
architectural concern in distributed architectures such as
microservices.

Separating Domain and Operational Coupling

One of the design goals of microservices architectures is a high degree
of decoupling, often manifested in the advice: “duplication is
preferable to coupling.”

Let’s say that two services need to pass information about customer
profiles back and forth, but the architecture’s domain-driven bounded
context insists that implementation details should remain private to
each service. A common solution is to give each service its own internal
representations of entities such as Profile, then passing that
information in loosely coupled ways, such as name-value pairs in JSON.
This lets each service change its internal representation—including the
technology stack—at will, without breaking the integration. Developers
generally frown on duplicating code, which can cause issues with
synchronization, semantic drift, and more, but some things are worse
than duplication…and in microservices, that includes coupling.

Architects who design microservices generally resign themselves to the
reality that sometimes they have to duplicate implementations to
preserve decoupling. But what about capabilities that benefit from high
coupling? Each service should have certain common operational
capabilities, such as monitoring, logging, authentication and
authorization, and circuit breakers. However, allowing each team to
manage these dependencies often descends into chaos.

For example, consider a company trying to choose one standard monitoring
solution for all of its services to make it easier to operationalize
them. The architect decides to make each team responsible for
implementing monitoring for its service: the Payment service team, the
Inventory service team, and so on. But how can the operations team be
sure that each team actually did this? Also, what about issues such as
unified upgrades? If the standardized monitoring tool needs an upgrade
across the organization, how should the teams all coordinate that?

Hexagonal architecture

In the Hexagonal architecture pattern, shown in Figure 20-1, the domain
logic resides in the center of the hexagon, which is surrounded by ports
and adapters connected to other parts of the ecosystem (in fact, this
pattern is alternately known as the Ports and Adapters pattern). A
visual representation of this pattern appears in Figure 20-1.

[The Hexagonal architecture pattern]

Figure 20-1. The Hexagonal architecture pattern

Sharp-eyed readers may notice that only four of the hexagon’s six sides
are used. This pattern’s creator, Alistair Cockburn, initially drew it
as a hexagon and called it the Hexagonal architecture pattern. He almost
instantly regretted it, since the name Ports and Adapters is more
descriptive, but it was too late. Too many architects thought
“Hexagonal” sounded cool, so the name stuck.

Mistaking the pattern for the implementation is a common hazard, and
this is a good example. The Hexagonal architecture has a potentially
serious flaw when used to describe microservices, but only for those who
understand the pattern’s original intent. Hexagonal architecture
predates modern microservices, but there are many similarities between
them. There’s also one significant difference: data fidelity. Hexagonal
architecture treats the database as just another adapter that can be
plugged in. It didn’t include the data schema as business logic, because
of the misperception (which was common at the time that the Hexagonal
pattern name was coined) that the database was an entirely separate
piece of machinery. Eric Evans had the insight to correct this mistake
in his book Domain-Driven Design by recognizing that, regardless of
where they reside, database schemas must change to reflect the system’s
business logic.

This makes the Hexagonal pattern a constant source of confusion among
architects. Whenever someone uses it, are they describing the separation
of operational and domain concerns, or are they referring to the literal
pattern, which would isolate the data and therefore violate a core
microservices design principle? Using the pattern name as shorthand for
“separation of domain and operational concerns” is fine, as long as it
isn’t misleading in context. However, architects today have no need for
this implementation. We now have a more suitable mechanism to implement
the Hexagonal pattern: the Service Mesh pattern.

Service Mesh

Back in “Operational Reuse”, we described the common architectural
approach to separation of technical concerns from domain concerns: using
the Sidecar and Service Mesh patterns.

The Sidecar pattern isn’t just a way to decouple operational
capabilities from domains—​it’s an orthogonal reuse pattern to address a
specific kind of coupling (see “Orthogonal Coupling”). Often,
architectural solutions require several types of coupling, such as our
current example of domain versus operational coupling. An Orthogonal
Reuse pattern presents a way to reuse some aspect represented by one or
more concerns in the architecture that doesn’t fit within the preferred
hierarchical organization. For example, microservices architectures are
organized around domains, but operational coupling requires cutting
across those domains. A sidecar allows an architect to isolate those
concerns in a cross-cutting, but consistent, layer through the
architecture.

Orthogonal Coupling

In mathematics, two lines are orthogonal if they intersect at right
angles, which also implies independence. In software architecture, two
parts of an architecture may be orthogonally coupled: they may have two
distinct purposes that must still intersect to form a complete solution.
The obvious example from this chapter is an operational concern such as
monitoring, which is necessary but independent from domain behavior,
like catalog checkout. Recognizing orthogonal coupling allows architects
to find the intersection points that cause the least entanglement
between concerns.

While the Sidecar pattern offers a nice abstraction, it has trade-offs
like all other architectural approaches, as shown in Table 20-1.

  Advantages                                             Disadvantages
  ------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------
  Offers a consistent way to create isolated coupling    Must implement a sidecar per platform
  Allows consistent infrastructure coordination          Sidecar component may grow large/complex
  Ownership per team, centralized, or some combination   Implementation “drift” between independent teams

  : Table 20-1. Trade-offs for the Sidecar and Service Mesh patterns
  {#table-replication-mesh}

Both the Hexagonal and Service Mesh patterns illustrate ways to
implement the reuse pattern to separate domain from operational
concerns. The Hexagonal implementation is general purpose, while the
Service Mesh is well suited to microservices and other distributed
architectures. The key for architects is to identify the pattern
first—​separation—​and then decide how best to implement it in their
architecture.

Communication

Many architecture patterns, including communication patterns, come from
event-driven architecture and apply to any distributed architecture that
communicates via messages and/or events, such as discussed in Chapters
15 and 18. In fact, you’ve seen examples of communication in each of
those chapters—​we just haven’t identified them as particular patterns
because architects commonly implement patterns without realizing it.
Patterns are, after all, solutions to common problems.

Orchestration Versus Choreography

Consider two communication patterns you’ve already seen, in both
“Mediated Event-Driven Architecture” and “Choreography and
Orchestration”: choreography and orchestration, as summarized in
Figure 20-2.

[Illustration of orchestration and choreography in a microservices
architecture]

Figure 20-2. Orchestration and choreography in a microservices architecture

In each of the isomorphic workflows shown in Figure 20-2, four domain
services (Services A through D) need to collaborate to form a workflow.
In the orchestration case, there’s also a separate service that acts as
a coordinator for the workflow: the orchestrator.

While we’ve described this communication as both orchestration and
mediation, the pattern remains the same. Architects benefit from being
able to recognize patterns lurking inside implementations because their
trade-offs become more apparent.

Notice that when we described the trade-offs for mediation and
orchestration, we touched on many of the same issues. We’ll summarize
the advantages here:

Centralized workflow

    As complexity goes up, architects benefit from utilizing a unified
    component for state, behavior, and boundary conditions.

Error handling

    Error handling, a major part of many domain workflows, is assisted
    by having a state owner for the workflow.

Recoverability

    Because an orchestrator monitors the state of the workflow, if one
    or more domain services suffers from a short-term outage, the
    architect can add logic to retry.

State management

    Having an orchestrator makes the state of the workflow queryable,
    providing a place for other workflows and other transient states.

General disadvantages of orchestration include:

Responsiveness

    All communication must go through the orchestrator, which has the
    potential to create a throughput bottleneck that can harm
    responsiveness.

Fault tolerance

    While orchestration enhances recoverability for domain services, it
    creates a potential single point of failure for the workflow. This
    can be addressed with redundancy, but that also adds more
    complexity.

Scalability

    This communication style doesn’t scale as well as choreography
    because the orchestrator adds more coordination points, which cuts
    down on potential parallelism.

Service coupling

    Having a central orchestrator creates tighter coupling between it
    and the domain components, which is sometimes necessary but is
    frowned upon in microservices architectures.

Similarly, we discussed choreography in both microservices and
event-driven architectures. The trade-offs for choreographed workflows
include:

Responsiveness

    This communication style has fewer single chokepoints, thus offering
    more opportunities for parallelism.

Scalability

    The lack of coordination points like orchestrators allows more
    independent scaling.

Fault tolerance

    The lack of a single orchestrator allows the architect to use
    multiple instances to enhance fault tolerance. They could, of
    course, create multiple orchestrators, but because all communication
    must go through them, multiple orchestrators are more sensitive to
    the workflow’s overall level of fault tolerance.

Service decoupling

    No orchestrator means less coupling.

Disadvantages of the choreography communication style include:

Distributed workflow

    Having no workflow owner makes managing errors and other boundary
    conditions more difficult.

State management

    Having no centralized state holder hinders ongoing state management.

Error handling

    Error handling is more difficult without an orchestrator because the
    domain services must have more workflow knowledge.

Recoverability

    Recoverability becomes more difficult without an orchestrator to
    attempt retries and other remediation efforts.

These two patterns nicely illustrate our distinction between styles and
patterns. Any distributed architecture can use any of these
communication patterns, and architects should understand how to evaluate
their trade-offs. Remember our Second Law of Software Architecture: you
can’t just do trade-off analysis once and be done with it. They also
illustrate that common patterns exist everywhere, which is why they are
common.

CQRS

Another common communication pattern that appears in many distributed
architectures (and a few monolithic ones) is
Command-Query-Responsibility-Segregation (CQRS). This simple
communication and data pattern splits a commonly monolithic
communication with a database into two, illustrated in Figure 20-3.

[Client/server versus CQRS]

Figure 20-3. Client/server versus CQRS

In Figure 20-3, the structure on the left illustrates a common
client/server data interaction, where the application queries the
database and performs transactional writes by utilizing the database as
part of the application infrastructure. While this is a common pattern,
some systems have stark differences between read and write volumes, or
want to isolate reads from writes for the sake of security and other
concerns. For those systems, CQRS, illustrated on the right in
Figure 20-3, solves this problem.

CQRS isolates writes into one datastore (usually a database; sometimes
another infrastructure, such as a durable message queue), which
synchronizes the data to another database (usually asynchronously),
which services read requests.

By separating reads and writes, architects can isolate different
architectural characteristics, depending on the data. This also allows
them to use different data models for each database if necessary.

CQRS is a good example of a data communication pattern that facilitates
differing architectural characteristics for different types of data
capabilities, security concerns, or other factors that benefit from
physical separation.

Infrastructure

Software architecture has patterns in every place where teams have found
useful contextualized solutions to common problems, and these patterns
often intersect with other parts of the ecosystem (see Chapter 26 for a
complete discussion).

Architects care about coupling: between components, data elements,
APIs…and infrastructure, as exemplified by the Broker-Domain pattern.

Broker-Domain Pattern

In this section, we’ll look at the same order-placement workflow, this
time implemented with an event-driven architecture, as illustrated in
Figure 20-4.

[An order placement workflow implemented in EDA]

Figure 20-4. An order placement workflow implemented in EDA

As you’ve seen, EDA uses events to communicate between services, so
event handlers need to subscribe to the proper services to build the
workflow. Event handlers are implemented by brokers, which are part of
the infrastructure of the architecture. In EDA, the topic or queue is
typically owned by the sender: for example, Payment needs to know a
topic’s address to subscribe to it.

In Figure 20-5, OrderPlacement “owns” the broker to which other
processors will subscribe; in other words, the infrastructure required
to support this service includes the broker. If a system uses only one
broker for all communication, all of its services depend on a single
part of the infrastructure.

[In event-driven choreography, the topic or queue is typically owned by
the sender]

Figure 20-5. In event-driven choreography, the topic or queue is typically owned by the sender

The infrastructure for the workflow depicted in Figure 20-6 includes a
single broker, meaning that each event processor “knows” where to go to
subscribe to workflow collaborators. A single broker also allows a
single place for logging, monitoring, and other governance.

[Using one broker for the entire workflow]

Figure 20-6. Using one broker for the entire workflow

However, one of the goals of a distributed architecture is to improve
fault tolerance. What happens if the single broker in Figure 20-6 goes
down? The entire workflow stops working. Another potential issue is
scale. If all messages must go through a single broker, there’s a risk
that the broker will become swamped as the volume of messages increases.

An alternative approach is the Domain-Broker pattern, which treats
infrastructure in a similar manner to the granularity of domains.
Consider Figure 20-7.

[Utilizing the Domain-Broker pattern to assign ownership to
infrastructure]

Figure 20-7. Utilizing the Domain-Broker pattern to assign ownership to infrastructure

In the alternative architecture shown in Figure 20-7, each group of
related services shares a broker, reflecting the architecture’s overall
domain partitioning. This solution still allows good discovery while
increasing fault tolerance, scalability, elasticity, and a host of other
operational architectural characteristics. Note, however, that neither
of these approaches is a “best practice.” The Single-Broker pattern’s
trade-offs appear in Table 20-2.

  Advantages                      Disadvantages
  ------------------------------- -------------------
  Centralized discovery           Fault tolerance
  Least possible infrastructure   Throughput limits

  : Table 20-2. Single-Broker pattern trade-offs {#tbl-single-broker
  .tradeoff}

The Domain-Broker pattern also features trade-offs, shown in Table 20-3.

  Advantages                  Disadvantages
  --------------------------- -------------------------------------------
  Better isolation            More difficult discovery of queues/topics
  Matches domain boundaries   More infrastructure = more expensive
  More scalable               More moving parts to maintain

  : Table 20-3. Domain-Broker pattern trade-offs {#tbl-domain-broker
  .tradeoff}

Architects must balance discovery with the need to isolate domains as
they decide which of these infrastructure patterns make the most sense
for their particular systems.

Part III. Techniques and Soft Skills

An effective software architect must not only understand the technical
aspects of software architecture, but also the primary techniques and
soft skills necessary to think like an architect, guide development
teams, and effectively communicate the architecture to various
stakeholders. This section of the book addresses the key techniques and
soft skills necessary to become an effective software architect.

Chapter 21. Architectural Decisions

One of the core expectations of an architect is to make architectural
decisions. Architectural decisions usually involve the structure of the
application or system, but they may involve technology decisions as
well, particularly when those technology decisions impact architectural
characteristics. Whatever the context, a good architectural decision is
one that helps guide development teams in making the right technical
choices. Making architectural decisions involves gathering enough
relevant information, justifying the decision, documenting the decision,
and effectively communicating that decision to the right stakeholders.

Architectural Decision Antipatterns

The programmer Andrew Koenig defines an antipattern as something that
seems like a good idea when you begin, but leads you into trouble.
Another definition of an antipattern is a repeatable process that
produces negative results. The three most common architectural decision
antipatterns that can (and usually do) emerge when an architect makes
decisions are the Covering Your Assets antipattern, the Groundhog Day
antipattern, and the Email-Driven Architecture antipattern. These three
antipatterns usually follow a progressive flow: overcoming the Covering
Your Assets antipattern leads to the Groundhog Day antipattern, and
overcoming that leads to the Email-Driven Architecture antipattern.
Making effective and accurate architectural decisions requires
overcoming all three.

The Covering Your Assets Antipattern

The Covering Your Assets antipattern occurs when an architect avoids or
defers making an architectural decision out of fear of making the wrong
choice. There are two ways to overcome this. The first is to wait until
the last responsible moment to make an important architectural decision:
that is, when there’s enough information to justify and validate the
decision, but not so long that it holds up development teams or sends
the architect into the Analysis Paralysis antipattern, where they are
stuck forever in analyzing the decision. A good way to determine the
last responsible moment is to ask when the cost of deferring the
decision exceeds the risk associated with deciding. As illustrated in
Figure 21-1, notice that in the early stages of the decision-making time
scale, the cost (denoted by the solid line) is low because there’s less
time spent on making the decision, but the risk (denoted by the dotted
line) is high because less is known about the problem or solution.
Spending more time deferring the decision increases the cost, but also
reduces risk because the architect can make a more complete analysis of
the problem and possible alternatives. The time to make a decision is
where these two factors intersect and the cost increase exceeds the
reduced risk.

[Last responsible moment]

Figure 21-1. Last responsible moment

Another way to avoid this antipattern is to collaborate with development
teams to ensure that the decision can be implemented as expected. This
is vitally important because no architect can possibly know every single
detail about any issue associated with a particular technology. By
closely collaborating with development teams, the architect can respond
quickly, gain more insight, and reduce the risk of the decision being
the incorrect one.

To illustrate this point: suppose you, as the architect, decide that all
product-related reference data (such as product description, weight, and
dimensions) should be cached in all service instances needing that
information. You decide that this will be done using a read-only
replicated cache, with the primary cache owned by the Catalog service.
(A replicated, or in-memory, cache means that if there are any changes
to product information or new products added, the Catalog service
updates its cache, which is then replicated to all other services
requiring that data through a replicated cache product.) Your
justification for this decision is to reduce coupling between the
services and to share data effectively without having to make an
interservice call. However, the development teams implementing this
architectural decision find that, due to some services’ scalability
requirements, this decision would require more in-process memory than is
available. Because you are closely collaborating with these teams, you
quickly become aware of the issue and adjust your architectural decision
accordingly.

Groundhog Day Antipattern

The Groundhog Day antipattern occurs when people don’t know why an
architect made a particular decision, so they keep discussing it over
and over and over, never coming to a final resolution or agreement. It
gets its name from the 1993 movie Groundhog Day, in which Bill Murray’s
character must relive February 2 over and over, every day.

This antipattern occurs because architects fail to justify their
decision (or fail to justify it completely). It’s important to provide
both technical and business justifications for an architectural
decision.

For example, say you decide to break apart a monolithic application into
separate services. Your justification is to decouple the functional
aspects of the application so that each part of the application uses
fewer virtual machine resources and can be maintained and deployed
separately. While this is a good technical justification, what’s missing
is the business justification—in other words, why should the business
pay for this architectural refactoring? A good business justification
for this decision might be to deliver new business functionality faster,
thereby improving time to market. Another might be to reduce the costs
associated with developing and releasing new features.

Providing the business value is vitally important when justifying an
architectural decision. It is also a good litmus test for determining
whether the architectural decision should be made in the first place. If
it doesn’t provide any business value, perhaps the architect should
reconsider the decision.

Four of the most common business justifications are cost, time to
market, user satisfaction, and strategic positioning. Consider what’s
important to the business stakeholders. Justifying a particular decision
based on cost savings alone might not be the right call if the business
stakeholders are more concerned about time to market.

Email-Driven Architecture Antipattern

Once an architect makes and fully justifies their decisions, another
architecture antipattern often emerges: Email-Driven Architecture. This
antipattern occurs when people lose or forget an architectural decision,
or don’t even know that it’s been made and therefore cannot possibly
implement it. Overcoming this antipattern is all about communicating
architectural decisions effectively. Email is a great tool for
communication, but it makes a poor document repository system.

Fortunately, an architect can easily avoid the Email-Driven Architecture
antipattern by learning how to communicate architectural decisions
effectively. First, be sure not to include the decision in the body of
an email. Doing so creates multiple systems of record for that decision,
because each email contains a copy of the decision rather than having it
in only one place. Many such emails leave out important details about
the decision (including the justification), creating the Groundhog Day
antipattern all over again. Also, if that architectural decision is ever
changed or superseded, it’s difficult to know whether all the relevant
people receive the revised decision.

A better approach is to mention only the nature and context of the
decision in the body of the email and provide a link to the single
system of record, where the architectural decision and corresponding
details are stored (whether that’s a link to a wiki page or a reference
to a document in a filesystem).

Consider the following email about an architectural decision:

  “Hi, Sandra, I’ve made an important decision regarding communication
  between services that directly impacts you. Please see the decision
  using the following link…​.”

Notice that, in the phrasing of the beginning of the first sentence, the
context is mentioned (communication between services), but not the
actual decision itself. The second part of the first sentence is also
important: if an architectural decision doesn’t directly impact the
person, then why bother that person with it? This is a great litmus test
for determining which stakeholders (including developers) should be
notified directly of an architectural decision. The second sentence in
this example provides a link to the single location of the architectural
decision, providing a single system of record for decisions.

Architectural Significance

Many architects believe that if a decision involves a specific
technology, then it’s not an architectural decision, but rather a
technical decision. This is not always true. If an architect decides to
use a particular technology because it directly supports a particular
architecture characteristic (such as performance or scalability), then
it’s still an architectural decision.

Michael Nygard, a well-known software architect and author of the second
edition of Release It! (Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2018), addresses the
problem of what decisions an architect should be responsible for (and
hence what constitutes an architectural decision) by coining the term
architecturally significant. According to Nygard, architecturally
significant decisions are those that affect a system’s structure,
non-functional characteristics, dependencies, interfaces, or
construction techniques.

Structure, in this context, refers to decisions that affect the
architecture patterns or styles being used. For example, a decision by
an architect to share code between a set of microservices impacts the
bounded context of the microservice, and thus affects the structure of
the system.

The system’s non-functional characteristics are the architectural
characteristics that are important for the system being developed or
maintained. For example, if a choice of technology affects performance,
and performance is an important aspect of the application, that choice
becomes an architectural decision, even though it may specify a
particular product, framework, or technology.

Dependencies refer to the coupling points between components and/or
services within the system. Dependencies can affect architecture
characteristics such as scalability, modularity, agility, testability,
reliability, and so on, so decisions about dependencies become
architectural decisions.

Interfaces refer to how services and components are accessed and
orchestrated: usually through a gateway, integration hub, service bus,
adapter, or API proxy. Making decisions about interfaces usually
involves defining contracts, including versioning and deprecation
strategies. Interfaces impact others using the system and hence are
architecturally significant.

Finally, construction techniques refer to decisions about platforms,
frameworks, tools, and even processes that, although technical in
nature, might impact some aspect of the architecture.

Architectural Decision Records

One of the most effective ways of documenting architectural decisions is
through Architectural Decision Records (ADRs). Michael Nygard first
evangelized ADRs in a 2011 blog post, and in 2017, Thoughtworks
Technology Radar recommended the technique for widespread adoption.

An ADR consists of a short text file (usually one to two pages long)
describing a specific architectural decision. While ADRs can be written
using plain text or in a wiki page template, they are usually written in
some sort of text document format, like AsciiDoc or Markdown.

Tooling is also available for managing ADRs. Nat Pryce, coauthor of
Growing Object-Oriented Software, Guided by Tests (Addison-Wesley,
2009), has written an open source tool called ADR Tools that provides a
command-line interface to manage ADRs, including numbering schemes,
locations, and superseded logic. Micha Kops, a software engineer from
Germany, provides some great examples of using ADR tools to manage
architectural decision records.

Basic Structure

The basic structure of an ADR consists of five main sections: Title,
Status, Context, Decision, and Consequences. We usually add two
additional sections as part of the basic structure: Compliance and
Notes. The Compliance section is a space to think about and document how
the architectural decision will be governed and enforced (manually or
through automated fitness functions). The Notes section is a space to
include metadata about the decision, such as the author, who approved
it, when it was created, and so on.

It’s fine to extend this basic structure (as illustrated in Figure 21-2)
to include any other needed section. Just keep the template consistent
and concise. A good example of this might be to add an Alternatives
section analyzing all the other possible solutions.

[Basic ADR structure]

Figure 21-2. Basic ADR structure

Title

ADR titles are usually numbered sequentially and contain a short phrase
describing the architectural decision. For example, an ADR title
describing a decision to use asynchronous messaging between the Order
service and the Payment service might read: “42. Use of Asynchronous
Messaging Between Order and Payment Services.” The title should be short
and concise, but descriptive enough to remove any ambiguity about the
nature and context of the decision.

Status

Every ADR has one of three statuses: Proposed, Accepted, or Superseded.
The Proposed status means the decision must be approved by a
higher-level decision maker or some sort of architectural governance
body (such as an architecture review board). Accepted means the decision
has been approved and is ready for implementation. Superseded means the
decision has been changed and superseded by another ADR. The Superseded
status always assumes that the prior ADR’s status was Accepted; in other
words, a Proposed ADR would never be superseded by another ADR; it would
be modified until Accepted.

The Superseded status is a powerful way of keeping historical records of
what decisions have been made, why they were made at the time, what the
new decision is, and why it was changed. Usually, when an ADR has been
superseded, it is marked with the number of the decision that superseded
it. Similarly, the decision that supersedes another ADR is marked with
the number of the ADR it superseded.

For example, let’s say ADR 42 (“Use of Asynchronous Messaging Between
Order and Payment Services”) is in Approved status. Due to later changes
to the implementation and location of the Payment service, you decide
that REST should now be used between the two services. You therefore
create a new ADR (number 68) to document this changed decision. The
corresponding statuses look as follows:

  ADR 42. Use of Asynchronous Messaging Between Order and Payment
  Services

  Status: Superseded by 68

  ADR 68. Use of REST Between Order and Payment Services

  Status: Accepted, supersedes 42

The link and history trail between ADRs 42 and 68 lets you avoid the
inevitable “what about using messaging?” question regarding ADR 68.

ADRs and Request for Comments (RFC)

Sending a draft ADR out or comments can help an architect validate their
assumptions and assertions with a larger audience of stakeholders. An
effective way of engaging developers and initiating collaboration is
creating a new kind of status called Request for Comments (RFC) and
specifying a deadline for reviewers to complete their feedback. Once
that date is reached, the architect can analyze the comments, make any
necessary adjustments to the decision, make the final decision, and set
the status to Proposed (or Accepted, if the architect has authority to
approve the decision).

An ADR with RFC status would look as follows:

STATUS
Request For Comments, Deadline 09 JAN 2026

Another significant aspect of the Status section of an ADR is that it
forces the architect and their boss or lead architect to discuss the
criteria for approving an architectural decision and determine whether
the architect can do so on their own, or whether it must be approved
through a higher-level architect, architecture review board, or some
other governing body.

Three good starting places for these conversations are cost, cross-team
impact, and security. Cost should include software purchase or licensing
fees, additional hardware costs, and the overall level of effort to
implement the architectural decision. To estimate this, multiply the
estimated number of hours to implement the architectural decision by the
company’s standard full-time equivalency (FTE) rate. The project owner
or project manager usually has the FTE amount. This conversation might
lead everyone to agree that, for example, if the cost of the
architectural decision exceeds a certain amount, then it must be set to
a Proposed status and approved by someone else. If the architectural
decision impacts other teams or systems or has any sort of security
implications, then it must be approved by a higher-level governing body
or lead architect.

Once the team establishes and agrees on the criteria and corresponding
limits (such as “costs exceeding $5,000 must be approved by the
architecture review board”), document it well so that all architects
creating ADRs will know when they can and cannot approve their own
architectural decisions.

Context

The Context section of an ADR specifies the forces at play. In other
words, “What situation is forcing me to make this decision?” This
section of the ADR allows the architect to describe the specific
circumstances and concisely elaborate on the possible alternatives. If
the architect is required to document the analysis of each alternative
in detail, add an Alternatives section rather than including that
analysis in the Context section.

The Context section also provides a place to document a specific area of
the architecture itself. By describing the context, the architect is
also describing the architecture. Using the example from the prior
section, the Context section might read as follows: “The Order service
must pass information to the Payment service to pay for an order
currently being placed. This could be done using REST or asynchronous
messaging.” Notice that this concise statement specifies not only the
scenario, but also the alternatives considered.

Decision

The Decision section of the ADR contains a description of the
architectural decision, along with a full justification. Nygard
recommends stating architectural decisions in an affirmative, commanding
voice rather than a passive one. For example, the decision to use
asynchronous messaging between services would read, “We will use
asynchronous messaging between services.” This is much better than “I
think asynchronous messaging between services would be the best choice,”
which does not make clear what the decision is or if a decision has even
been made—only the opinion of the architect.

One of the most powerful aspects of the Decision section of ADRs is that
it lets the architect emphasize the justification for the decision.
Understanding why a decision was made is far more important than
understanding how something works. This helps developers and other
stakeholders better understand the rationale behind a decision, and
therefore makes them more likely to agree with it.

To illustrate this point, let’s say you decide to use Google’s Remote
Procedure Call (gRPC) to communicate between two particular services to
reduce network latency due to very high responsiveness needs. Several
years later, a new architect on the team decides to use REST instead of
gRPC to make communications between services more consistent. Because
the new architect doesn’t understand why gRPC was chosen in the first
place, their decision ends up having a significant impact on latency,
causing timeouts in upstream systems. If the new architect had access to
an ADR, they would have understood that the original decision to use
gRPC was meant to reduce latency (at the cost of tightly coupled
services) and could have prevented this problem.

Consequences

Every decision an architect makes has some sort of impact, good or bad.
The Consequences section of an ADR forces an architect to describe the
overall impact of an architectural decision, allowing them to think
about whether the negative impacts outweigh the benefits.

This section is also a good place to document the trade-off analysis
performed during the decision-making process. For example, let’s say you
decide to use asynchronous (fire-and-forget) messaging for posting
reviews on a website. Your justification for this decision is to improve
responsiveness (from 3,100 milliseconds down to 25 milliseconds) because
users wouldn’t have to wait for the actual review to be posted—​only for
the message to be sent to a queue. One member of your development team
argues that this is a bad idea due to the complexity of the error
handling associated with an asynchronous request: “What happens if
someone posts a review with some bad words?” What this team member
doesn’t know is that you discussed that very problem with the business
stakeholders and other architects when analyzing the trade-offs of this
decision, and decided together that it was better to improve
responsiveness and deal with complex error handling rather than increase
the wait time and provide feedback as to whether the review post was
successful or not. If this decision was documented using an ADR, you
could have provided this trade-off analysis in the Consequences section,
preventing this sort of disagreement.

Compliance

The Compliance section is not one of the standard sections of an ADR,
but it’s one we highly recommend adding. The Compliance section states
how the architectural decision will be measured and governed. Will the
compliance check for this decision be manual, or can it be automated
using a fitness function? If it can be automated, the architect can
specify how the fitness function will be written, along with any other
changes to the code base needed to measure this architectural decision
for compliance.

For example, suppose you make the decision within a traditional n-tiered
layered architecture (as illustrated in Figure 21-3) that all shared
objects used by business objects in the Business layer must reside in
the Shared Services layer to isolate and contain shared functionality.

[Architectural Decision Example]

Figure 21-3. An example of an architectural decision

This architectural decision can be measured and governed using a host of
automation tools, including ArchUnit in Java and NetArchTest in C#. With
ArchUnit in Java, the automated fitness-function test for this
architectural decision might look like this:

    @Test
    public void shared_services_should_reside_in_services_layer() {
        classes().that().areAnnotatedWith(SharedService.class)
            .should().resideInAPackage("..services..")
            .check(myClasses);
    }

This automated fitness function would require writing new stories to
create a Java annotation (@SharedService) and add it to all shared
classes to support this method of governance.

Notes

Another section that is not part of a standard ADR but that we highly
recommend adding is a Notes section. This section includes various
metadata about the ADR:

- Original author

- Approval date

- Approved by

- Superseded date

- Last modified date

- Modified by

- Last modification

Even when storing ADRs in a version-control system (such as Git), it’s
useful to have additional metadata beyond what the repository can
support. We recommend adding this section regardless of how and where
the architect stores ADRs.

Example

Our example of the Going, Going, Gone (GGG) auction system includes
dozens of architectural decisions. Splitting up the bidder and
auctioneer user interfaces, using a hybrid architecture consisting of
event-driven and microservices, leveraging the Real-time Transport
Protocol (RTP) for video capture, using a single API Gateway, and using
separate queues for messaging are just a few of the architectural
decisions an architect would make. Every architectural decision an
architect makes, no matter how obvious, should be documented and
justified.

Figure 21-4 illustrates one of the architectural decisions within the
GGG auction system: using separate point-to-point queues between the bid
capture, bid streamer, and bid tracker services rather than a single
publish-and-subscribe topic (or even REST, for that matter).

[Example Architectural Decision]

Figure 21-4. Use of pub/sub between services

Without an ADR to justify this decision, others involved with designing
and developing this system might disagree and decide to implement it in
a different way.

The following is an example of an ADR for this architectural decision:

  ADR 76. Separate Queues for Bid Streamer and Bidder Tracker Services

  STATUS
  Accepted

  CONTEXT
  The Bid Capture service, upon receiving a bid, must forward that bid
  to the Bid Streamer service and the Bidder Tracker service. This could
  be done using a single topic (pub/sub), separate queues
  (point-to-point) for each service, or REST via the Online Auction API
  layer.

  DECISION
  We will use separate queues for the Bid Streamer and Bidder Tracker
  services.

  The Bid Capture service does not need any information from the
  Bid Streamer service or Bidder Tracker service (communication is only
  one-way).

  The Bid Streamer service must receive bids in the exact order they
  were accepted by the Bid Capture service. Using messaging and queues
  automatically guarantees the bid order for the stream by leveraging
  first-in, first out (FIFO) queues.

  Multiple bids come in for the same amount (for example, “Do I hear a
  hundred?”). The Bid Streamer service only needs the first bid received
  for that amount, whereas the Bidder Tracker needs all bids received.
  Using a topic (pub/sub) would require the Bid Streamer to ignore bids
  that are the same as the prior amount, forcing the Bid Streamer to
  store shared state between instances.

  The Bid Streamer service stores the bids for an item in an in-memory
  cache, whereas the Bidder Tracker stores bids in a database. The
  Bidder Tracker will therefore be slower and might require
  backpressure. Using a dedicated Bidder Tracker queue provides this
  dedicated backpressure point.

  CONSEQUENCES
  We will require clustering and high availability of the message
  queues.

  This decision will require the Bid Capture service to send the same
  information to multiple queues.

  Internal bid events will bypass security checks done in the API layer.
  UPDATE: Upon review at the January 14, 2025, ARB meeting, the ARB
  decided that this was an acceptable trade-off and that no additional
  security checks are needed for bid events between these services.

  COMPLIANCE
  We will use periodic manual code reviews to ensure that asynchronous
  pub/sub messaging is being used between the Bid Capture service,
  Bid Streamer service, and Bidder Tracker service.

  NOTES
  Author: Subashini Nadella

  Approved: ARB Meeting Members, 14 JAN 2025

  Last Updated: 14 JAN 2025

Storing ADRs

Once an architect creates an ADR, they need to store it somewhere.
Regardless of where that is, each architectural decision should have its
own file or wiki page. Some architects like to keep ADRs in the same Git
repository as the source code, allowing the team to version and track
ADRs as they would source code.

However, for larger organizations, we caution against this practice for
several reasons. First, everyone who needs to see the architectural
decision might not have access to the Git repository containing the
ADRs. Second, the application’s Git repository is not a good place to
store ADRs that have a context outside of them (such as integration
architectural decisions, enterprise architectural decisions, or
decisions that are common to every application). For these reasons, we
recommend storing ADRs in a dedicated ADR Git repository to which
everyone has access, a wiki (using a wiki template), or a shared
directory on a shared file server that can be accessed easily by a wiki
or other document-rendering software.

Figure 21-5 shows what this directory structure (or wiki page navigation
structure) might look like.

[Example ADR Directory Structure]

Figure 21-5. Example directory structure for storing ADRs

The application directory contains architectural decisions that are
specific to some sort of application (or product) context. This
directory is subdivided into further directories:

common

    The common subdirectory is for architectural decisions that apply to
    all applications, such as, “All framework-related classes will
    contain an annotation (@Framework in Java) or attribute ([Framework]
    in C#) identifying the class as belonging to the underlying
    framework code.”

application

    Subdirectories under the application directory correspond to the
    specific application or system context and contain architectural
    decisions specific to that application or system (in this example,
    the app1 and app2 applications).

integration

    The integration directory contains ADRs that involve communication
    between application, systems, or services.

enterprise

    Enterprise architecture ADRs are contained within the enterprise
    directory, indicating that these are global architectural decisions
    impacting all systems and applications. An example of an enterprise
    architecture ADR would be “All access to a system database will only
    be from the owning system,” preventing databases from being shared
    across multiple systems.

When storing ADRs in a wiki, the same structure applies, with each
directory structure representing a navigational landing page. Each ADR
is represented as a single wiki page within each navigational landing
page (application, integration, or enterprise).

The directory and landing-page names indicated in this section are only
recommendations and examples. Choose whatever names fit the company’s
situation, as long as those names are consistent across teams.

ADRs as Documentation

Documenting software architecture has always been difficult. While some
standards are emerging for diagramming architecture (such as software
architect Simon Brown’s C4 Model or The Open Group ArchiMate standard),
no agreed-upon standard exists for documenting software architecture.
That’s where ADRs come in.

ADRs can be an effective means to document a software architecture. The
Context section provides an excellent opportunity to describe the
specific area of the system that requires an architectural decision to
be made, as well as to describe the alternatives. More importantly, the
Decision section describes the reasons why a particular decision is
being made, which is by far the best form of architectural
documentation. The Consequences section adds the final piece of the
puzzle by describing the trade-off analysis for the decision—for
example, the reasons (and trade-offs) for choosing performance over
scalability.

Using ADRs for Standards

Very few developers like standards. Unfortunately, standards are
sometimes more about control rather than providing a useful purpose.
Using ADRs for standards can change this bad practice. For example, the
Context section of an ADR describes the situation that is forcing the
organization to adopt the particular standard. The Decision section of
an ADR can thus indicate not only what the standard is, but more
importantly, why it needs to exist.

This is a great way to qualify whether a particular standard should even
exist in the first place. If an architect can’t justify it, then perhaps
it isn’t a good standard to set and enforce. Furthermore, the more
developers understand why a particular standard exists, the more likely
they are to follow it (and, correspondingly, not challenge it). The
Consequences section of an ADR is another great place to qualify whether
a standard is valid: it requires the architect to think about and
document the standard’s implications and consequences, and whether the
particular standard should be implemented or not.

Using ADRs with Existing Systems

Many architects question the usefulness of ADRs for existing systems.
After all, architectural decisions have already been made and the system
is in production. Do ADRs serve any real purpose at this point? In fact,
they do. Remember, ADRs are more than just documentation—they help
architects and developers understand why a decision was made and if it
was the most appropriate one.

Start by writing some ADRs for the more significant architectural
decisions made and questioning whether those decisions are the right
ones or not. For example, maybe a group of services are sharing a single
database. Why? Is there a good reason? Should the data be broken apart?

Part of the journey of incorporating ADRs into an existing system is
doing a little investigative work to uncover these why questions.
Unfortunately, the person who made the original decision might have left
the company a long time ago, so no one knows the answer. In these cases
it’s up to the architect to identify and analyze the alternatives and
the trade-offs of each option and attempt to validate (or invalidate)
the existing decision. In either case, writing ADRs for these sorts of
significant decisions starts to build up the justifications and
rationales (and brain trust) for the system and can help identify
architectural inefficiencies and incorrect system design.

Leveraging Generative AI and LLMs in Architectural Decisions

One of the many intriguing aspects of generative AI is whether
architects can use it to help make and validate decisions. Should
services use messaging, streaming, or event sourcing when sending
downstream data? Should the database remain as a single monolith, or
should it be broken down into domain databases? Should
Payment Processing be deployed as a single service or broken apart into
multiple services, one for each payment type?

Most architects already know the answer to these questions—it depends!
Coming back to our First Law of Software Architecture, everything in
software architecture is a trade-off. Decisions like these depend on a
lot of factors, including the specific context in which the decision is
applied. Every situation and every environment is different, which is
why there are no “best practices” for these sorts of structural
questions.

Most LLMs base their results largely on probability. In other words,
what is the most probable answer given the context of the prompt, and
what is the “best practice” for this problem? However, probability and
“best practices” have no place in making architectural decisions.
Answering architectural questions requires a careful analysis of the
trade-offs involved, and applying a specific business and technical
context to identify the most appropriate choice. For example, if the
business is most concerned about time to market (getting changes and new
features out to customers as fast as possible), then maintainability is
going to be far more important than performance, and will drive most of
the decision-making process toward optimizing maintainability.

Architectural decisions require translating business concerns (such as
time to market or sustained growth) into architectural characteristics
(such as maintainability, testability, deployability, and so on). This
translation is not always obvious, and getting it right requires years
of experience. Once completed, it serves as a basis for trade-off
analysis. For example, deciding whether to have a single service for
payment processing or a service per payment type boils down to a
trade-off between maintainability and performance: a single service
provides better performance, but multiple services provide better
maintainability. If the business is primarily concerned about time to
market, maintainability is far more important than performance, so
separate services would be the appropriate choice for this specific
context.

Because of the very specific and individualistic nature of analyzing
trade-offs and business context, it is difficult for generative AI as it
currently exists to arrive at the most appropriate architectural
decision. The best-case scenario, based on recent experiments your
authors have done, is to have a generative AI tool outline the possible
trade-offs of a decision, to assist in identifying any missed
trade-offs. While generative AI tools have plenty of knowledge, they
lack the wisdom required to make the most appropriate architectural
decision.

Chapter 22. Analyzing Architecture Risk

Every architecture comes with risks: some operational (such as
availability, scalability, and data integrity), some structural (such as
static coupling between logical components). Analyzing architecture risk
is one of architects’ most important activities, allowing them to
address deficiencies and structural decay within the architecture and
take corrective action. In this chapter, we show you some key techniques
and practices for quantifying, assessing, and identifying risk, and
introduce an activity called risk storming.

Risk Matrix

The first thing to determine in assessing architecture risk is its
level: whether risk to a particular part of the architecture is low,
medium, or high. The challenge here is that assessing risk can be
subjective. One architect might hold the opinion that some aspect of the
architecture is high risk, while another architect’s opinion might be
that the same aspect is medium risk. We italicize opinion here to
emphasize the subjectivity of assessing risk. Fortunately, architects
have a useful risk-assessment matrix that helps us make risk more
measurable.

The architecture risk-assessment matrix (Figure 22-1) uses two
dimensions to qualify risk: the overall impact of the risk involved and
the likelihood of that risk occurring. The architect rates each
dimension as low (1), medium (2), or high (3), then multiplies the
numbers within each intersection of the matrix. This provides a
numerical representation of risk, making the process of qualifying risk
more objective. Ratings of 1 and 2 are considered low risk (usually
depicted in green), numbers 3 and 4 are considered medium risk (usually
yellow), and numbers 6 through 9 are considered high risk (usually red).
Using shading can be helpful for grayscale rendering and for people
unable to distinguish colors.

[Risk matrix]

Figure 22-1. Matrix for determining architecture risk

To show you its utility, we’ll use the risk matrix in an example.
Suppose you’re concerned about the availability of your application’s
primary central database.

Tip

When using this matrix to qualify risk, consider impact first and
likelihood second. If you are unsure of the likelihood, use a high (3)
rating until you can confirm.

First, you’ll consider overall impact: what happens if the database goes
down or becomes unavailable? Let’s say you might deem the impact high
risk and map that risk to the last row of the matrix in Figure 22-1 as a
3 (medium), 6 (high), or 9, (high). However, when you consider the
second dimension—the likelihood of that risk occurring—you realize that
the database is on highly available servers in a clustered
configuration, and the likelihood that the database would become
unavailable is low (first column in the matrix). The intersection
between high impact and low likelihood gives you an overall risk rating
of 3 (medium risk) for availability in the primary central database.

Risk Assessments

You can use the risk matrix to build what is called a risk assessment: a
summarized report of an architecture’s overall risk, with meaningful
assessment criteria based on a context (services, subdomain areas, or
domain areas of a system). We’ve performed many risk assessments, and
have found architectural characteristics to be excellent risk-assessment
criteria. Why spend time analyzing performance risk when the system’s
critical architectural characteristics are scalability, elasticity, and
data integrity? Knowing characteristics such as those described in
Chapter 4 is the first step in analyzing architectural risk.

Tip

The architectural characteristics that are most critical for the
architecture to support make great risk-assessment criteria.

The basic format of a risk-assessment report is shown in Figure 22-2.
Here, 1 and 2 represent low risk, 3 and 4 represent medium risk, and 6
and 9 represent high risk. The risk criteria run along the left side of
the spreadsheet, and the context runs across the top.

[Risk assessment]

Figure 22-2. Example of a standard risk assessment

We use an ecommerce ordering system as the example for this risk
assessment. It assesses five criteria, representing the system’s
critical architectural characteristics. Across the top are four
different contexts, each representing a separate domain (customer
registration, catalog checkout, order fulfillment, and order shipping).
A domain or subdomain context works well; analyzing risk at the level of
services is usually too fine-grained and doesn’t account for risk
involving communication or coordination between multiple services.

The nice thing about using quantified risk is that it considers both the
risk criteria and the context. For example, in Figure 22-2, the total
accumulated risk for data integrity is 17, making it the highest risk
area from a criteria standpoint. The accumulated risk for availability
is only 10 (the lowest risk criteria-wise). In terms of the relative
risk of each context area, however, customer registration is the domain
that carries the highest risk context-wise, whereas order fulfillment is
the lowest-risk context. This is useful information when determining
priorities and where to put additional effort into reducing risk.

This risk assessment example contains all of the risk-analysis results,
but it’s sometimes useful to filter out details to highlight certain
problems. For example, suppose that you, as the architect of this
system, are in a meeting, presenting to stakeholders about the high-risk
areas of the system. Rather than presenting the full risk assessment, as
Figure 22-2 does, you could filter out the low- and medium-risk areas
(the noise) to highlight the high-risk areas (the signal). Improving the
overall signal-to-noise ratio lets you deliver a more effective, less
distracting message. Figure 22-3 shows a filtered version of the same
risk assessment. Compare the two images to see how much clearer the
message is with the second filtered assessment.

[Assessment filtering]

Figure 22-3. Filtering the risk assessment to show only high risks

One problem with the full version of the risk assessment is that it only
shows a snapshot in time, not whether things are improving or getting
worse. In other words, Figure 22-2 does not show the direction of risk.
You can determine the direction of risk by using continuous measurements
through fitness functions, as described in Chapter 6. Objectively
analyzing each risk criterion lets you observe trends to spot the
direction of each risk criterion.

In Figure 22-4, we add a third dimension to the risk assessment:
direction. We use a right-side-up triangle to indicate that the risk for
that particular criteria and context is getting worse—the tip of the
triangle points up, toward a higher number. Conversely, we use an
upside-down triangle to indicate that the risk is lessening (in other
words, the tip is pointing down to a lower number). Finally, we use a
circle to represent that the risk is not moving—getting neither better
nor worse. This can get confusing, so we always recommend including a
key when using any sort of symbol to represent direction.

[Assessment direction]

Figure 22-4. Showing direction of risk using triangles

This revised architectural risk assessment, now showing direction, tells
a different story than the original. First, we can see that data
integrity is getting worse based on continuous measurements (triangle
pointing up) for catalog checkout, order fulfillment, and order
shipping, which could indicate a database issue. However, security and
availability are getting better overall (triangle pointing down) for
customer registration and catalog checkout, indicating improvements in
those areas.

Next, we describe a process called risk storming that teams can use to
determine how to identify the risk level for particular contexts and
criteria.

Risk Storming

No architect can singlehandedly determine the overall risk of a system,
for two reasons. First, an architect working alone might miss or
overlook a risk area; second, very few architects have full knowledge of
every part of the system. This is where risk storming can help.

Risk storming is a collaborative exercise to determine architectural
risk within a specific dimension (either context or criteria). While
most risk-storming efforts involve multiple architects, we strongly
recommend including senior developers and tech leads as well. Not only
will they provide an implementation perspective on architectural risk,
but involving them helps them better understand the architecture.

Risk storming involves three phases: identification, consensus, and
mitigation. In the individual phase (phase 1), all participants, working
alone, use the risk matrix to assign risk to various areas of the
architecture. This individual phase of risk storming is essential so
that participants don’t influence other participants or direct people’s
attention away from particular areas of the architecture. In the two
collaborative phases, all participants work together to gain consensus
on what the risk areas are and discuss them (phase 2), and come up with
solutions for mitigating the risk (phase 3).

All three phases utilize a comprehensive or contextual architecture
diagram (see Chapter 23). The architect conducting the risk-storming
effort—we’ll call this person the facilitator—is responsible for sending
all participants updated diagrams for the risk-storming session.

Figure 22-5 shows an example architecture we’ll use to illustrate the
risk-storming process. In this architecture, an Elastic Load Balancer
forwards a request to each EC2 instance containing the web servers
(Nginx) and application services. The application services make calls to
a MySQL database, a Redis cache, and a MongoDB database (for logging).
They also make calls to the Push Expansion Servers, which in turn all
interface with the MySQL database, Redis cache, and MongoDB logging
facility. (Don’t worry if you don’t understand all of these products and
buzzwords—this overly vague, generalized architecture is only meant to
illustrate how risk storming works.)

[Example architecture diagram for risk storming session]

Figure 22-5. Example architecture diagram for risk storming session

We’ll begin with phase 1.

Phase 1: Identification

The identification phase of risk storming involves each participant
individually identifying areas of risk within the architecture. It’s
critical that, in this phase, each participant should record their
unbiased view of the risk involved, without being redirected or swayed
by other participants. The identification phase has three steps:

1.  The facilitator sends all participants an invitation to the
    collaborative phases. The invitation contains the architecture
    diagram (or where to find it), the risk criteria and context to be
    analyzed, and the date, time, and location (physical or virtual) of
    the collaborative session, along with any other logistical details.

2.  Participants use the risk matrix to analyze the architecture risks
    individually.

3.  Participants classify each risk as low (1–2), medium (3–4), or high
    (6–9), and write the numbers on small green, yellow, or red sticky
    notes.

Most risk-storming efforts analyze only one particular criterion or
context (such as “Where are our security risks?” or “What areas are at
risk within customer registration?”). However, if there are issues with
staff availability or timing, the risk-assessment team may have to
analyze multiple dimensions within a specific context (such as
performance and scalability). In these cases, participants typically
write the specific criterion next to the risk number on the sticky
notes. For example, suppose three participants identify risk with a
central database. All three participants identify the risk as high (6),
but one participant sees this as a risk to availability, while the other
two see it as a risk to performance. The participants should discuss
these two criteria separately.

Tip

Whenever possible, restrict risk-storming efforts to a single criterion
or context. This allows participants to focus their attention on that
specific dimension and avoids confusion about what the actual risk is.

Phase 2: Consensus

The consensus phase of risk storming is highly collaborative, with the
goal of gaining consensus among all participants regarding the risk or
risks within the architecture. This activity is most effective when the
facilitator posts a large printed architecture diagram on the wall (or
an electronic version on a large screen). When the participants arrive
at the risk-storming session, the facilitator instructs them to begin
placing their risk-level sticky notes on the relevant area of the
architecture diagram (see Figure 22-6).

Once all of the sticky notes are in place, the collaborative phase can
begin. The goal here is to analyze the risk areas as a team and reach a
consensus about their risk level. In the example pictured in
Figure 22-6, the team has identified several areas of risk. (The actual
criteria aren’t important for this example.) We can see that:

- Two participants identified the Elastic Load Balancer as medium risk
  (3), whereas one participant identified it as high risk (6).

- One participant identified the Push Expansion Servers as high risk
  (9).

- Three participants identified the MySQL database as medium risk (3).

- One participant identified the Redis cache as high risk (9).

- Three participants identified MongoDB logging as low risk (2).

- No one identified any other areas of the architecture as carrying any
  risk, so there are no sticky notes on any other areas.

[Risk-storming identification]

Figure 22-6. Initial identification of risk areas

The MySQL database and MongoDB logging need no further discussion in
this session, since all participants agree on their risk levels.
However, there’s a difference of opinion about the Elastic Load
Balancer, and the Push Expansion Servers and Redis cache were only
identified as risks by one participant each. Working through these
discrepancies is what the collaborative phase is all about.

Two participants (Austen and Logan) identified the Elastic Load Balancer
as medium risk (3); one (Addison) identified it as high risk (6). Austen
and Logan ask Addison why they identified the risk as high. Addison
responds that if the Elastic Load Balancer goes down, the entire system
will become inaccessible. While this is true—and brings the impact
rating up to high—the other two participants convince Addison that there
is low risk of this happening due to clustering. Addison agrees, and the
group brings the likelihood risk level down to a medium (3).

This could have gone a different way, however. If Austen and Logan
missed a particular aspect of risk in the Elastic Load Balancer that
Addison saw, Addison might have convinced the other two participants to
classify this risk’s level as high instead of medium. That’s why the
collaboration phase of risk storming is so important.

One participant identified the Push Expansion Servers as high risk (9),
but no other participant identified any risk in this area of the
architecture at all. The person who identified the risk explains that
they rated the risk as high because they’ve had bad experiences with
Push Expansion Servers continually crashing under high loads similar to
this architecture’s load. This example shows the value of risk
storming—without that participant’s involvement, no one would have seen
the high risk until well into production.

The Redis cache is an interesting case. One participant, a developer
named Devon, identified it as high risk (9), but no one else saw that
cache as having any risk. When the other participants ask Devon about
their rationale for rating this risk as high, Devon responds, “What’s a
Redis cache?” Whenever a risk-storming participant identifies a
technology as unknown to them, that area automatically gets assigned a
high risk level (9).

Tip

Always assign unproven or unknown technologies the highest risk rating
(9), since the risk matrix cannot be used for this criterion or context.

The example of the Redis cache illustrates why it’s important to bring
developers into risk-storming sessions. The fact that this participant
didn’t know a given technology is valuable information for the architect
about overall risk. The architect might decide to change the technology
or incur training costs to bring the development team up to speed.

This phase continues until all participants agree on the risk areas
identified. Once all the sticky notes are consolidated, this phase ends.
Its final outcome is shown in Figure 22-7.

[Risk-storming consensus]

Figure 22-7. Consensus of risk areas

Phase 3: Risk Mitigation

Once all participants agree on the risk levels of the architecture, the
risk mitigation phase begins. Mitigating risk usually involves changing
certain areas of the architecture that otherwise might have been deemed
perfect the way they were.

This phase, which is also collaborative, seeks ways to reduce or
eliminate the risks identified in the second phase. Depending on the
risks identified, the original architecture may need to be completely
changed, or the changes could be limited to straightforward
architectural refactoring in specific areas, such as adding a queue for
backpressure to reduce a throughput bottleneck.

Whatever the changes required, the risk mitigation phase usually incurs
additional costs. For that reason, it’s important for this phase to
involve key business stakeholders with the authority to decide whether
the cost of a given mitigation solution outweighs the risk.

For example, suppose that, in our example risk-storming session the team
identifies the central database as having medium risk (4) with regard to
overall system availability. The participants agree that clustering the
database and breaking it into separate physical databases would mitigate
that risk. However, that solution would cost $50,000. The facilitating
architect meets with key business stakeholders, including the owner, to
discuss the trade-offs of availability risk and cost. The business owner
decides that the price tag is too high and that the cost does not
outweigh the risk of availability. The architect then suggests a
different approach: instead of expensive clustering, what about
splitting the database into two separate domain-based databases? This
solution would only cost $16,000, while still reducing the availability
risk. The stakeholders agree to this compromise.

This scenario shows how risk storming shapes not only the overall
architecture, but also the negotiations between architects and business
stakeholders. In combination with the risk assessments we described at
the start of this chapter, risk storming is an excellent vehicle for
identifying and tracking risk, improving the architecture, and
structuring negotiations between key stakeholders.

User-Story Risk Analysis

Risk storming is useful in many aspects of software development aside
from identifying architectural risk. For example, a development team
could use risk storming to determine the overall risk associated with
user-story completion within a given iteration (and consequently the
overall risk assessment of that iteration) during story grooming. Using
the same risk matrix, the team can identify user-story risk by
identifying the overall impact if the story is not completed within the
iteration, and the likelihood that the story will not be completed in
the current iteration. Then they can identify high-risk stories, track
them carefully, and better prioritize them.

Risk-Storming Use Case

To illustrate the power of risk storming and how it can improve overall
architecture, let’s consider the example of a support system for a call
center where nurses advise patients on various health conditions. The
system requirements are:

- A third-party diagnostics engine will serve up questions and guide
  nurses and patients through their medical issues. This engine can
  handle about 500 requests a second.

- Patients can either call in using the call center to speak to a nurse
  or use a self-service website that accesses the same diagnostic engine
  directly.

- The system must support 250 concurrent nurses nationwide and up to
  hundreds of thousands of concurrent self-service patients nationwide.

- Nurses can access patients’ medical records through a medical records
  exchange, but patients cannot access their own medical records.

- The system must be HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and
  Accountability Act) compliant, meaning it’s essential that no one but
  nurses can access patients’ medical records. The self-service option
  cannot guarantee HIPAA compliance.

- The system needs to be able to handle high volume during cold, flu,
  and COVID outbreaks.

- Calls are routed to nurses based on each nurse’s skill profile (such
  as languages spoken or medical specializations).

After analyzing these requirements, Logan, the architect responsible for
this system, creates the high-level architecture diagrammed in
Figure 22-8. This architecture has three separate web-based UIs: one for
self-service, one for nurses receiving calls, and one for administrative
staff to add and maintain nurse profiles and configuration settings. The
call-center portion of the system consists of a Call Accepter service,
which receives calls, and the Call Router service, which routes the
caller to the next available nurse based on the nurse’s skill profile.
The Call Router service accesses the central database to get nurse
profile information. Central to this architecture is a
diagnostics-system API Gateway, which performs security checks and
directs requests to the appropriate backend service.

[Diagnostics example]

Figure 22-8. High-level architecture for a nursing-hotline diagnostics system

The four main services in this system are the Case Management service,
the Nurse Profile Management service, the Medical Records Interface
service to the medical records exchange, and the external third-party
Diagnostics Engine Interface service. All communications use REST,
except for proprietary protocols to the external systems and call-center
services. The areas the architecture must support are, in summary,
availability, elasticity, and security.

After many reviews, Logan believes the architecture is ready for
implementation. However, being a responsible and effective architect,
Logan decides to hold a risk-storming exercise.

Availability

As facilitator, Logan decides to focus the first risk-storming exercise
on availability, which is critical to the system’s success. After the
identification and collaboration phases, the participants come up with
the following risk areas (illustrated in Figure 22-9):

- Central database availability: high risk (6) due to high impact (3)
  and medium likelihood (2) of the database being unavailable when
  needed.

- Diagnostics Engine availability: high risk (9) due to high impact (3)
  and unknown likelihood (3) of unavailability.

- Medical Records Interface availability: low risk (2); this component
  is not required to determine a particular medical outcome.

- The team has deemed no other parts of the system to be availability
  risks, since the architecture includes multiple instances of each
  service and clusters the API Gateway.

[Availability risk]

Figure 22-9. Availability risk areas, as identified by the risk-storming team

All participants agree that if the database went down, nurses could
write down case notes manually, but the call router could not function.
To mitigate this risk, they collectively decide to break apart the
single physical database into two separate databases: one clustered
database containing nurse-profile information, and one single-instance
database for case notes. Not only does this architecture change address
the database availability concerns, it also helps secure the case notes.

It’s much harder to mitigate availability risk in external systems (in
this case, the Diagnostics Engine and Medical Records Interface) because
they are controlled by a third party. The team decides to research
whether these systems have published service-level agreements (SLAs) or
service-level objectives (SLOs). An SLA is usually a legally binding
contractual agreement; an SLO is usually not legally binding. They find
SLAs for both systems. The Diagnostics Engine SLA guarantees 99.99%
availability (that’s 52.60 minutes of downtime per year), and the
Medical Records Interface guarantees at 99.90% availability (that’s 8.77
hours of downtime per year). Based on this analysis, this information
was enough for the risk assessment team to remove the identified risk.

After this risk-storming session, the team changes the architecture, as
illustrated in Figure 22-10, creating two databases and adding the SLAs
to the architecture diagram.

[Availability risk mitigation]

Figure 22-10. Availability risk areas can be mitigated by using separate databases

Elasticity

The second risk-storming exercise focuses on elasticity—spikes in user
load (otherwise known as variable scalability). Although there are only
250 nurses (which means no more than 250 nurses will be accessing the
Diagnostics Engine), the self-service portion of the system can access
the Diagnostics Engine as well, which significantly increases the number
of requests to the Diagnostics Engine interface. The risk-storming
participants are concerned about flu season and COVID outbreaks, which
will significantly increase the anticipated load on the system.

The participants unanimously identify the Diagnostics Engine interface
as high risk (9). Since it can handle only 500 requests per second, they
correctly calculate a high risk that it won’t be able to keep up with
the anticipated throughput, particularly with REST as its interface
protocol.

The team decided that one way to mitigate this risk is to use
asynchronous queues (messaging) for communication between the API
Gateway and the Diagnostics Engine interface. This will provide a
backpressure point if calls to the Diagnostics Engine get backed up.
While this is a good practice, it still doesn’t quite mitigate all the
risk: nurses and self-service patients will still be waiting too long
for responses from the Diagnostics Engine, and their requests will
likely time out.

The participants decide to use a pattern known as the Ambulance pattern
to separate these requests by using two message channels instead of just
one. This would let the system prioritize nurses’ requests over
self-service requests. This would help mitigate the risk, but still
doesn’t address wait times. After more discussion, the group decides to
reduce outbreak-related calls to the Diagnostics Engine by caching those
particular diagnostics questions so that they never reach the
Diagnostics Engine interface.

In addition to creating two messaging channels (one for the nurses and
one for self-service patients), the team creates a new service called
the Diagnostics Outbreak Cache Server that handles all requests related
to a particular outbreak or flu-related question (Figure 22-11). This
new architecture reduces the number of calls to the diagnostics engine,
allowing for more concurrent requests related to other symptoms. Without
the risk-storming effort, this risk might not have been identified until
flu season.

[Elasticity risk mitigation]

Figure 22-11. Architecture modifications to address elasticity risk

Security

Encouraged by these successes, the architect decides to facilitate a
final risk-storming session focused on another crucial characteristic
for this system—security. Due to HIPAA regulatory requirements, the
Medical Records Interface must allow only nurses to access patients’
medical records. The architect believes that the authentication and
authorization checks in the API Gateway neutralize this risk, but is
curious whether the participants will find any other security risks.

The participants all identify the diagnostics system’s API Gateway as a
high security risk (6). They cite the high impact if administrative
staff or self-service patients access medical records (3), but rate the
likelihood as medium (2). While the security checks for each API call
help, all calls (self-service, admin, and nurses) are still going
through the same API Gateway. They eventually convince the facilitator,
who had initially rated this risk as low (2), that the risk is in fact
high and needs to be mitigated.

Everyone agrees that having separate API Gateways for each type of user
(admin staff, self-service users, and nurses) would prevent non-nurse
calls from ever reaching the Medical Records Interface. The architect’s
final version of the architecture is shown in Figure 22-12.

[Security risk mitigation]

Figure 22-12. Architecture modifications to address security risk

This example illustrates the power of risk storming. Architects,
developers, and key stakeholders collaborate, consider the architectural
characteristics most vital to the system’s success, and identify risk
areas that would otherwise have gone unnoticed.

The original architecture (Figure 22-8) is significantly changed after
risk storming (Figure 22-12) in ways that address concerns about
availability, elasticity, and security and make this architecture more
effective and more likely to succeed.

Summary

Risk storming is not a one-time process. It continues throughout a
system’s lifecycle, as teams work to identify and mitigate risk areas
before they appear in production. How often an organization should hold
risk-storming sessions depends on many factors, including the frequency
of change, any architecture-refactoring efforts, and the architecture’s
incremental development. It’s typical to do some risk storming on
particular dimensions after adding a major feature or at the end of
every iteration, to ensure that the architecture is correct and will
address the business’s needs.

Chapter 23. Diagramming Architecture

Newly minted software architects are often surprised at how varied the
job is, outside the technical knowledge and experience that brought them
into the role to begin with. In particular, effective communication is
critical to an architect’s success. No matter how brilliant your
technical ideas, if you can’t convince managers to fund those ideas and
developers to build them, your brilliance will never manifest.

Diagramming is a critical communication skills for architects. While
entire books exist about each topic, we’ll hit some particular
highlights for each.

To visually describe an architecture, the architect often must show
different views: for example, they might start with an overview of the
entire topology, then drill down into the design details of specific
parts of the architecture. However, showing a portion without indicating
its place within the overall architecture will confuse viewers.

Representational consistency is the practice of always showing the
relationships between parts of an architecture before changing views,
and it’s equally important in diagrams and in presentations. For
example, if you wanted to describe the details of how the plug-ins
relate to one another in the Silicon Sandwiches solution, you’d start
with an architecture diagram showing the system’s entire topology, then
the relationship between it and the plug-in structure, before going into
the plug-in structure itself. Figure 23-1 provides an example.

[]

Figure 23-1. Using representational consistency to indicate context in a larger diagram

Use representational consistency carefully to ensure that viewers
understand the scope of the items being presented and eliminate a common
source of confusion.

Diagramming

The topology of an architecture is always of interest to architects and
developers because it captures how the structure fits together, and
allows teams to form a valuable shared understanding. We encourage all
architects to hone their diagramming skills to razor sharpness.

Tools

The current generation of diagramming tools for architects is extremely
powerful, and every architect should learn their tool of choice deeply.
But don’t neglect low-fidelity artifacts, especially early in the design
process. Building very ephemeral design artifacts early prevents
architects from becoming overly attached to what they have created, an
antipattern we call Irrational Artifact Attachment.

Irrational Artifact Attachment

The Irrational Artifact Attachment antipattern describes the
proportional relationship between a person’s irrational attachment to
some artifact and how long it took the person to produce that artifact.
If an architect spends four hours creating a beautiful diagram in some
tool like Visio, they’ll be even more irrationally attached to that
artifact than if they’d invested only two hours.

One benefit of the Agile approach to software development is that it
involves creating “just-in-time” artifacts with as little ceremony and
ritual as possible. This is one reason so many Agilists love index cards
and sticky notes: using low-tech tools lets people throw away what’s not
right, freeing them to experiment and allow the true nature of the
artifact to emerge through revision, collaboration, and discussion.

The classic ephemeral artifact is a cell-phone photo of a whiteboard
diagram (along with the inevitable “Do Not Erase!” imperative). These
days, many architects have abandoned the whiteboard in favor of a tablet
attached to an overhead projector. This offers several advantages.
First, the tablet has an unlimited canvas and can fit as many drawings
as the team might need. Second, it allows the team to copy/paste “what
if” scenarios, which would obscure the original if done on a whiteboard.
Third, images created on a tablet are already digitized and don’t have
the inevitable glare of whiteboard photos. Fourth, using electronic
images makes remote work much easier and more collaborative.

Eventually, you’ll need to create nice diagrams in a fancy tool, but
before you invest that time, make sure the team has iterated on the
design sufficiently. Whatever platform you’re using, you’ll find
powerful diagramming tools. We happily used OmniGraffle for the original
versions of all of the diagrams in this book, which were then refined by
O’Reilly illustrators. While we don’t necessarily advocate one tool over
another, we recommend looking for the following features, as a baseline:

Layers

    Drawing tools often support layers, which architects should learn to
    use well. Layers allow the user to link groups of items together
    logically and show or hide them as needed. For example, you might
    build a comprehensive diagram for a presentation, but hide the
    overwhelming details when not directly discussing them. Layers also
    provide a good way to present pictures that build incrementally.

Stencils/templates

    Stencil tools allow users to amass a library of common visual
    components, including composites of other basic shapes. For example,
    throughout this book, you have seen standard icons for things like
    individual microservices; these exist as single items in the
    authors’ stencil tool. Building a set of stencils for patterns and
    artifacts that are common within an organization creates consistency
    across architecture diagrams and makes it faster to build new
    diagrams.

Magnets

    Many drawing tools offer assistance for drawing lines between
    shapes. Magnets represent the places on those shapes where lines
    snap to connect automatically, providing alignment and other visual
    niceties. Some tools allow users to add more magnets or create their
    own.

Use Layers Semantically, Not Decoratively

We prefer drawing tools that support layers, but we suggest using them
semantically—that is, in ways that contribute meaning to the overall
image. For example, the base layer of each diagram should represent the
topology of the architecture: its containers, databases, dependencies,
brokers, and other core elements. This layer should focus on
architecture rather than implementation; for instance, specify
“synchronous communication” rather than naming a specific protocol. The
next layer should contain implementation details: what type of database,
which communication protocols, and so on.

Using layers in this manner makes diagrams extensible: it’s possible to
add other contextualized layers to present domain-driven design
boundaries, transactional scope, or any other meta-information the
architect wants to contrast against the topology of the architecture.

In addition to these specific helpful features, the tool should, of
course, support basic functions such as lines, colors, shapes, and other
visual artifacts, and should be able to export to a wide variety of
formats.

Diagramming Standards: UML, C4, and ArchiMate

The software industry uses several formal standards for technical
diagrams. We’ll look at three of the most popular here.

UML

Grady Booch, Ivar Jacobson, and Jim Rumbaugh created the Unified
Modeling Language (UML) standard in the 1980s to unify their competing
design philosophies. It was supposed to be the best of all worlds, but,
like many things designed by committee, failed to create much impact
outside organizations that mandated its use. Architects and developers
still use UML class and sequence diagrams to communicate structure and
workflow, but most other UML diagram types have fallen into disuse.

C4

C4 is a diagramming technique developed by Simon Brown between 2006 and
2011 to address UML’s deficiencies and modernize its approach. The “four
Cs” in C4 are:

Context

    The entire context of the system, including the roles of users and
    external dependencies.

Container

    The physical (and often logical) deployment boundaries and
    containers within the architecture. This view forms a good meeting
    point for operations teams and architects.

Component

    The component view of the system; this most neatly aligns with an
    architect’s view of the system.

Class

    C4 uses the same style of class diagrams as UML, which are
    effective, so there is no need to replace them.

C4 offers a good alternative for any company seeking to standardize on a
diagramming technique. Its creators have been active for years and have
gathered a huge following. Critically, it has kept up with changes in
the software development ecosystem, expanding to take advantage of new
capabilities. Many diagramming tools contain templates for C4 diagrams,
and the C4 ecosystem contains tools and frameworks to assist architects.
C4 defines standards for components, lines, containers, databases, and
other common artifacts.

A C4 diagram of the Silicon Sandwich modular monolith data design
appears in Figure 23-2.

[Silicon Sandwiches component diagram in C4]

Figure 23-2. Silicon Sandwiches component diagram in C4

ArchiMate

ArchiMate (a portmanteau of architecture and animate) is an open source
enterprise-architecture modeling language from The Open Group for
describing, analyzing, and visualizing architectures within and across
business domains. ArchiMate offers a lighter-weight modeling language
for enterprise ecosystems. The goal of this technical standard is to be
“as small as possible,” not to cover every edge case. It is a popular
choice among architects.

Diagram Guidelines

Every architect should build their own diagramming style, whether they
use their own modeling language or one of the formal ones. It’s OK to
borrow from representations you think are particularly effective. This
section offers some general guidelines for creating technical diagrams.

Titles

Make sure all the elements of the diagram have titles, unless they’re
very well-known to the audience. Use rotation and other effects to make
titles “stick” to the right thing and to make efficient use of space.

Lines

Lines should be thick enough to be clearly visible. If the lines
indicate information flow, use arrows to indicate directional or two-way
traffic. Different types of arrowheads might suggest different
semantics—just be consistent.

One of the few general standards in architecture diagrams is that solid
lines almost always indicate synchronous communication, and dotted lines
indicate asynchronous communication.

Shapes

While the formal modeling languages we’ve described all have standard
shapes, there’s no pervasive set of standard shapes used across the
software development world. Most architects make their own set of
standard shapes; sometimes these are adopted across an organization to
create a standard language.

We tend to use three-dimensional boxes to indicate deployable artifacts,
rectangles to indicate containers, and cylinders to represent databases,
but we don’t have any particular key beyond that.

Labels

It’s important to label every item in a diagram, especially if there is
any chance of ambiguity.

Color

Architects often don’t use color enough. For many years, books were out
of necessity printed in black and white, so architects and developers
became accustomed to monochromatic drawings. While we still favor
monochrome, we use color when it helps distinguish one artifact from
another. For example, when discussing microservices architecture quantum
in Chapter 19, we use shades of gray in Figure 19-6 (reproduced here as
Figure 23-3) to indicate grouping.

[microservices communication]

Figure 23-3. Reproduction of a microservices communication example from Chapter 19, showing different services in shades of gray

Be careful about using color to indicate critical differences, however;
people who are colorblind or have other visual disabilities will not be
able to see the distinction. We suggest using unique iconography in
addition to color, so if someone can’t distinguish the color, they can
still understand the meaning—just as any street-crossing lights use
green for go and red for stop, but also show unique figures for each
color.

Keys

If a diagram’s shapes are ambiguous for any reason, include a key that
clearly indicates what each shape represents. An easily misinterpreted
diagram is worse than no diagram at all.

Summary

Diagramming standards are a useful way for organizations to provide
consistent communication. Architects, however, frequently break the
rules, especially when the standard doesn’t offer a good way to
represent the design. We encourage organizations to establish standards
but allow reasonable exceptions.

In the past, when heavyweight computer-assisted software engineering
(CASE) tools were the norm, architects had to build elaborate models to
represent simple things. They were often forced to include many useless
details that were merely noise in that specific context. We favor
lightweight diagramming tools and quick-and-dirty artifacts, especially
early in the design process. Just don’t become so enamored with your
creations that you lose your objectivity.

Chapter 24. Making Teams Effective

In addition to creating technical architectures and making architecture
decisions, software architects are also responsible for leading the
development team and guiding it through implementing the architecture.
Architects who do this well create effective development teams that work
together closely to solve problems and create winning solutions. While
this may sound obvious, we’ve seen too many architects ignore their
development teams and create an architecture alone, in a siloed
environment. When this architecture is handed off to the development
team, the developers often struggle to implement it correctly.

Making teams productive is one of the ways successful software
architects differentiate themselves. In this chapter, we introduce some
basic techniques for improving development teams’ effectiveness.

Collaboration

All too often, the software industry treats architecture and development
as entirely separate activities. Consider Figure 24-1, which compares
the traditional responsibilities of architects to those of developers.
Architects are responsible for activities like analyzing business
requirements to extract and define architectural characteristics,
selecting architecture patterns and styles to solve the problem domain,
and creating logical components. The development team uses the artifacts
the architect creates during these activities to create class diagrams
for components, build UI screens, and write and test source code.

[Traditional view]

Figure 24-1. Traditional roles of architects versus developers

The image in Figure 24-1 illustrates why this traditional approach to
architecture rarely works. Look at the unidirectional arrow that passes
through the virtual and physical barriers separating the architect from
the developer: that’s what causes all of the problems. Architects’
decisions don’t always make it to the development team, and when
development teams change the architecture, it rarely gets back to the
architect. In this model, because the architect is so disconnected from
the development team, the architecture rarely accomplishes its goals.

The key to making architecture work is breaking down the barriers, both
physical and virtual, between architects and developers, instead forming
a strong bidirectional collaborative relationship between them. The
architect and development team must be on the same virtual team, as in
the collaborative model depicted in Figure 24-2. Not only does this
model facilitate strong bidirectional communication and collaboration,
it also allows the architect to mentor and coach developers.

[Collaboration view]

Figure 24-2. Making architecture work through collaboration

Unlike with the static, rigid old-school waterfall approaches, today’s
software architectures change and evolve with nearly every iteration or
phase of a product effort. Tight collaboration between the architect and
the development team is essential for success.

In the rest of this chapter and in Chapter 25, we’ll show you techniques
for forming the healthy, bidirectional, collaborative relationships that
not only make development teams more effective, but create more robust
and successful architectures.

Constraints and Boundaries

It’s been our experience that a software architect can significantly
influence the success or failure of a development team. Teams that feel
left out of the loop or estranged from their architects often lack
knowledge about various constraints on the system; without the right
level of guidance, they struggle to implement the architecture
correctly.

One of the roles of a software architect is to create and communicate
the constraints within which developers must implement the architecture.
Think of these constraints as forming a “room” in which the development
team works to implement the architecture. As Figure 24-3 demonstrates,
having boundaries that are too tight or too loose directly hampers
teams’ ability to successfully implement the architecture.

[Boundaries]

Figure 24-3. The boundaries a software architect creates affect the team’s ability to implement the architecture

Too many constraints make the room too small for the development team,
preventing them from accessing many of the tools, libraries, and
practices they need to implement the system. This causes frustration,
and usually results in developers leaving the project for happier and
healthier environments.

The converse can also happen. Constraints that are too loose (or having
no constraints at all) make the room too big. In this case there are too
many choices available, forcing the development team to essentially take
on the role of the architect to make all of the important architectural
decisions. Lacking proper guidance, the developers find themselves
performing too many proofs of concept, struggling over design decisions,
and becoming unproductive, confused, and frustrated.

Effective software architects strive to provide the right level of
guidance and appropriate constraints so that the team has everything it
needs. The rest of this chapter is devoted to showing how to create
these appropriate boundaries.

Architect Personalities

We’re going to generalize wildly for the sake of conceptual clarity
here, and tell you that architects’ personalities come in three basic
types: the control-freak architect, the armchair architect, and the
effective architect. Control-freak architects tend to produce tight
boundaries, armchair architects tend to produce loose boundaries, and
effective architects produce appropriate boundaries. The following
sections describe the details of each architecture personality.

The Control-Freak Architect

The control-freak architect tries to control every detail of the
software development process. Every decision they make is usually too
fine-grained and too low-level, resulting in tight boundaries and too
many constraints on the development team.

For example, a control-freak architect might restrict the development
team from downloading useful or even necessary open source or
third-party libraries, or place tight restrictions on naming
conventions, class designs, method lengths, and so on. They might go so
far as to write pseudocode for the development teams to implement,
essentially stealing the art of programming away from the developers.
Developers find this frustrating and often lose respect for the
architect.

Unfortunately, it’s very easy to become a control-freak architect,
particularly when you’re transitioning into architecture from a software
developer role. Architects’ role is to create the building blocks of the
application (the logical components) and determine how they all
interact. The developers’ corresponding role is to determine how best to
implement those logical components, using class diagrams and design
patterns. New architects, being used to creating the class diagrams and
selecting the design patterns themselves as developers, often find this
temptation difficult to resist.

For example, suppose an architect creates a logical component that
manages the reference data within the system: things like the static
name-value pair data used on the website, product codes, and warehouse
codes. The architect’s role is to identify the logical component (in
this case, a Reference Manager), determine its core set of operations
(for example, GetData, SetData, ReloadCache, and NotifyOnUpdate), and
identify which other components need to interact with the
ReferenceManager. A control-freak architect might think that the best
way to implement this component is through a parallel loader pattern,
leveraging an internal cache with a particular data structure. This
might be an effective design, but it’s not the only design, and, more
importantly, it’s not the architect’s job to come up with an internal
design for the Reference Manager—that’s the developer’s job.

As we’ll talk about in this chapter, sometimes architects need to play
the role of control freak, depending on the complexity of the project
and the team’s skill level. However, most of the time, a control-freak
architect disrupts the development team, doesn’t provide the right level
of guidance, gets in the way, and is generally ineffective as a leader.

The Armchair Architect

The armchair architect is an architect who hasn’t coded in a very long
time (if ever) and doesn’t account for implementation details when
creating an architecture. They are typically disconnected from the
development team and are rarely around, simply moving on to the next
project after completing the initial architecture diagrams.

Some armchair architects are simply in way over their heads: they just
don’t know the technology or business domain well enough to provide
leadership or guidance. Think about it: what do developers do? They
write source code, of course. Writing source code is really hard to
fake; either you can write source code or you can’t. What does an
architect do? No one knows! Draw lots of lines and boxes? It’s all too
easy to fake it as an architect.

For example, suppose an armchair architect designing a stock-trading
system is in way over their head. Their architecture diagram might only
contain two boxes: one representing the trading system, and one
representing the trade compliance engine it communicates with. There’s
nothing wrong with this architecture—it’s just too high-level to be of
any use to anyone.

Armchair architects create loose boundaries around their development
teams, so those teams end up doing the work the architect is supposed to
be doing. Their velocity and productivity suffer as a result, and
everyone gets confused about how the system should work.

It’s as easy to become an armchair architect as it is to become a
control freak. When an architect finds that they don’t have time for the
development teams that are implementing the architecture (or simply
choosing not to spend time with them), that’s an indicator that they
might be falling into the armchair-architect personality. Development
teams need an architect’s support and guidance, and they need the
architect to be available to answer questions. Other indicators of an
armchair architect are the following:

- Not fully understanding the business domain, business problem, or
  technology being used

- Not enough hands-on experience developing software

- Not considering the implications associated with a certain
  implementation of the architecture solution (such as complexity,
  maintenance, and testing)

Few architects intend to become armchair architects; it just “happens”
when they get spread too thin between projects or teams and lose touch
with the technology or the business domain. To avoid this, we recommend
getting more involved in the project’s technologies and building a
stronger understanding of the business problem and domain.

The Effective Architect

An effective software architect creates appropriate constraints and
boundaries, ensures that team members are working well together, and
provides them with the right level of guidance. The effective architect
also makes sure that the team has the correct tools and technologies in
place and removes any other roadblocks between the development team and
its goals.

While this sounds obvious and easy, it’s not. There is an art to
becoming an effective leader as well as an effective software architect.
It requires collaborating closely with the development team and gaining
their respect. In the following sections, we’ll show you some techniques
for determining how involved an architect should be with a development
team.

How Much Involvement?

Becoming an effective architect is about knowing how much to be involved
with a given development team—and when to stay out of their way. This
concept, known as Elastic Leadership, is widely evangelized by author
and consultant Roy Osherove. We’re going to deviate a bit from
Osherove’s work in this area to focus on factors that are specific to
software-architecture leadership.

Knowing how much to be involved with a development team can be
challenging, and so is determining how many teams or projects you can
manage at once. Here are five key factors to consider:

Team familiarity

    How well do the team members know each other? Have they worked
    together before? Generally, the better team members know each other,
    the more they can self-organize and the less they need the architect
    involved. Conversely, the newer the team members are, the more
    they’ll need the architect to facilitate collaboration and reduce
    cliques.

Team size

    We consider more than a team with 12 developers to be a big team,
    and one with 5 or fewer to be a small team. The larger the team, the
    more the architect is needed. We discuss this topic in more detail
    in “Team Warning Signs”.

Overall experience

    What is the team’s mix of senior and junior (inexperienced)
    developers? How well do its members know the technology and the
    business domain? (If the business domain is particularly complex,
    consider assessing team members’ overall level of technological
    experience separately from their business-domain experience.) Teams
    with lots of junior developers require more involvement and
    mentoring from the architect and more mentoring. In teams with more
    senior developers, the architect can become more of a facilitator
    than a mentor.

Project complexity

    Highly complex projects require the architect to be more available
    to assist with issues, while relatively simple, straightforward
    projects require less involvement.

Project duration

    Is the project short (say, two months), long (two years), or average
    duration (around six months)? The architect involvement needed grows
    with the length of the project.

While most of these factors might seem obvious, project duration is
sometimes confusing. As we indicated, the shorter the project’s
duration, the less involvement is needed; the longer the project, the
more involvement is needed. Does that seem counterintuitive? Consider a
quick two-month project. Two months is not a lot of time to qualify
requirements, experiment, develop code, test every scenario, and release
into production. In this case, the architect should act more like an
armchair architect; the development team already has a keen sense of
urgency, and a control-freak architect would just get in the way and
delay the project. Now think about a two-year project: the developers
are more relaxed, not feeling a sense of urgency. They’re likely to be
planning vacations and taking long lunches. Thus, for longer duration
projects the architect is needed to ensure that the project moves along
on schedule and that the team accomplishes the most complex tasks first.

To illustrate how to use these factors to determine an appropriate level
of involvement, assume a fixed scale of 20 points for each factor, as
shown in Figure 24-4. The side of the scale with negative values
indicates less involvement, ending in the extreme of the armchair
architect. The positive values indicate more involvement, ending in the
extreme of the control-freak architect.

[Involvement scale]

Figure 24-4. Scale for measuring architects’ amount of involvement with development teams

This scale is not exact, of course, but it does help in determining the
amount of involvement the architect should expect to have with a
development team. For example, consider the project scenario, Scenario
1, shown in Table 24-1 and Figure 24-5. The values for each factor in
the table move the “needle” toward either extreme: +20 for a factor that
indicates more involvement, -20 for one that indicates less involvement.
The factor scores rated here for Scenario 1 total -60, indicating that
the architect should limit their involvement in daily interactions,
facilitating but staying out of the team’s way. They will be needed to
answer questions and make sure the team is on track, but for the most
part the architect should be largely hands-off and let the experienced
team do what they do best—develop software quickly.

  Factor               Value               Rating   Personality
  -------------------- ------------------- -------- --------------------
  Team familiarity     New team members    +20      Control freak
  Team size            Small (4 members)   -20      Armchair architect
  Overall experience   All experienced     -20      Armchair architect
  Project complexity   Relatively simple   -20      Armchair architect
  Project duration     2 months            -20      Armchair architect
                                                    
  Accumulated score                        -60      Armchair architect

  : Table 24-1. Scenario 1 example for amount of involvement
  {#table-making-teams-effective-scenario1}

[Scenario1]

Figure 24-5. Amount of involvement for Scenario 1

Now consider Scenario 2, described in Table 24-2 and illustrated in
Figure 24-6, where the team members know each other well, but the team
is large (12 team members) and consists mostly of junior developers. The
project is relatively complex, with a duration of six months. In this
case, the accumulated score comes out to +20, indicating that the
effective architect should take on a mentoring and coaching role and be
fairly involved in day-to-day activities, but not so much as to disrupt
the team.

  Factor               Value                  Rating   Personality
  -------------------- ---------------------- -------- --------------------
  Team familiarity     Know each other well   -20      Armchair architect
  Team size            Large (12 members)     +20      Control freak
  Overall experience   Mostly junior          +20      Control freak
  Project complexity   High complexity        +20      Control freak
  Project duration     6 months               -20      Armchair architect
                                                       
  Accumulated score                           +20      Control freak

  : Table 24-2. Scenario 2 example for amount of involvement
  {#table-making-teams-effective-scenario2}

[Scenario2]

Figure 24-6. Amount of involvement for Scenario 2

Architects use these factors at the start of a project to determine how
involved they plan to be, but as the project progresses, their level of
involvement usually changes. We thus recommend analyzing these factors
continually throughout the project’s lifecycle.

It is difficult to make these factors objective, since some (such as the
team’s overall experience level) might carry more significance than
others. In these cases the metrics can easily be weighted or modified to
suit a particular situation.

The primary message here is that the appropriate amount of architect
involvement on a development team varies according to these five
factors. By using these factors to gauge their level of involvement,
architects can draw the appropriate boundaries and create the right size
“room” for the team.

Team Warning Signs

We mentioned team size as one of the five factors that help an architect
determine the level of involvement on a development team: the larger a
team, the more architect involvement is needed; the smaller the team,
the less involvement is needed. However, what constitutes a “large
team”? In this section, we’ll look at three factors that can help an
architect determine if the team is too large, and hence not as effective
as it can be.

Process Loss

The term process loss was coined by Fred Brooks in his book The Mythical
Man-Month (Addison-Wesley, 1995). The basic idea of process loss,
otherwise known as Brooks’s Law, is that the more people you add to a
project, the more time the project will take. As Figure 24-7 shows,
group potential is defined by the collective efforts of everyone on the
team. However, Brooks states that any team’s actual productivity will
always be less than its potential productivity; the difference is called
the team’s process loss.

[Process loss]

Figure 24-7. Brooks’s Law holds that a team’s size affects its actual productivity

Process loss is a good factor in determining the correct team size for a
particular project, and an effective software architect observes the
development team to look for indications of process loss. For instance,
if team members frequently run into merge conflicts when pushing code to
a repository, this is an indication that they are working on the same
code and possibly getting in each other’s way.

To avoid process loss, we recommend looking for areas of parallelism and
having team members working on separate services or areas of the
application. Anytime a project manager proposes adding a new team member
to a project, an effective architect will look for opportunities to
create parallel work streams. If they find none, they notify the project
manager that a new addition could have a negative impact on the team.

Pluralistic Ignorance

Pluralistic ignorance is when everyone privately rejects a norm, but
agrees to it because they think they are missing something obvious. For
example, suppose the majority of people on a large team agree that using
messaging between two remote services is the best solution. One person
thinks this is a silly idea, because of a secure firewall between the
two services. However, that person publicly agrees along with everyone
else to use messaging. Although they privately reject the idea, they are
afraid that they might be missing something obvious if they speak up.
The larger the group, the less willing people are to confront others. On
a smaller team, they might have spoken up to challenge the original
solution, prompting the team to land on another protocol (such as REST)
for a better solution.

The concept of pluralistic ignorance was made famous by the Danish
children’s story “The Emperor’s New Clothes”, by Hans Christian
Andersen. In the story, two con artists, posing as tailors, convince the
king that the new clothes they’ve “made” for him are invisible to anyone
who is unworthy to see them. The king, who can’t see the clothes but is
unwilling to admit that he himself must be unworthy, struts around
totally nude, asking all of his subjects how they like his new clothes.
The subjects, afraid of being considered unworthy, assure the king that
his new clothes are the best thing ever. This folly continues until a
child finally calls out to the king that he isn’t wearing any clothes at
all.

During meetings, an effective software architect observes people’s
facial expressions and body language, alert for the possibility that
some might mask their skepticism because of pluralistic ignorance. If
the architect senses this happening, they act as a facilitator—perhaps
interrupting to ask a skeptic what they think about the proposed
solution and supporting them when they speak up, even if the person is
wrong. The point here is for the architect, as a facilitator, to make
sure everyone feels it is a safe enough environment to speak up.

The third factor that indicates appropriate team size is called
diffusion of responsibility. As teams get bigger, their growth has a
negative impact on communication. If team members are confused about who
is responsible for what and things are getting dropped, those are good
signs that the team is too large.

Figure 24-8 shows someone standing next to a broken-down car on the side
of a country road. In this scenario, how many people might stop and ask
the motorist if everything is OK? Because it’s a small road, it’s
probably in a small community, so maybe everyone who passes by will
stop. But what if that same motorist is stranded on the side of a busy
highway in a large city? Thousands of cars might simply drive by without
anyone stopping to ask if everything is OK. This is a good example of
the diffusion of responsibility. As cities get busier and more crowded,
people assume the motorist has already called for help, or that some
other member of the crowd witnessing the event will help. However, in
most of these cases, help is not on the way, and the motorist is stuck
with a dead or forgotten cell phone.

[Diffusion of responsibility]

Figure 24-8. Diffusion of responsibility

An effective architect not only guides the development team through
implementing the architecture, but ensures that its members are healthy,
happy, and working together to achieve a common goal. Looking for these
three warning signs and helping to correct the problems they indicate is
a good way to ensure an effective development team.

Leveraging Checklists

Airline pilots use checklists on every flight. Even the most
experienced, seasoned veteran pilots have checklists for takeoff,
landing, and thousands of other situations—both common ones and unusual
edge cases. They use checklists because one missed aircraft setting or
procedure (such as forgetting to set the flaps to 10 degrees before
takeoff) can mean the difference between a safe flight and a disaster.

In Dr. Atul Gawande’s excellent book The Checklist Manifesto (Picador,
2011), he describes the power of checklists to make surgical procedures
safer. Alarmed at the high rate of staph infections in hospitals, Dr.
Gawande created surgical checklists. Infection rates in hospitals using
the checklists fell to near zero, while rates in control hospitals not
using the checklists continued to rise.

Checklists work. They’re excellent vehicles for making sure every task
is covered and addressed. So why doesn’t the software development
industry leverage them too? Having worked for many years in this
industry, we firmly believe that checklists make a big difference in the
effectiveness of development teams. Of course, most software developers
aren’t handling life-and-death matters like flying airliners or
performing open-heart surgery. In other words, software developers don’t
require checklists for everything. The key is knowing when to leverage
them and when not to.

Figure 24-9 is not a checklist—it’s a set of procedural steps for
creating a new database table, so it should not be in checklist form.
Some of its tasks have dependencies; for example, the database table
cannot be verified if the form has not yet been submitted. Any process
with a procedural flow of dependent tasks should not be in a checklist.
Nor should simple, familiar processes that are executed frequently
without error.

[Bad Checklist]

Figure 24-9. Example of a bad checklist

Good candidates for checklists include processes that don’t have a set
procedural order or dependent tasks, as well as those where people
frequently skip steps or make errors. Don’t go overboard and start
making everything a checklist. Architects often do this once they find
that checklists do, in fact, make development teams more effective. They
risk invoking what is known as the Law of Diminishing Returns. The more
checklists the architect creates, the less likely developers are to use
them. It’s also wise to make checklists as small as possible while still
capturing all the necessary steps. Developers generally will not follow
overly long checklists. If any of the tasks listed can be automated,
automate them and remove them from the checklist.

Note

Don’t worry about stating the obvious in a checklist. The obvious stuff
is what usually gets missed.

Three of the checklists we’ve found most helpful cover developer code
completion, unit and functional testing, and software releases. Each
checklist is discussed in the following sections.

The Hawthorne Effect

The hardest part of introducing checklists to a development team is
getting developers to actually use them. It’s all too common for some
developers to run out of time and simply check off all the items in a
checklist without actually performing the tasks.

One way to address this issue is by talking with the team about the
difference using checklists can make and having them read The Checklist
Manifesto by Atul Gawande. Make sure each team member understands the
reasoning behind each checklist. Consider having them decide
collaboratively what procedures should and shouldn’t be on a
checklist—creating a sense of ownership also helps.

When all else fails, there’s the Hawthorne effect: the tendency for
people who know they are being observed or monitored to change their
behavior, generally to do the right thing. This effect doesn’t require
actual monitoring so much as a perception; for example, many employers
mount non-functioning cameras in highly visible areas, while others
install website monitoring software that they rarely check. (How many of
those reports are actually viewed by managers?)

To use the Hawthorne effect to govern checklists, let the team know that
because using checklists is critical to the team’s productivity, all
checklists will be verified to make sure the task was actually
performed. In reality, occasional spot-checks are all that’s needed;
developers will be much less likely to skip items or falsely mark them
as completed.

Developer Code-Completion Checklist

The developer code-completion checklist is a useful tool, particularly
when a developer states that they are “done” with the code. It also is
useful for arriving at a “definition of done”: if everything in the
checklist is complete, the developer can say they are actually done with
the code they were working on.

Here are some things to include in a developer code-completion
checklist:

- Coding and formatting standards not included in automated tools

- Frequently overlooked items (such as absorbed exceptions)

- Project-specific standards

- Special team instructions or procedures

Figure 24-10 shows an example developer code-completion checklist. There
are some obvious tasks here, like “Run code cleanup and code formatting”
and “Make sure there are no absorbed exceptions.” How often do
developers in a hurry forget to run code cleanup and formatting from the
IDE? Plenty often. In The Checklist Manifesto, Gawande finds the same
phenomenon with respect to surgical procedures—the obvious tasks are
often the ones missed.

[Code-Completion Checklist]

Figure 24-10. Example of a developer code-completion checklist

The architect should always review the checklist to see if any items can
be automated or written as plug-ins for a code-validation checker. While
the project-specific tasks in the checklist (such as executing the
custom validator, verifying the audit log is written, calling the
setFailure() method, and including the @ServiceEntrypoint annotation)
are good to have in a checklist, some of these could be automated. For
example, while an automated check might not be feasible for “Include
@ServiceEntrypoint on service API class,” it would work for “Verify that
only public methods are calling setFailure()”—a straightforward check to
automate with any code-crawling tool. Checking for areas of automation
shortens the checklist’s size and improves its ratio of signal to noise.

Unit and Functional Testing Checklist

Perhaps one of the best checklists is for unit and functional testing.
This checklist contains some of the more unusual and edge cases that
software developers tend to forget to test. Whenever someone from QA
finds a code issue based on a particular test case, add that test case
to this checklist.

This particular checklist is usually one of the longest, since it
encompasses all the types of tests that can be run against code. Its
purpose is to ensure the most complete testing possible so that when the
developer is done with the checklist, the code is essentially production
ready.

Here are some of the items found in a typical unit and functional
testing checklist:

- Special characters in text and numeric fields

- Minimum and maximum value ranges

- Unusual and extreme test cases

- Missing fields

As with the developer code-completion checklist, if any items can be
written as automated tests or are already included in the automated test
suite, they should be removed from the checklist and automated.

Developers sometimes don’t know where to start when writing unit tests
or how many they should write. This checklist provides a way to make
sure general and specific test scenarios are included in the development
process. In organizations where testing and development are performed by
separate teams, this checklist helps to bridge the gap. The more
development teams perform complete testing, the easier they make the
testing teams’ jobs, freeing them up to focus on business scenarios not
covered in the checklists.

Software-Release Checklist

Releasing software into production is perhaps one of the most
error-prone points in the software development lifecycle, so it makes
for a great checklist. This checklist helps avoid failed builds and
deployments, and significantly reduces the risk associated with
releasing software.

The software-release checklist is usually the most volatile of the
checklists presented here, because it changes each time a deployment
fails or has problems, to address new errors and shifting circumstances.

The software-release checklist typically includes:

- Configuration changes in servers or external configuration servers

- Third-party libraries added to the project (JAR, DLL, etc.)

- Database updates and corresponding database-migration scripts

Anytime a build or deployment fails, the architect should analyze the
root cause of the failure and add a corresponding entry to the
software-release checklist. This way, the item will be verified during
the next build or deployment, preventing the problem from happening
again.

Providing Guidance

Another way software architects can make teams effective is by using
design principles to provide guidance. This also helps form the
constraint “room” in which developers work to implement the
architecture. Communicating design principles is one of the keys to
creating a successful team.

To illustrate this point, imagine you’re guiding a development team in
using what is typically called the layered stack—the collection of
third-party libraries that make up the application. Development teams
usually have lots of questions about the layered stack, including which
libraries are OK, which are not, and whether or when they can make their
own decisions about libraries.

You might begin by having the developers answer the following questions
about a library they want to use:

- Are there any overlaps between the proposed library and the system’s
  existing functionality?

- What is the justification for using the proposed library?

The first question guides developers to check if the functionality
provided by the new library can be satisfied through an existing library
or existing functionality. When developers ignore this activity (which
sometimes happens), they can end up creating lots of duplicate
functionality, particularly in large projects and teams.

The second question prompts the developer to ask if the new library or
functionality is truly needed. We recommend asking for both a technical
justification and a business justification, in part because this
technique helps make developers aware of the need to provide business
justifications.

The Impact of Business Justifications

One of your authors was the lead architect on a particularly complex
Java-based project with a large development team. One team member was
obsessed with the Scala programming language and desperately wanted to
use it on the project. Their desire to use Scala ended up becoming so
disruptive that two key team members declared their intention to leave
the project for other, “less toxic” environments. Your author convinced
them to hold off. Then he told the Scala enthusiast that he would
support using Scala within the project if the enthusiast provided a
business justification for the costs of the training and rewriting
involved. The Scala enthusiast was ecstatic and said they would get
right on it. They left the meeting yelling, “Thank you—you’re the best!”

The next day, the Scala enthusiast came into the office completely
transformed and asked to speak with your author. They began by
immediately (and humbly) saying, “Thank you.” The Scala enthusiast
explained that they had come up with all the technical reasons in the
world to use Scala, but none of those technical advantages had any
business value in terms of the cost, budget, and timeline. In fact, the
Scala enthusiast had realized two things: first, that the increase in
cost, budget, and timeline would provide no benefit whatsoever; and,
second, that they’d been disrupting the team. Before long, the Scala
enthusiast had transformed into one of its best and most helpful
members. Being asked to provide a business justification for something
they wanted increased their awareness of the business’s needs, making
them a better software developer and making the team stronger and
healthier. The two key developers who’d been planning on leaving stayed
on the team.

Another good way to communicate design principles is through graphical
explanations about which decisions the development team can make and
which they can’t. The graphic in Figure 24-11 shows what this might look
like for controlling the layered stack.

[Guidance for the layered stack]

Figure 24-11. Providing guidance for the layered stack

These categories are only examples, but many more can be defined. In
presenting Figure 24-11 to the team, the architect should apply each
category to the third-party library proposed for use:

Special purpose

    These are specific libraries used for things like rendering PDFs,
    scanning barcodes, and other circumstances that do not warrant
    writing custom software.

General purpose

    These libraries are wrappers on top of the language API and include
    things like Apache Commons and Guava for Java.

Framework

    These libraries are used for things like persistence (such as
    Hibernate) and inversion of control (such as Spring). In other
    words, they make up an entire layer or structure of the application
    and are highly invasive.

Next, the architect creates the “room” around this design principle.
Notice, in Figure 24-11, that the architect has authorized developers to
make decisions about special-purpose libraries without consulting the
architect. For general-purpose libraries, however, while developers can
analyze overlap analysis, provide justifications, and make a
recommendation, this category of library requires architect approval.
Finally, framework libraries are entirely the architect’s
responsibility—the development teams shouldn’t even perform analysis for
these types of libraries.

Summary

Making development teams effective is hard work. It requires lots of
experience and practice, as well as strong people skills (which we will
discuss in subsequent chapters). That said, the simple techniques in
this chapter for elastic leadership, leveraging checklists, and
providing guidance by communicating design principles do in fact work.
We’ve seen how useful they prove to be in making development teams work
more intelligently.

Some question architects’ role in such activities, insisting that this
work should be assigned to the development manager or project manager.
We strongly disagree. Software architects guide the team on technical
matters and lead them through implementing the architecture. Building a
close collaborative relationship with a development team allows the
architect to observe team dynamics and facilitate changes to make the
team more productive.

Chapter 25. Negotiation and Leadership Skills

Negotiation and leadership skills are hard skills, obtained only through
many years of learning, practice, and mistakes—but they are critical in
becoming an effective software architect. This book can’t make anyone an
expert in negotiation and leadership overnight, but the techniques we
introduce in this chapter are a good starting point. To dive deeper into
this topic, we suggest Tanya Reilly’s book The Staff Engineer’s Path: A
Guide for Individual Contributors (O’Reilly, 2022) and the classic
negotiation book Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In
(Penguin Books, 2011) by Roger Fisher, William L. Ury, and Bruce Patton.

Negotiation and Facilitation

In Chapter 1, we listed core expectations for software architects. The
last expectation we discussed was understanding and being able to
navigate your organization’s office politics. The reason this is such an
important expectation is that almost every decision you make as a
software architect will be challenged: by developers who think they know
more, by other architects who think they have a better idea or way of
approaching the problem, and by stakeholders who think your solution is
too expensive or will take too much time.

Negotiation is one of an architect’s most important skills. Effective
software architects understand the politics of the organization, have
strong negotiation and facilitation skills, and can overcome
disagreements to create solutions that all stakeholders agree on.

Negotiating with Business Stakeholders

Consider the following scenario in which you, as the lead architect,
must negotiate with a key business stakeholder:

Scenario 1

    Parker, the senior vice president and product sponsor for this
    project, insists that the new global trading system must support
    “five nines” of availability (99.999%). However, based on the amount
    of time between global markets when trading doesn’t occur (two
    hours), you know that three nines of availability (99.9%) would be
    sufficient to meet the project requirements. The problem is, you’ve
    seen that Parker does not like to be wrong and doesn’t respond well
    to being corrected, especially if they perceive it as condescending.
    Parker isn’t technically knowledgeable, but thinks they are, so they
    tend to get involved in the non-functional aspects of projects. As
    the architect, your goal is to convince Parker, through negotiation,
    that three nines (99.9%) of availability would be enough.

You’ll have to be careful to not be too egotistical and forceful in your
analysis, but you also need to make sure you’re not missing anything
that might prove you wrong during the negotiation. There are several key
negotiation techniques you can use to help with this sort of stakeholder
negotiation. The first is:

Tip

Pay attention to the buzzwords and jargon people use, even if they seem
meaningless. They often contain clues that can help you better
understand and negotiate the situation.

Corporate buzzwords are generally meaningless, but can nevertheless
provide valuable information when you’re about to enter into
negotiations. Say you ask when a particular feature is needed and Parker
responds, “I needed it yesterday.” You can’t literally provide that, but
it should tell you that time to market is important to this stakeholder.
Similarly, the phrase “this system must be lightning fast” means
performance is a big concern, and “zero downtime,” rather than being
literal, means that availability is critical in this application.
Effective software architects read between the lines of such exaggerated
statements to identify the stakeholder’s real concerns. This leads to a
second negotiation technique:

Tip

Gather as much information as possible before entering into a
negotiation.

Parker’s use of the phrase “five nines” indicates that they want the
system to have high availability (specifically, 99.999% of uptime).
However, it might be the case that Parker is unaware of what “five
nines” of availability actually means in terms of amount of downtime per
year. Table 25-1 shows the downtimes based on the number of nines of
availability.

  Percentage uptime      Downtime per year (per day)
  ---------------------- -----------------------------
  90.0% (one nine)       36 days 12 hrs (2.4 hrs)
  99.0% (two nines)      87 hrs 46 min (14 min)
  99.9% (three nines)    8 hrs 46 min (86 sec)
  99.99% (four nines)    52 min 33 sec (7 sec)
  99.999% (five nines)   5 min 35 sec (1 sec)
  99.9999% (six nines)   31.5 sec (86 ms)

  : Table 25-1. The nines of availability
  {#table-negotiation-skills-nines}

“Five nines” of availability comes out to 5 minutes and 35 seconds of
downtime per year, or an average of 1 second a day of unplanned
downtime. That’s ambitious, costly, and, as it turns out, unnecessary
for Scenario 1 based on the amount of time between global trading when
trading doesn’t occur. Stating these goals in hours and minutes (or, in
this case, seconds) is a much better way to have the conversation than
sticking with the “nines” vernacular because it brings some actual
metrics and quantified numbers into the discussion.

Negotiating Scenario 1 would include validating Parker’s concerns (“I
understand that availability is very important for this system”), then
steering the negotiation from the nines vernacular to one of reasonable
hours and minutes of unplanned downtime. Three nines (which you deem
good enough) comes to an average of 86 seconds of unplanned downtime per
day—certainly a reasonable number, given the context of this global
trading system. Stating it this way might be enough to convince Parker
that this amount of unplanned downtime is satisfactory. However, if it
doesn’t, here’s another tip:

Tip

When all else fails, state things in terms of qualified cost and time.

We recommend saving this negotiation tactic for last. We’ve seen too
many negotiations start off on the wrong foot due to opening statements
like “That’s going to cost a lot of money” or “We don’t have time for
that.” Money and time (which includes the effort involved) are certainly
key factors in any negotiation, but try other justifications and
rationalizations that matter more before you bring them up. They should
be a last resort. Once you reach an agreement with the stakeholder, you
can consider cost and time if they are important.

Another important negotiation technique for such situations:

Tip

When you need to qualify demands or requirements, “divide and conquer.”

In The Art of War, the ancient Chinese warrior Sun Tzu writes of one’s
opponent, “If his forces are united, separate them.” You can use this
divide-and-conquer tactic during negotiations as well. In Scenario 1,
Parker is insisting on five nines (99.999%) of availability for the new
trading system. But does the entire system needs five nines of
availability? You can qualify the requirement, narrowing it down to any
specific area(s) of the system that genuinely need five nines of
availability. This reduces the scope of difficult (and costly)
requirements, not to mention the scope of the negotiation.

Negotiating with Other Architects

It’s not unusual for architects to have to negotiate with other
architects on a project. Consider Scenario 2, where two architects
disagree on which protocol to use:

Scenario 2

    You’re the senior of two architects on a project, and you believe
    that asynchronous messaging would be the right approach for
    communication between a group of services, to increase both
    performance and scalability. However, Addison, the other architect
    on the project, strongly disagrees. They insist that REST would be a
    better choice, because it’s always faster than messaging and can
    scale just as well. They cite their research, which consists of a
    Google search and the output of a prompt to a popular generative AI
    tool. This is not the first heated debate you’ve had with Addison,
    nor will it be the last. You want to convince them that messaging is
    the right solution.

Now, as the senior architect, you certainly could tell Addison that
their opinion doesn’t matter and ignore it. However, this will only
intensify the animosity between you, and an unhealthy, noncollaborative
relationship between the project’s two architects would almost certainly
have a negative impact on the development team.

Tip

Always remember that demonstration defeats discussion.

Rather than arguing over REST versus messaging, you should demonstrate
to Addison why messaging would be a better choice in this specific
environment. Because every environment is different, simply Googling it
rarely yields the correct answer. But if you compare the two options in
a production-like environment and show Addison the results, you might be
able to avoid an argument entirely.

Tip

Avoid being overly argumentative or letting things get too personal.
Calm leadership, combined with clear and concise reasoning, will almost
always win a negotiation.

This is a very powerful technique for dealing with adversarial
relationships. Once things get personal or heated, the best thing to do
is stop the negotiation. Re-engage later, when both parties have calmed
down. Architects argue from time to time, but if you stay calm and
project leadership, the other person will usually back down.

Negotiating with Developers

Effective software architects gain the team’s respect through working
together. That way, when they request something of the development team,
it’s far less likely to spark an argument or resentment.

As you saw in Chapter 24, working with development teams can be
difficult at times. When development teams feel disconnected from the
architecture (or the architect), they often feel left out of decisions.
This is a classic example of the Ivory Tower architecture antipattern.
Ivory tower architects dictate from on high, giving development teams
orders without regard for their opinions or concerns. This usually leads
to the team losing respect for the architect and can eventually cause
the team’s dynamics to break down altogether. One negotiation technique
that can help address this situation is always providing a justification
for your decisions.

Tip

When convincing developers to adopt an architecture decision or to do a
specific task, provide a justification rather than “dictating from on
high.”

If you provide a reason why something needs to be done, developers are
more likely to agree. For example, consider the following conversation
between an architect and a developer about making a simple query within
a traditional n-tiered layered architecture:

  Architect: “You must go through the Business layer to make that call.”
  Developer: “I disagree. It’s much faster just to call the database
  directly.”

There are several things wrong with this conversation. First, notice the
architect’s use of the words “you must.” Not only is this type of
commanding voice demeaning, it’s one of the worst ways to begin a
negotiation (or a conversation). The developer’s response includes a
reason: going through the Business layer will be slower and take more
time.

Now consider an alternative approach:

  Architect: “Since change control is most important to us, we have
  formed a closed-layered architecture. This means all calls to the
  database need to come from the Business layer.”
  Developer: “OK, I get it—but in that case, how am I going to deal with
  these performance issues for simple queries?”

Here, the architect is justifying the demand that all calls go through
the Business layer. Providing the justification first is always a good
approach. Most people tend to stop listening as soon as they hear
something they disagree with. Stating the reason before the demand
ensures that the developer will hear the architect’s justification.

The architect has also taken a less personal approach to phrasing this
demand. By saying “this means” rather than “you must,” they’ve turned
the demand into a simple statement of fact. Now take a look at the
developer’s response: instead of disagreeing with the
layered-architecture restrictions, the developer asks a question about
improving performance for simple calls. Now the two can engage in a
collaborative conversation to find ways to make simple queries faster
while still preserving the closed layers in the architecture.

Another effective negotiation tactic is to have the developer arrive at
the solution on their own. For example, suppose that you, as an
architect, are choosing between two frameworks, Framework X and
Framework Y. Framework Y doesn’t satisfy the security requirements for
the system, so you naturally choose Framework X. A developer on your
team strongly disagrees, insisting that Framework Y would still be the
better choice. Rather than argue the matter, you tell the developer that
if they can show you how Framework Y addresses the security concerns,
the team will use Framework Y.

One of two things will happen next. Option 1 is that the developer tries
to demonstrate that Framework Y satisfies the security requirements, but
fails. In failing, they come to understand firsthand why the team can’t
use this framework. And because they arrive at the solution on their
own, you automatically get their buy-in for the decision to use
Framework X. You’ve essentially made it the developer’s decision. This
is a win. Option 2 is that the developer finds a way to address the
security requirements with Framework Y and demonstrates it to you. This
is a win as well. In this case, you missed something in your assessment
of Framework Y, and now you have a better solution to the problem (and
the developer still feels involved in the decision).

Tip

If a developer disagrees with a decision you make, have them arrive at
the solution on their own.

Developers are smart people with useful knowledge. Collaborating with
the development team is how architects gain their respect—and their
assistance in finding better solutions. The more developers respect an
architect, the easier it will be for the architect to negotiate with
them.

The Software Architect as a Leader

A software architect is also a leader, guiding a development team as
they implement the architecture. We maintain that about 50% of being an
effective software architect is having good people skills, including
facilitation and leadership. In this section, we discuss leadership
techniques for software architects.

The 4 Cs of Architecture

We’ve said many times that change is a constant—and that’s never more
true than when the change in question involves things getting more and
more complex, whether it’s business processes, technology, or even
architecture itself. As you saw in Part III of this book, some
architectures are very complex. If an architecture needs to support six
nines of availability (99.9999%), that’s equivalent to unplanned
downtime of about 86 milliseconds a day, or 31.5 seconds of downtime per
year. This sort of complexity is known as essential complexity—in other
words, “we have a hard problem.”

It’s easy for architects (and developers) to fall into the trap of
adding unnecessary complexity to solutions, diagrams, and documentation.
To quote Neal:

  Developers are drawn to complexity like moths to a flame—frequently
  with the same result.

Figure 25-1 diagrams the major information flows of the backend
processing systems at a very large global bank. Is this system
necessarily complex—in other words, does it have to be complex? No one
knows, because the architect has made it complex. This sort of
complexity is called accidental complexity: in short, “we have made a
problem hard.” Architects sometimes add complexity to prove their worth
when things seem too simple, or to guarantee that they are always kept
in the loop on decisions or even to maintain job security. Whatever the
reason, introducing accidental complexity into something that does not
have to be complex is one of the best ways to lose respect and become an
ineffective leader and architect.

[Accidental complexity]

Figure 25-1. Introducing accidental complexity into a problem

To avoid accidental complexity, we use what we call the 4 Cs of
architecture leadership: communication, collaboration, clear, and
concise. These factors, as shown in Figure 25-2 (not to be confused with
the 4 Cs within the C4 Model of diagramming), work together to create an
effective communicator and collaborator on the team.

[4Cs of Architecture]

Figure 25-2. The 4 Cs of architecture

As a leader, facilitator, and negotiator, it’s vital for a software
architect to be able to communicate clearly and concisely. It is equally
important to be able to collaborate with developers, business
stakeholders, and other architects. Focusing on the 4 Cs helps an
architect gain the team’s respect and helps make them the go-to person
on the project for questions, advice, mentoring, coaching, and
leadership.

Be Pragmatic, Yet Visionary

An effective software architect must be pragmatic, yet visionary.
Striving for this balance is not as easy as it sounds; it takes a fairly
high level of maturity and significant practice to accomplish.

A visionary is someone who thinks about or plans the future with
imagination or wisdom. Being a visionary means applying strategic
thinking to a problem, which is exactly what architects do. Architects
plan for the future and make sure the architecture they build remains
vital (valid and useful) for a long time. However, architects often
become too theoretical in their planning and designs, creating solutions
that are too difficult to implement—or even understand.

Now consider the other side of the coin, which is being pragmatic. Being
pragmatic means dealing with things sensibly and realistically in a way
that is based on practical rather than theoretical considerations. While
architects need to be visionaries, they also need to apply practical,
realistic solutions. Being pragmatic when creating an architectural
solution means accounting for:

- Budget constraints and other cost-based factors

- Time constraints and other time-based factors

- The development team’s skill set and skill level

- The trade-offs and implications of each architecture decision

- The technical limitations of any proposed design or solution

Good software architects strive to balance pragmatism with imagination
and wisdom in solving problems (see Figure 25-3).

For example, consider an architect faced with sudden, significant
increases in concurrent user load for reasons that are unclear. A
visionary might come up with an elaborate way to improve the system’s
elasticity by breaking apart the databases and building a complex data
mesh: a collection of distributed, domain-partitioned databases used to
separate analytical data concerns from transactional ones. In theory,
this approach might be possible, but being pragmatic means applying
reason and practicality to the solution. For example, has the company
ever used a data mesh before? What are the trade-offs of using a data
mesh? Would this solution really solve the problem?

[Pragmatic yet visionary]

Figure 25-3. Good architects find the balance between being pragmatic and being visionary

Maintaining a good balance between being pragmatic and being visionary
is an excellent way to gain respect as an architect. Business
stakeholders appreciate visionary solutions that fit within a set of
constraints, and developers appreciate having a practical (rather than
theoretical) solution to implement.

A pragmatic architect would first look at what factors are limiting the
system’s elasticity. Finding and isolating any bottlenecks would be a
practical first approach to this problem. Is the database creating a
bottleneck with respect to some of the services invoked or other
external sources needed? If so, could some of the data be cached to
reduce calls to the database?

Leading Teams by Example

Bad software architects “pull rank,” using their title to get people to
do things. Effective software architects get people to do things by
leading through example. Again, this is all about gaining the respect of
development teams, business stakeholders, and other people throughout
the organization (such as the head of operations, development managers,
and product owners).

The classic “lead by example, not by title” story involves a captain in
command of a sergeant during a military battle. The captain, who is
largely removed from the troops, commands all of the troops forward to
take a particularly difficult hill. The soldiers, full of doubt, look
for confirmation from the lower-ranking sergeant. The sergeant,
understanding the situation, nods his head slightly, and the soldiers
immediately move forward with confidence to take the hill.

The moral of this story is that rank and title mean very little when it
comes to leading people. The computer scientist Gerald Weinberg is
famous for saying, “No matter what the problem is, it’s a people
problem.” Most people think that solving technical issues has nothing to
do with people skills and everything to do with technical knowledge.
While technical knowledge is certainly necessary, it’s only a part of
solving any problem.

Suppose, for example, that an architect is meeting with a team of
developers to solve an issue that’s come up in production. One of the
developers makes a suggestion, and the architect responds, “Well, that’s
a dumb idea.” Not only will that developer not make any more
suggestions, but now none of the other developers dare to say anything.
The architect has just shut down collaboration across the entire team.

Let’s look at another snippet of dialogue between an architect and a
developer:

  Developer: “So how are we going to solve this performance problem?”
  Architect: “What you need to do is use a cache. That would fix the
  problem.”
  Developer: “Don’t tell me what to do.”
  Architect: “What I’m telling you is that it would fix the problem.”

This is a good example of communicating without collaborating. By using
the words “what you need to do is,” the architect is shutting down
collaboration. Now consider a revised approach:

  Developer: “So how are we going to solve this performance problem?”
  Architect: “Have you considered using a cache? That might fix the
  problem.”
  Developer: “Hmmm, no, we didn’t think about that. What are your
  thoughts?”
  Architect: “Well, if we put a cache here…​”

The words “have you considered” turn the command into a question,
placing control back in the developer’s hands so that they can have a
collaborative conversation with the architect. How you use language is
vitally important to building a collaborative environment.

Leading collaboration as an architect isn’t just about how you
personally collaborate with others—it’s also about facilitating
collaboration among the team members. Try to observe team dynamics and
notice situations like the one in this dialogue. If you witness a team
member using demanding or condescending language, take them aside and
coach them on using collaborative language. Not only will this create
better team dynamics, it will also help the team members respect one
another.

If you need to get someone to do something they otherwise might not want
to do, sometimes it’s best to turn a request into a favor. In general,
human beings dislike being told what to do, but want to help others.
Consider the following conversation between an architect and developer
regarding an architecture refactoring effort during a busy iteration:

  Architect: “I’m going to need you to split the payment service into
  five different services, with each service containing the
  functionality for each type of payment we accept, such as store
  credit, credit card, PayPal, gift card, and reward points. That will
  provide better fault tolerance and scalability in the website. It
  shouldn’t take too long.”
  Developer: “Sorry, I’m way too busy this iteration for that. I really
  can’t do it.”
  Architect: “Listen, this is important and it needs to be done this
  iteration.”
  Developer: “Sorry, I can’t. Maybe one of the other developers can do
  it. I’m just too busy.”

The developer immediately rejects the task, even though the architect
has justified it as providing better fault tolerance and scalability.
The architect is telling the developer to do something they are simply
too busy to do—and their demand doesn’t even include the person’s name!
Now consider the technique of turning the request into a favor:

  Architect: “Hi, Sridhar. Listen, I’m in a real bind. I really need to
  have the payment service split into separate services for each payment
  type to get better fault tolerance and scalability, and I waited too
  long to do it. Is there any way you can squeeze this into this
  iteration? It would really help me out.”
  Developer (pausing): “I’m really busy this iteration, but I guess I’ll
  see what I can do.”
  Architect: “Thanks, Sridhar, I really appreciate the help. I owe you
  one.”
  Developer: “No worries. I’ll see that it gets done this iteration.”

First, using the person’s name makes the conversation more personal and
familiar, rather than an impersonal professional demand. Using a
person’s name and proper pronouns during conversations or negotiations
can help build respect and healthy relationships. Not only do people
like hearing their own names, but it creates a sense of familiarity as
well. Practice remembering people’s names by using them frequently. If
you find a name hard to pronounce, research the correct pronunciation,
then practice it until it is perfect. When someone tells you their name,
we like to repeat it back and ask if we’re pronouncing it correctly. If
it’s not correct, we repeat this process until we get it right.

Second, the architect in the prior conversation admits they are in a
“real bind” and that splitting the services would really “help them out
a lot.” This doesn’t always work, but playing off the basic human urge
to help others has a better probability of success than the first
conversation. Try it the next time you face this sort of situation.

Another effective leadership technique when you meet someone for the
first time or greet someone you only see occasionally is to always shake
the person’s hand and make eye contact. The handshake is an important
people skill that goes back to medieval times. It lets both people know
they are friends, not foes, and forms a bond between them. That said, be
aware of the cultural aspect of handshakes. For example, in the US, the
UK, Europe, and Australia, a handshake is an acceptable means of
greeting someone, whereas other cultures use different greetings (such
as Japan, where it’s about bowing and the timing of the bow).
Nevertheless, sometimes it can be hard to get a simple handshake right.

A handshake should be firm, but not overpowering. Look the person in the
eye; looking away while shaking someone’s hand is a sign of disrespect,
and most people will notice that. Also, don’t keep the handshake going
too long. Two or three seconds are all you need. Don’t go overboard with
handshakes either. If you come to the office every morning and start
shaking everyone’s hand, it’s weird enough to make people uncomfortable.
However, a monthly meeting with the head of operations is the perfect
opportunity to stand up, say “Hello, Ruth, nice seeing you again,” and
give Ruth a quick, firm handshake. Knowing when to shake hands and when
not to is part of the complex art of people skills.

As a leader, be careful to respect and preserve personal boundaries
between people at all levels. The handshake is a professional way of
forming a physical bond. Since that’s a good thing, some people assume
that it’s even better and more bonding to hug someone. It’s not. Hugging
in a professional setting, regardless of the environment, can make
people uncomfortable and could potentially even become a form of
workplace harassment. The same holds true for general conduct in the
workplace or when traveling with a coworker. Skip the hugs, adhere to
commonsense professional conduct, and stick with handshakes.

A good leader should become the “go-to person” on the team—the person
developers go to with questions and problems. An effective software
architect will seize the opportunity and take the initiative to lead the
team, regardless of their title or role on the team. If someone is
struggling with a technical issue, take initiative: step in and offer
help or guidance. The same is true for nontechnical situations. If a
team member comes into work looking sort of depressed and bothered, as
though something is definitely up, an effective software architect might
offer to talk. “Hey, Antonio, I’m heading over to get some coffee. Why
don’t we head over together?” Then during the walk, they can ask if
everything is OK. This provides an opening for a more personal
discussion and maybe even, in the best case, a chance to mentor and
coach. However, an effective leader will also pay attention to verbal
and nonverbal signs (like facial expressions and body language) and
recognize when it’s time to back off.

Another way to establish yourself as the go-to person on the team is to
host periodic brown-bag “lunch and learn” sessions about a specific
technique or technology, like design patterns or some new features of
the latest programming-language release. If you are reading this book,
you have some particular skill or knowledge that others don’t have.
Hosting these events isn’t just about providing valuable information to
developers or exhibiting your technical prowess—it’s also an opportunity
to practice mentoring and public-speaking skills, and identifies you as
a leader and mentor.

Integrating with the Development Team

An architect’s calendar is usually filled with overlapping meetings,
like the calendar shown in Figure 25-4. So how do architects find the
time to integrate with the team, guide and mentor them, and be available
for questions or concerns?

[Calendar]

Figure 25-4. A typical calendar of a software architect

Unfortunately, frequent meetings are a necessary evil. The key is
controlling them so you can make time for the team. As Figure 25-5
shows, there are two types of meetings: those imposed upon you (someone
invites you to a meeting), and those you impose (you call the meeting).

[Meeting Types]

Figure 25-5. Meeting types

The meetings others call are the hardest to control. Because software
architects must communicate and collaborate with lots of different
stakeholders, they are invited to almost every meeting—even if their
presence isn’t really needed. When invited to a meeting, ask the
organizer why you’re needed. If inviting you is just a way to keep you
in the loop, that’s what meeting notes are for. Asking why you should be
at a meeting can help you decide which meetings to attend and which you
can skip. Looking at the meeting agenda is also useful for this. Also,
are you needed at the whole meeting, or just the part that will discuss
a particular topic? Could you leave after that agenda item? Don’t waste
time in a meeting that you could be spending helping the development
team solve problems.

Tip

Ask for the meeting agenda ahead of time to help qualify if you are
really needed at the meeting or not.

When developers, or the tech lead, are invited to a meeting, consider
going in their place, particularly if both you and the tech lead are
invited, so the team can stay focused on the tasks at hand. While
deflecting meetings away from useful team members might increase the
time you spend in meetings, it increases the development team’s
productivity and their respect for you.

As an architect you will sometimes have to impose meetings on others,
but since this is where you have control, keep them to an absolute
minimum. Set an agenda and stick to it. Don’t let some other issue that
isn’t relevant to everyone disrupt the meeting. Ask yourself whether the
meeting you are calling is more important than the work it will pull the
team away from. For example, if it’s a matter of communicating some
important information, could you simply send an email rather than call a
meeting? However, if you do need to schedule a meeting with a
development team, try to schedule meetings first thing in the morning,
right after lunch, or toward the end of the day so as to minimize the
disruption to the developers during central work hours.

Developer Flow State

Flow is a state of mind developers frequently get into where the brain
gets 100% engaged in a particular problem, allowing full attention and
maximum creativity. For example, when a developer might be working on a
particularly difficult algorithm or piece of code, hours can feel like
minutes. Pay close attention to your team’s productivity flow and be
sure not to disrupt it. You can read more about flow state in the book
Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
(Harper Perennial, 2008).

Another good way to integrate with the development team, if you work
on-site, is to sit with them. Sitting in a cubicle away from the team
sends the message “I am special and should not be disturbed.” Sitting
alongside the team sends the message “I’m an integral part of the team
and available for questions or concerns.” When you’re on-site but can’t
sit with your development team, the best thing to do is walk around and
be seen as much as possible. An architect who’s never visible, stuck on
a different floor or always in their office, cannot possibly guide the
team. Block off time in the morning, after lunch, or late in the day to
converse, help with issues, answer questions, and do basic coaching and
mentoring. Developers appreciate this type of communication and will
respect you for making time for them during the day. The same holds true
for other stakeholders: stopping in to say hi to the head of operations
while on a coffee run is an excellent way to keep the lines of
communication open.

Sometimes, such as if you work in a remote environment, it’s not
possible to sit with the development team or walk around and be seen.
This makes collaboration much more difficult. For more information on
managing remote teams, we highly recommend Jacqui Read’s book
Communication Patterns (O’Reilly, 2023), Part 4 of which is entirely
devoted to remote teams.

Summary

The negotiation and leadership tips we present in this chapter are meant
to help software architects form better collaborative relationships with
the development team and other stakeholders. These are necessary skills.
But don’t just take it from us; take it from Theodore Roosevelt, the
26th president of the United States:

  The most important single ingredient in the formula of success is
  knowing how to get along with people.

  Theodore Roosevelt

Chapter 26. Architectural Intersections

So far in this book, we’ve shown how to identify the critical
characteristics an architecture must support, how to select the most
appropriate architectural style for those characteristics and for the
business problem, how to make effective architecture decisions, and how
to lead and guide development teams through implementing the
architecture. However, for an architecture to work, it must also be
aligned with other facets of the technical and business environment. We
call these alignments the intersections of architecture.

In this chapter, we discuss several important intersections that arise
when creating or validating a software architecture:

Implementation

    Is the implementation aligned with architectural concerns
    surrounding operational characteristics, architectural constraints,
    and the internal structure of the architecture?

Infrastructure

    Do the infrastructure and the way the architecture is deployed align
    with the operational concerns of the architecture, such as
    scalability, responsiveness, fault tolerance, and availability?

Data topologies

    One widely ignored alignment is that between the intersection of
    architecture and data topologies and data type. The data topology
    (monolithic, domain databases, and database per service) must
    properly align with the architectural style for the system to work.

Engineering practices

    Does the way the development team creates, maintains, and tests
    software match the corresponding architecture? Does the deployment
    pipeline match the architectural style?

Team topologies

    The way teams are organized can significantly impact the
    architecture, and vice versa. If the team structure is not properly
    aligned with the architecture, development teams will usually
    struggle, finding even the simplest of changes challenging.

Systems integration

    What other systems or services does the architecture need to
    communicate with? Not paying attention to this particular
    intersection can have devastating results in terms of maintenance,
    reliability, and operational characteristics such as scalability,
    responsiveness, and availability.

The enterprise

    Is the architecture aligned with the frameworks, practices, guiding
    principles, and standards across the organization and the
    enterprise?

The business environment

    Is the architecture properly aligned with the business environment
    and the problem domain? Too often architects ignore this important
    intersection, and as a result the architecture fails to meet the
    goals or needs of the business.

Generative AI

    How does the increasing use of large language models (LLMs) impact
    the architecture? This intersection is quickly becoming an important
    one as more companies leverage generative AI within their systems.

The following sections describe these intersections in more detail.

Architecture and Implementation

The First Law of Software Architecture also happens to be software
architects’ most common response to any question: “It depends.” Perhaps
the second most common response is, “That’s an implementation detail.”
When a software architecture fails to achieve its goals, this second
response is often to blame.

For an architecture to work properly, its implementation—that is, its
source code—must be aligned with its design to address three things: the
architecture’s operational concerns (such as fault tolerance,
responsiveness, scalability, and so on), internal structure, and
constraints. This section addresses each of the three in turn.

Operational Concerns

Operational concerns are the architectural characteristics we focused on
in Part I of the book, which form the foundation of any software
architecture, and which the architecture must support in order to solve
the business problem at hand. Architectural characteristics are what
drive architectural decisions (as discussed in Chapter 21).

So what does it mean for the architecture and the implementation to fall
out of alignment in how they address the system’s operational concerns?
Let’s say you’re an architect working on a new order-entry system that
needs to support anywhere from several thousand to half a million
concurrent customers. You choose a microservices architecture style,
based on the star ratings found in “Style Characteristics” in
Chapter 18, which is appropriate based on this system’s high scalability
and elasticity needs. However, during implementation, the development
team observes that, because the services’ bounded contexts are so
tightly formed (see “Bounded Context” in Chapter 18), the
Order Placement service cannot access the inventory database directly.
Instead, it must synchronously call the Inventory service to get the
current inventory for any item a customer is interested in buying. Not
only does this synchronous call tightly couple the two services, it
greatly slows the system’s responsiveness.

The development team decides to use an in-memory replicated cache
between these services, as shown in Figure 26-1: data resides in the
internal memory of each service instance, and is always kept in sync
behind the scenes through caching. Caching products for this purpose
include Apache Ignite and Hazelcast. Here, the Inventory service would
have a writable in-memory cache containing the item IDs and current
inventory counts; each instance of the Order Placement service would
have a replicated read-only version of that cache in its internal
memory. Using an in-memory replicated cache decouples the services and
significantly improves responsiveness.

[In-memory replicated caching]

Figure 26-1. The development team decided to use in-memory replicated caching between services, resulting in out-of-memory conditions when scaling the services

After production release, as the number of concurrent users grows, more
instances of each service are needed to handle the load. The system
crashes when the load reaches about 80,000 concurrent customers because
the internal cache’s memory requirements are too high, causing
out-of-memory conditions in all of the virtual machines.

In this scenario, the architecture and its implementation are
misaligned. While the architecture focuses on supporting high levels of
scalability and elasticity, the implementation focuses on responsiveness
and service decoupling. Both teams made good decisions, but in service
of different goals.

Structural Integrity

You learned in Chapter 8 that logical components are the building blocks
of any system and form its logical architecture. They are usually
represented through the directory structures in the source-code
repository (or namespaces, depending on the programming language). Since
the logical architecture describes how the system works and what parts
of the system interact with other parts, it’s critical that the
structure of the source code matches that of the logical architecture.

Without proper guidance, knowledge, and governance, it’s easy for
developers to ignore the system’s logical architecture and start
creating directory structures and namespaces as they please, without
regard for their impact on the system’s integrity. This misalignment
results in architectures that are difficult to maintain, test, and
deploy, and as a result become less reliable and harder to evolve or
adapt to new features, such as the logical architecture illustrated in
Figure 26-2.

[Bad logical architecture]

Figure 26-2. An example of an internal logical architecture that lacks governance and alignment

To ensure that the structure of the source code matches the logical
architecture, we recommend using automated governance tools, such as
ArchUnit for the Java platform, ArchUnitNet and NetArchTest for the .NET
platform, PyTestArch for Python, or TSArch for TypeScript and
JavaScript. These automated tools, coupled with good communication and
collaboration between the architect and the development team, create
implementations that are properly aligned with the architecture, as
shown in Figure 26-3.

[Good logical architecture]

Figure 26-3. An example of an internal logical architecture based on proper governance and alignment

Compare Figure 26-2 with Figure 26-3. Notice how the architecture in
Figure 26-3 is much more maintainable, testable, deployable, reliable,
adaptable, and extensible than that of the misaligned architecture shown
in Figure 26-2. This comparison illustrates the importance of this type
of implementation alignment.

Architectural Constraints

A constraint is a governing rule or principle describing some sort of
restriction within the architecture (such as limiting communications to
only REST or using a specific type of database) required to achieve its
goals. If the system’s implementation doesn’t adhere to its constraints,
the architecture will fail. Thus, part of a software architect’s job is
to identify and communicate the constraints of an architecture.

To illustrate what we mean by this particular intersection, consider a
business trying to release a new system with a very limited budget and a
tight deadline. This business expects lots of structural changes to the
database and needs to get those changes done as quickly as possible. In
this case, a traditional layered architecture (see Chapter 10) would be
an excellent fit due to its simplicity, cost-effectiveness, and
technical partitioning. Because this style separates the layers,
database changes can be isolated to only one layer, making them easier
and faster.

For the layered architecture to work in this particular business
problem, the architect would need to define the following constraints:

- All database logic must reside in the Persistence layer.

- The Presentation layer cannot access the Persistence layer directly,
  but must go through all of the layers, even for simple queries.

These constraints are necessary to prevent spreading the database logic
throughout the entire architecture, and so that changes to the physical
database structure (such as dropping a table or changing a column name)
won’t affect any code outside the Persistence layer.

Now let’s say the UI developers decide it’s faster to call the database
directly and implement the architecture that way instead. In addition,
the backend developers realize it would be much easier to maintain and
test the code if the Business logic and database logic are together, so
they also ignore the constraints and couple these concerns in the
business layer of the architecture. This implementation is not aligned
with the constraints of the architecture, which means that database
changes will impact all of the code in every layer, take too long, and
the system will not meet the business goals.

Architectural tools are also useful for governing architectural
constraints.

Architecture and Infrastructure

The scope of software architecture has grown over the last couple of
decades to encompass more and more responsibility and perspective.
Around the mid-2000s, the typical relationship between architecture and
operations was contractual and formal, with lots of bureaucracy. Most
companies outsourced operations to a third party to avoid the complexity
of hosting their own operations, with SLAs for uptime, scale,
responsiveness, and other important characteristics. Today, however,
architecture styles such as microservices freely leverage
characteristics that used to be solely operational. For example, elastic
scale was once built into space-based architectures (see Chapter 16),
but today, microservices handles it less painfully through tighter
collaboration between architects and DevOps.

History: How Pets.com Gave Us Elastic Scale

People often assume that our current technical capabilities (like
elastic scale) are just invented one day by some clever developer. In
reality, though, the best ideas are often born of hard lessons. Pets.com
is an early example. This ecommerce site appeared around 1998, hoping to
become the Amazon.com of pet supplies. Its brilliant marketing
department created a compelling mascot: a sock puppet with a microphone
that said irreverent things. The mascot became a superstar, appearing in
public at parades and national sporting events.

Unfortunately, Pets.com’s management apparently spent all the money on
the mascot, not on infrastructure. Once orders started pouring in, they
weren’t prepared. The website was slow, transactions were lost,
deliveries delayed…​it was pretty much the worst-case scenario. Shortly
after a disastrous Christmas rush, Pets.com closed down, selling its
only remaining valuable asset—the mascot.

What Pets.com needed was elastic scale: the ability to spin up more
instances of resources when they became needed. Cloud providers now
offer this feature as a commodity, but early ecommerce companies had to
manage their own infrastructure, and many fell victim to a previously
unheard-of phenomenon: too much success can kill a business. The fall of
Pets.com, and other similar horror stories, led architects to pay more
attention to such intersections when creating software architectures.

The intersection of architecture and infrastructure is important because
it facilitates operational architectural characteristics. Just because
an architecture can support high scalability doesn’t mean it will—if the
corresponding infrastructure doesn’t support it, it won’t (as
demonstrated by Pets.com). At client sites, we’ve all too often
witnessed architects and developers being blamed for architectural
failures that were really caused by a misalignment between architecture
and infrastructure.

In most cases, this misalignment occurs because of a lack of
communication and collaboration between the architect and those
responsible for the infrastructure and operations. Architects often fail
to realize infrastructure’s influence on characteristics such as
scalability, responsiveness, fault tolerance, performance, availability,
elasticity, and so on. This misalignment gave rise to the field of
DevOps.

For many years, many companies considered operations to be separate from
software development, often outsourcing them to a third-party company as
a cost-saving measure. In the 1990s and 2000s, many architectures were
designed defensively around the assumption that operations would be
outsourced and thus outside of architects’ control. (For a good example
of this, see Chapter 16.) However, in the mid-2000s, companies started
experimenting with new forms of architecture that combined many
operational concerns. For example, older architecture styles such as
orchestration-driven SOA required elaborate tools and frameworks to
support capabilities like scalability and elasticity, which greatly
complicated implementation. So architects built architectures that could
handle scale, performance, elasticity, and a host of other capabilities
internally. The side effect was that these architectures were vastly
more complex.

The creators of the microservices architecture style realized that
operational concerns are better handled by operations. By creating a
collaborative relationship between architecture and operations, the
architects realized they could simplify their designs and rely on the
operations people to handle the things they handle best. They teamed up
with operations to create microservices, and to lay the foundations of
what would become the DevOps movement. While DevOps has helped, this
intersection of architecture and infrastructure is nevertheless still
problematic for most companies.

While infrastructure is less of a concern, cloud environments can still
get misaligned with an architecture. For example, deploying services
across regions or even availability zones can decrease or even cancel
out the performance and data integrity benefits of in-memory replicated
caches and distributed caches. Similarly, co-locating services,
containers, or even Kubernetes Pods on the same virtual machine will
significantly increase performance, but it will also adversely impact
scalability, fault tolerance, availability, and elasticity.

Aligning architecture with infrastructure involves close communication
and collaboration between architects and infrastructure team members, or
even adopting DevOps practices, so that all stakeholders understand the
critical operational concerns. Only then can architects truly realize
the operational benefits of the architecture they selected—the ones that
led us to grant those wonderful five-star ratings.

Architecture and Data Topologies

The intersection of architecture and data topologies is often
overlooked. Choosing the wrong database type or topology can harm an
architecture and negate its best architectural characteristics. For
example, monolithic databases, while providing good data consistency and
transactional support, can detract from scalability and fault tolerance.
Similarly, distributed database topologies, while good at scalability
and change control, can decrease a system’s data integrity, data
consistency, and performance.

The following sections describe the intersection of architecture and
data topologies.

Database Topology

A database’s topology, as we discussed in Chapter 15, refers to how its
physical databases are configured within the architecture. Three basic
topologies include a monolithic database, distributed domain-based
databases, or the distributed database-per-service topology. Figure 26-4
illustrates these basic database topology types.

[Database topologies]

Figure 26-4. Common types of database topologies

The database topology must be aligned with the architecture in order to
work correctly. For example, microservices architectures typically use a
database-per-service pattern to maintain a strict bounded context.
Without this proper alignment, it would be extremely challenging for
architects to control change, and the system’s operational
characteristics, such as fault tolerance, scalability, elasticity,
maintainability, testability, and deployability, would all suffer. That
said, some styles, such as the service-based architecture (see
Chapter 14), are more flexible with regard to the physical database
topology.

Architectural Characteristics

In Part II of this book, we showed that every architectural style has
its superpowers (rated at 4 to 5 stars) and its weaknesses (1 to 2
stars). So do database types—and it’s important to align a system’s
architectural superpowers with the corresponding superpowers of its
database type. In our book Software Architecture: The Hard Parts, your
authors rated the characteristics of six different database types:
relational, key-value, document, columnar, graph, and NoSQL. You might
recall that scalability and elasticity are superpowers for
microservices, event-driven, and space-based architectures. They are
also superpowers for key-value and columnar databases, which means that
these database types are good choices to amplify those architectural
characteristics.

Data Structure

The structure of data being stored and accessed is also a factor in this
intersection. If the data structure is relational—that is, built upon a
hierarchy of interdependent relationships—then a relational database
will align well. However, storing key-value pairs in a relational
database is a misalignment that can lead to inefficiencies in both the
database and the architecture. Not all data carries with it the same
structure, so keep an eye on this. Some data may be relational, other
data may be document based (particularly when storing JSON-based event
or request payloads), and still other data may be key-value driven.
Given the potential diversity of data structures within any given
architecture, we recommend leveraging polyglot databases whenever
feasible.

Read/Write Priority

If the business problem involves high read or write volumes, that’s
important information for aligning the database topology with the
architecture. For example, if the architecture requires high write
volumes as a priority over infrequent reads, then a columnar database
would be a good fit. However, if the reverse is true and high read
volumes are the priority, then a key-value database, document database,
or graph database would be more appropriate. If the system prioritizes
reads and writes about equally, then relational and NewSQL databases
would be good choices. Misaligning this factor can lead to poorly
performing systems.

Architecture and Engineering Practices

In the late 20th century, dozens of software-development methodologies
became popular, including Waterfall and many flavors of Agile (such as
Scrum, Extreme Programming, Lean, and Crystal). At the time, most
architects believed that none of this affected software architecture,
treating development as an entirely separate process. However, over the
last several years, advances in engineering have thrust process concerns
upon software architecture. It’s useful to separate software-development
processes from engineering practices. By processes, we mean how teams
are formed and managed, how meetings are conducted and workflows
organized—in short, the mechanics of how people organize and interact.
Engineering practices, on the other hand, refer to the process-agnostic
techniques and tools teams use to develop and release software. For
example, Extreme Programming (XP), continuous integration (CI),
continuous delivery (CD), and test-driven development (TDD) are all
proven engineering practices that don’t rely on a particular process.
Thus, the term software engineering encompasses both software
development and these practices.

Focusing on engineering practices is important. Software development
lacks many of the features of more mature engineering disciplines. For
example, civil engineers can predict structural change with much more
accuracy than software engineers can predict similar aspects of software
structure. This means that the Achilles’ heel of software development is
estimation: how much time, how many resources, how much money? Part of
what contributes to this difficulty is that traditional practices of
estimation don’t accommodate the exploratory nature of software
development and the unknowns that typically arise when developing
software.

While process is mostly separate from architecture, iterative processes
fit its nature better. Trying to build a modern system like
microservices using an antiquated process like Waterfall will create a
great deal of friction. One aspect of architecture where Agile
methodologies really shine is in migrating from one architectural style
to another. Agile methodologies support such changes better than
planning-heavy processes because they have tight feedback loops and
encourage techniques like the Strangler Pattern and feature toggles.

Architects often also serve as project technical leaders, which means
determining what engineering practices the team uses. Just like
carefully considering the problem domain before choosing an
architecture, architects must also ensure that their architectural style
and engineering practices mesh. For example, the microservices
architectural philosophy assumes that teams will automate things like
machine provisioning, testing, and deployment. Trying to build a
microservices architecture with an antiquated operations group, manual
processes, and little testing would likely lead to failure. Just as
different problem domains lend themselves toward certain architectural
styles, so do different engineering practices.

The evolution of thought continues, from Extreme Programming to
continuous delivery and beyond, as advances in engineering practices
make new architecture capabilities possible. Neal’s book, Building
Evolutionary Architectures, highlights new ways to think about the
intersection of engineering practices and architecture that can improve
how we automate architectural governance. The book offers an important
new nomenclature and way of thinking about architectural
characteristics, and covers techniques for building architectures that
change gracefully over time.

In the software development world, nothing remains static. Architects
might design a system to meet certain criteria, but to ensure that their
designs survive both implementation and the inevitable march of change,
what we need is an evolutionary architecture.

Building Evolutionary Architectures introduces the concept of using
architectural fitness functions to protect (and govern) architectural
characteristics as change occurs over time. Recall from Chapter 6 that
architectural fitness functions are a way to get an objective integrity
assessment of some architectural characteristic(s). This assessment may
include a variety of mechanisms, such as metrics, unit tests, monitors,
and chaos engineering.

To see how fitness functions can be used to help align this
intersection, consider the business problem of needing a fast time to
market. Time to market translates to agility—the system’s ability to
respond quickly to change. Agility is a composite architectural
characteristic consisting of maintainability, testability, and
deployability (see Chapter 6). All three of these architectural
characteristics are influenced by engineering practices and procedures,
and as such can be measured and tracked through fitness functions. For
example, both microservices and service-based architectures support high
levels of agility. However, if the engineering practices surrounding
these architectural characteristics are not aligned with the
architecture, the system won’t meet those agility goals and
requirements. Fitness functions can be used to help identify a
misalignment, prompting the architect to take action to realign the
engineering practices with the architecture (or vice versa).

Architecture and Team Topologies

As we’ve discussed throughout Part II of the book, team topologies can
have a direct impact on software architecture, and vice versa. This
alignment is so important that we’ve included a section on team
topologies for each architecture style we introduce in this book.

One of the most basic ways team topologies can align with architecture
is by type of partitioning. Like architectures, teams can be domain
partitioned or technically partitioned. Domain-partitioned teams are
organized by domain area and are typically cross-functional, with
specialization throughout the team. For example, a particular
domain-partitioned team might focus on the customer-facing portion of a
system, and as such would be responsible for the end-to-end processing
of customer-related functionality, from the UI to the database.
Technically partitioned teams, in contrast, each focus on one particular
technical function of the architecture and are usually organized by
technical categories: for example, UI teams, backend-processing teams,
shared-services teams, and database teams would align with the layered
architecture style very nicely. Alternatively, these teams might be
technically partitioned into business-function teams and
data-synchronization teams, which would align well with the space-based
architectural style.

Understanding how teams are organized is vital for ensuring the success
of the system. If the organization’s team topology is misaligned with
the architecture, the teams will struggle to implement and maintain the
architecture, which will be unlikely to meet its business goals.

Architecture and Systems Integration

Systems rarely live in isolation. Most require additional processing and
data from other systems—and that brings us to the intersection of
architecture and systems integration. When one system needs to
communicate with another system to perform additional processing or
retrieve data, its architect faces a host of challenges and
implications. For example, is the system that is being called available?
Does it scale and perform to the same level as the requirements of the
calling system?

When architects don’t focus enough on systems integration, the systems’
static and dynamic coupling often results in architectures that can’t
scale, aren’t responsive, and lack agility. When integrating with other
systems, consider which communication protocols to use, what types of
contracts to have between systems, whether the systems’ architectural
characteristics are compatible, and if the integration preserves each
system’s architectural quantum.

Architecture and the Enterprise

Every enterprise has a set of standards and guiding principles. By
enterprise, we mean the collection of all systems and products within a
company (or a department or division within the company). For example,
many companies force certain security standards, practices, or
procedures on architectural solutions, regardless of the type of system.
Enterprise standards can also involve platforms, technologies,
documentation standards, and diagramming standards, to name a few. Be
aware of enterprise-level standards and practices, and ensure the
architecture is properly aligned with them.

We have experienced many situations where the architect ignored
enterprise-level practices, standards, and procedures. The usual result
has been that the architectural solution, however technically effective,
is deemed a failed “one-off” solution and scrapped. We can’t stress
enough the importance of aligning the architecture with enterprise
practices to ensure its success.

Architecture and the Business Environment

The business environment has a significant and direct influence on the
architecture of its systems (and vice versa), and the business
environment never stops changing. Is the company undergoing severe
cost-cutting measures to stay afloat, or aggressively expanding? Is the
business pivoting and repositioning every quarter to find its niche in a
highly volatile and competitive market, or does it find itself in a
position of stability? An effective software architect understands the
position and direction of the company, and aligns the architectures of
critical systems to match the business environment.

We call this alignment domain-to-architecture isomorphism. For example,
companies undergoing extreme cost-cutting measures would not align well
with microservices or space-based architectures, which are very costly
to create and maintain. Conversely, businesses that are aggressively
expanding through mergers and acquisitions would not be served well by
monolithic architecture styles that lack the ability to evolve and
adapt.

One issue architects typically face with this intersection is business
change, particularly unknown change. Former US Secretary of Defense
Donald Rumsfeld once famously said that:

  There are known knowns; there are things we know we know. We also know
  there are known unknowns; that is to say we know there are some things
  we do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns—the ones we don’t
  know we don’t know.

Many products and systems start with a list of known unknowns: things
developers must learn about the domain and technology they know will
change. However, these same systems also fall victim to unknown
unknowns: things no one knew were going to crop up, yet have appeared
unexpectedly. “Unknown unknowns” are the nemeses of software systems.
This is why all “Big Design Up Front” software efforts suffer:
architects cannot design for unknown unknowns. To quote Mark:

  All architectures become iterative because of unknown unknowns. Agile
  just recognizes this and does it sooner.

Planning for change in software architecture is hard. Evolutionary
architecture practices help address an ever-changing business landscape,
as does iterative architecture. Embracing architectural characteristics
such as portability, scalability, evolvability, and adaptability also
helps make a software architecture more flexible and adaptable to
change.

Barry O’Reilly, an experienced software architect specializing in
complexity theory and software design, came up with a new way of
thinking about constant business change, called residuality theory. In
his book Residues: Time, Change, and Uncertainty in Software
Architecture (Leanpub, 2024), O’Reilly describes techniques for treating
business change as stressors, and the corresponding architectural
changes as residues. His theory is that as the architect responds to
change by applying more and more residues to the architecture, these
residues will eventually start addressing unknown changes the architect
cannot possibly predict, creating an architecture that has reached a
critical state within complexity theory. It’s an interesting theory, one
we are watching closely.

Architecture and Generative AI

As we write the second edition of this book in early 2025, generative
artificial intelligence (Gen AI) and large language models (LLMs) have
infiltrated the world of software development and software design. Many
companies are incorporating them into systems to perform tasks that
previously were only performed manually by humans. Not surprisingly, Gen
AI intersects with software architecture too: architects are
incorporating LLMs into software architectures, and some are even using
Gen AI tools to assist them in thinking through hard problems.

Incorporating Generative AI into Architecture

One approach we recommend for incorporating Gen AI into an architecture
is to leverage abstraction and modularity. It’s important to be able to
replace one LLM with another quickly, and to allow for guardrails
(rails) and evaluate results (evals) from various LLMs.

For example, suppose a job search company wants to leverage Gen AI to
anonymize résumés, with the goal of reducing bias and placing focus on
job seekers’ skills rather than their demographics or other such
factors. This task is normally done by humans, but could easily be done
by an LLM. But are the LLM’s results accurate? Does it remove too much
information from the résumé? Does it keep too much demographic
information in place? For this sort of system, it’s vital to be able to
gather samples and metrics and compare LLM engines. Tools such as
Langfuse help create this kind of observability within the architecture.

Generative AI as an Architect Assistant

Given a proper prompt, an LLM (such as Copilot) can produce source code
that saves developers a lot of time and effort. They’re great for
solving very specific, deterministic problems, such as “write source
code in the C# programming language that generates a unique four-digit
PIN number that has no repeating digits.” But can LLM technology assist
software architects with typical tasks? Here are some general examples
of architecture-related prompts:

- Risk assessment: “Are there risk areas within this architecture?”

- Risk mitigation: “How should I address this risk?”

- Antipatterns: “Are there any common antipatterns in this
  architecture?”

- Decisions: “Should I use orchestration or choreography for this
  workflow?”

As of the time of the writing of this second edition (early 2025), we
haven’t had a tremendous amount of success with this endeavor. Asking an
LLM whether microservices or space-based architecture would be most
appropriate for a given situation rarely (if ever) yields the right
answer. Why? Because, as we’ve demonstrated in this book, everything in
software architecture is a trade-off. LLMs are great for understanding
knowledge, but to this day, they still lack the wisdom necessary to make
appropriate decisions. That wisdom includes so much context that it’s
much faster for the architect to solve a business problem by themselves
than to teach an LLM all about the problem and its extended environment
and context. The fact that we’ve included eight other intersections to
be concerned about should be evidence enough that this is a daunting
task.

That said, we’ve seen some tools with promise. For instance,
Thoughtworks Haiven can interpret an architecture diagram and fully
describe a software architecture, saving the work of having to export a
diagram into a machine-readable format such as XML and use it to prompt
the LLM. Once they’ve imported that information, users can ask Haiven
simple questions about the architecture, such as whether it can identify
any bottlenecks or issues. Other efforts have included using an LLM to
translate a PlantUML diagram or a pseudolanguage description of an
architecture into executable ArchUnit code to govern the structure of a
system. A lot of activity is happening in this area, so expect rapid
change in the coming years in how Gen AI can assist architects.

Summary

Software architecture is a holistic activity that involves many facets
of an organization. Effective software architects realize that creating
and maintaining an architecture is much more than just selecting a
particular architectural style and moving forward with implementation.
It’s also about making sure that the architecture is aligned with other
aspects of the environment, and about using the communication and
collaboration skills described in Part III to make that alignment
happen.

Chapter 27. The Laws of Software Architecture, Revisited

Way back in Chapter 1, we described the three laws of software
architecture:

- Everything in software architecture is a trade-off.

- Why is more important than how.

- Most architecture decisions aren’t binary but rather exist on a
  spectrum between extremes.

Just about every example in this book has illustrated these laws, which
points to their origin story. When we wrote the first edition, we hoped
to find numerous things that seemed universally true about software
architecture and codify them as laws. To our surprise, we ended up
identifying just two laws in the first edition, then uncovered one more
while writing the second. True to our original intent, these three laws
seem pretty universal and inform many important perspectives for working
software architects.

In this brief chapter, we’ll revisit these laws in light of the examples
we’ve shown and point out some nuances about trade-off analysis.

First Law: Everything in Software Architecture Is a Trade-Off

Our first law is one of the defining characteristics of software
architecture—everything is a trade-off. Many people think that the job
of a software architect is to find silver bullet solutions to sticky
problems and become a hero, but that rarely happens. (Architects rarely
get credit for good decisions, but always get blamed for bad ones.) No,
the real job of software architecture is analyzing trade-offs.

We believe, for a couple of reasons, that every architect should hone
their reputation as an objective arbiter of trade-offs, rather than
evangelizing for a particular approach.

First, evangelism in architecture is dangerous in the long term, because
yesterday’s best practice tends to become tomorrow’s antipattern.
Architects make trade-off decisions based on current factors and
situations as best they can, with incomplete knowledge. However, even if
a decision is sound when it’s made, the software development ecosystem
exists in a constant state of evolution and churn, which means that the
circumstances slowly change and are likely to eventually weaken (or
invalidate) the decision. If the architect has invested social capital
in evangelizing for that solution, their reputation may suffer when that
decision must change later. Always stay clear-eyed and objective about
technology choices to avoid attaching your credibility to a decision
that didn’t age well.

Second, decision makers in organizations aren’t really looking for
enthusiastic advocacy so much as sober objectivity. An architect who
develops a reputation as the go-to person for an objective trade-off
analysis becomes a valuable asset to their organization. When the
decision is critical, decision makers want someone whose judgment they
can trust; that should be you.

Let’s look at some examples of trade-off analysis for a couple of
software architecture decisions, and then discuss a common gap in
understanding.

Shared Library Versus Shared Service

A common conundrum for architects involves shared behavior in
distributed architectures, such as microservices or EDA: should we use a
shared library that is compiled into each service at build time, or use
a shared service that other services call at runtime, as illustrated in
Figure 27-1?

[Should the solution use a shared library or shared service for common
functionality?]

Figure 27-1. Should the solution use a shared library or shared service for common functionality?

In Figure 27-1, the service on the left encapsulates the shared
behavior, and other services call to access it. On the right, we have a
shared library, which is compiled into each service before deployment.
Which is better?

By now, readers know the answer to all such questions: “It depends!” But
you need to answer the inevitable follow-up question: “Depends on what?”
Like many nontrivial decisions in software architecture, the answer to
this question isn’t immediately obvious, so it’s time for you, as the
architect, to undertake trade-off analysis.

First, you must determine all the contextualized trade-offs that make a
difference for this solution. This list will be highly specific to both
the organization and the solution, so you’ll need to rely on your
knowledge of the organization, technology landscape, team capabilities,
budgets, and everything else that informs your trade-off options. For
this solution, we’ve created the following list of pertinent factors:

Heterogeneous code

    If solutions are written in multiple platforms, then the service
    will be easier to work with because, regardless of the technology
    stack, callers access the service via the network, making the
    implementation platform irrelevant. For the library, the team will
    need a version of the code for each technology stack and will have
    to keep the versions in sync, greatly adding to the project’s
    overall complexity.

High code volatility

    Recall that code volatility measures how fast the code changes
    (commonly known as churn). In a service, callers access new
    functionality as soon as they deploy the updated service, so if you
    need to change the library, you’ll have to recompile and deploy each
    service to take advantage of the new features.

Ability to version changes

    Versioning is much easier in the library than in the service. When
    the library needs to update, the team can resolve the version
    differences at compile time and build just what they need. For the
    service, version information must be determined at runtime, which
    complicates the interaction with the service.

Overall change risk

    Change risk is better for the library. Once you change the library
    code and successfully compile it into the service, you can have high
    confidence that it will work. The service, on the other hand, may
    change without any compile-time verification, which raises the
    potential likelihood of a runtime fault at invocation time.

Performance

    The library will clearly have better performance, as the calls to
    shared functionality are in-process calls, compared to the network
    calls required for the service. These calls will be much slower than
    in-process calls because of network latency and other factors.

Fault tolerance

    As we discussed in Chapter 9, runtime access to services always
    suffers potential network issues, including the service in question
    here. The library provides better fault tolerance: once you compile,
    test, and deploy the service, you can have high confidence that it
    is stable.

Scalability

    Just like performance, calls between services suffer from latency,
    which diminishes scalability. Thus, the library will offer better
    scalability, as access to the shared behavior is a very efficient
    in-process call.

Once you’ve determined your list of important factors, you can create a
matrix to compare how well each does for each criterion, as shown in
Table 27-1.

  Factor                       Shared library   Shared service
  ---------------------------- ---------------- ----------------
  Heterogeneous code           -                +
  High code volatility         -                +
  Ability to version changes   +                -
  Overall change risk          +                -
  Performance                  +                -
  Fault tolerance              +                -
  Scalability                  +                -

  : Table 27-1. Trade-offs between shared service and shared library
  {#totbl-library-vs-service}

The accumulation of positives for the shared library makes it the
winner…at least, for these factors and in this context. It may or may
not be the solution to the problem at hand—you may need to apply
additional weighting (see “Second Corollary: You Can’t Do It Just Once”
for more details)—but now you and your team have a good idea of the
forces at play.

Synchronous Versus Asynchronous Messaging

Consider the following trade-off analysis: your team is building a
distributed architecture to send trade information to both the
Notification and Analytics services, and you’re trying to decide whether
to use a queue or topic to implement this behavior.

The first option is a queue, or a point-to-point communication protocol.
As you learned in Chapter 2, the publisher knows who is receiving the
message. To reach multiple consumers, the publisher needs to send a
message to one queue for each consumer. If the Trading service wants to
use queues to tell the Analytics service and the Reporting service about
trades, the implementation will appear as in Figure 27-2.

[Using a queue to pass trade information to Notification and Analytics]

Figure 27-2. Using a queue to pass trade information to Notification and Analytics

In Figure 27-2, the Trading service issues a message to each consumer
via a queue. Each consumer has its own queue, and the sender posts a
message to each.

[Using a topic to pass trade information ]

Figure 27-3. Using a topic to pass trade information to Notification and Analytics

The alternative topology uses a topic instead, which implements a
broadcast rather than point-to-point communication. In Figure 27-3, the
Trading service posts a single message to a topic. Each consumer
subscribes to the topic, and they all receive a notification when a
message appears. In this case, the publisher of the message doesn’t know
(or care) who the consumers are—​in fact, the team can add new consumers
anytime without changing the other consumers or the producer.

Both options are viable, so how should you decide? By performing a
trade-off analysis, of course.

With queues, every service that the Trading service needs to notify will
need a separate queue. This is nice if the Notification service and the
Analytics service need different information, since you can send
different messages to each queue. The Trading service is aware of every
system to which it communicates, which makes it harder for another
(potentially rogue) service to “listen in.” That’s especially beneficial
if security is high on the priority list. Because each queue is
independent, you can monitor them separately and even scale them
independently if needed. The Trading service is tightly coupled to its
consumers—​it knows exactly how many there are. However, if you need to
send messages to the Compliance service, you’ll have to rework the
Trading service to start sending messages to a third queue.

Table 27-2 summarizes the trade-offs of using queues for this project.

  Advantage                                                 Disadvantage
  --------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------
  Supports heterogeneous messages for different consumers   Higher degree of coupling
  Allows independent monitoring of queue depth              Trading service must connect to multiple queues
  More secure                                               Requires additional infrastructure
  Less extensible (must add queues for more consumers)      Good support for extensibility and evolvability

  : Table 27-2. Trade-offs when using a queue {#totbl-queue-vs-topic}

Let’s do the same exercise for topics. One advantage is clear: topics
are extremely extensible. Any new consumer interested in, for example,
compliance, can subscribe to that topic without touching any of the
existing behavior. However, this advantage has downsides: each consumer
must consume the same message from the topic, which can lead to stamp
coupling (shown in Figure 9-9). And, because every consumer can read the
entire message, there are security concerns: should everyone be able to
read the entire message?

With this perspective in hand, you can make your trade-off table, shown
in Table 27-3.

  Advantage                                    Disadvantage
  -------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------
  Low coupling                                 Homogeneous message for each consumer
  Trading service generates just one message   Can’t monitor or scale individual consumers
  More extensible/evolvable                    Less secure
                                               Less scalability options

  : Table 27-3. Trade-offs when using a topic {#totbl-topics}

Now that you’ve done the trade-off analysis, you need to return to the
organizational goals for this solution and see which option is the
better fit. If security is more important, you should probably select
queues. If the organization is growing rapidly and has other services
interested in trades, then extensibility might be a priority, which
would lead you to use topics.

First Corollary: Missing Trade-Offs

Our first law has two corollaries. The first is:

  If you think you’ve discovered something that isn’t a trade-off, more
  likely you just haven’t identified the trade-off…yet.

  Corollary 1

The essence of a software architecture decision is trade-off analysis,
but what happens when you encounter a decision that seems to not have
any trade-offs? Our advice: keep looking!

Consider code reuse. Surely this is a purely beneficial practice, right?
The more code the organization can reuse, the less code it must write,
saving time and duplication.

Two factors dictate how effective code reuse will be. Architects often
discover the first but miss the second. The first factor is abstraction:
if you can abstract this code and use it from multiple call points, it’s
a good candidate for reuse. The second factor is low volatility. When a
team reuses a module of code that’s always changing, this creates churn
in the entire system. Every time the shared code changes, all callers of
that code must coordinate around that change. Even if it isn’t a
breaking change, the team must still verify that the change hasn’t
broken anything. When architectures reuse code inappropriately, teams
end up chasing breaking changes all over the architecture. This was one
of the key lessons architects as a field learned from the
orchestration-driven SOA architecture style (covered in Chapter 17), one
of the underlying philosophies of which was to try to reuse as much code
as possible. From a practical standpoint, teams working in those
architectures were swimming through quicksand: every change had the
potential to send unpredictable side effects rippling out through the
system.

That’s the hidden trade-off: reusing code effectively requires good
abstraction and low volatility. This is why the most successful reuse
targets in architecture are “plumbing”: technology frameworks,
libraries, platforms, and so on. The portion of most applications that
changes the fastest is the domain (the motivation for writing the
software in the first place), so domain concepts are terrible candidates
for reuse. (Notice that this underlies the DDD principle of bounded
context—no bounded contexts can reuse any of the implementation details
of another bounded context.)

Why We Can’t Have Nice Things—Trade-Offs!

As professional consultants, our clients often make requests like the
following: “We like the idea of microservices and distributed
architectures that feature high degrees of decoupling because they allow
high degrees of agility and fast deployment. However, we also want a
high degree of institutional reuse so that teams aren’t constantly
rewriting code.”

We have to be the bearers of bad news here: you cannot have both these
things, because the way a system implements reuse is via coupling. No
organization can have both decoupling and a high degree of reuse. The
two things are fundamentally incompatible. This is a prime example of
how organizations can misunderstand key trade-offs.

Second Corollary: You Can’t Do It Just Once

It would be nice if an architect could just perform one trade-off
analysis—just think really hard and decide once and for all to use
choreography for all workflows. But there are two problems with
trade-off analysis. First, there are often dozens or even hundreds of
variables (technical and otherwise) that contribute to the decision:
complexity, team experience, budget, team topology, schedule
pressure…​the list is endless. Subtle differences in those variables can
push a particular analysis in one direction or another, making this an
ongoing exercise. It’s dangerous for architects to make sweeping,
semipermanent decisions based on assumptions that might not be valid for
future applications of this solution.

Think of this corollary as job security for architects. We have to keep
doing trade-off analysis over and over, even for seemingly similar
situations. This reinforces the idea that the real job is trade-off
analysis, not making permanent, perfect decisions.

Second Law: Why Is More Important Than How

Our second law emphasizes the importance of why over how. As experienced
architects, we can look at an existing system and tell someone how it
works. However, there will be some decisions where it isn’t clear why
the previous architect chose this option over another, because they
didn’t record all of the decision criteria with their ultimate solution.

This is why we emphasize the importance of using both architecture
diagrams and ADRs (covered in Chapter 21). Every trade-off analysis
generates a tremendous amount of context that doesn’t appear in the
solution. It’s critical to document that analysis (along with the known
compromises and limitations of the solution) to prevent future
architects (who might be you) from having to redo the analysis just to
understand why.

Out of Context Antipattern

One antipattern that’s common in trade-off analysis is the Out of
Context antipattern. This antipattern occurs when the architect
understands the trade-offs but not how to weight all of them based on
the current context.

Consider the trade-off analysis we did in “Shared Library Versus Shared
Service”. Taken objectively, the shared library appears to be the
preferred solution, since it achieved more positive than negative
assessments. However, this trade-off analysis has a potential flaw: do
all of its criteria have equal weight?

Imagine that a team has code in several platforms. They aren’t overly
concerned with performance or scale, but want a clean way to manage
shared behavior. In this case, the first two trade-off criteria carry a
much higher priority, which should lead them to choose the shared
service. As a bonus, the team has already figured out what issues they
will have to mitigate.

Architects rely on experience to build trade-off criteria, but must also
weigh those criteria to find the correct fit for the solution. Generic
trade-off analysis isn’t very useful—it only becomes valuable when
applied in a specific context.

The Spectrum Between Extremes

In our first edition, we identified only two laws. However, we have
gradually realized that a third law exists:

  Most architecture decisions aren’t binary but rather exist on a
  spectrum between extremes.

  Third Law of Software Architecture

It would be nice to live in a world with nice, clean, binary
decisions—but software architecture doesn’t exist in that world. People
often observe how difficult it is to come up with comprehensive
definitions of important concepts in software architecture: architecture
versus design, orchestration versus choreography, topics versus queues,
and so on. The underlying reason is that the decision criteria aren’t
binary; they lie along a rather messy spectrum.

In “Architecture Versus Design”, we discussed the spectrum between
architecture and design and how to determine where a particular decision
lies within that spectrum. In fact, this law provides a useful way to
think about decisions that are closer to the software architecture side
of the spectrum than the design side:

  A software architecture decision is one where each of the options has
  significant trade-offs.

If everything in software architecture is a trade-off, then an
architectural decision must involve trade-offs for each option.

As an architect, don’t try to reduce every decision to a binary—few of
those exist in our world. That’s one of the reasons that every answer in
software architecture is “it depends”—it depends on where on the
spectrum of possible solutions the criterion in question falls.

As architects, we make our decisions in a swamp of uncertainty.
Accommodating this is annoying, but necessary. Not only do we sometimes
have to base important decisions on incomplete information, but often
the decision wouldn’t be clear-cut, even if we had the full scoop,
because it resides somewhere on a spectrum between two extremes.

Welcome to software architecture!

Parting Words of Advice

  How do we get great designers? Great designers design, of course.

  Fred Brooks

  So how are we supposed to get great architects, if they only get the
  chance to architect fewer than a half-dozen times in their career?

  Ted Neward

Practice is the proven way to build skills and become better at anything
in life, including architecture. We encourage new and existing
architects to keep honing their skills in the craft of designing
architecture as well as widening their individual technology breadth. To
that end, we’ve created some architecture katas modeled after the
examples in this book, which you can find on the companion website. We
encourage you to use them to practice and build your skills in
architecture.

People who use our katas often ask: is there an answer guide somewhere?
Unfortunately, no. To quote Neal:

  There are not right or wrong answers in architecture—only trade-offs.

When your authors started using architecture katas during our live
training classes, we initially kept the drawings the students produced,
with the goal of creating an answer repository. We quickly gave up,
though, because we realized that these were incomplete artifacts. The
teams had captured how they implemented their solutions with drawings of
topologies. The why was much more interesting—but while they explained
the trade-offs they considered in class, they didn’t have the time to
create architecture decision records. Keeping just the how meant we had
only half of the story.

So, our parting words of advice: always learn, always practice, and go
do some architecture!

Appendix. Discussion Questions

Chapter 1: Introduction

1.  What are the four dimensions that define software architecture?

2.  What is the difference between an architecture decision and a design
    principle?

3.  List the eight core expectations of a software architect.

4.  What is the First Law of Software Architecture?

Chapter 2: Architectural Thinking

1.  Name three criteria for determining whether a decision is more about
    architecture or more about design.

2.  List the three levels of knowledge in the knowledge triangle and
    provide an example of each.

3.  Why is it more important for an architect to focus on technical
    breadth rather than technical depth?

4.  What are some of the ways of maintaining your technical depth and
    remaining hands-on as an architect?

Chapter 3: Modularity

1.  Describe the difference between modularity and granularity, and
    provide an example of each.

2.  What is the difference between coupling and cohesion?

3.  What does the term connascence mean?

4.  What is the difference between static and dynamic connascence?

5.  What is the strongest form of connascence?

6.  What is the weakest form of connascence?

7.  Which is preferable within a code base: static or dynamic
    connascence?

Chapter 4: Architecture Characteristics Defined

1.  What three criteria must an attribute meet to be considered an
    architecture characteristic?

2.  What is the difference between an implicit characteristic and an
    explicit one? Provide an example of each.

3.  Provide an example of an operational characteristic.

4.  Provide an example of a structural characteristic.

5.  Provide an example of a cross-cutting characteristic.

6.  Why is it impossible to create an industry-wide standard list of
    architecture characteristics?

Chapter 5: Identifying Architectural Characteristics

1.  Give a reason why it is a good practice to limit the number of
    characteristics (“-ilities”) an architecture should support.

2.  True or false? Most architecture characteristics come from business
    requirements and user stories.

3.  If a business stakeholder states that time to market (that is,
    getting new features and bug fixes pushed out to users as fast as
    possible) is the most important business concern, which architecture
    characteristics would the architecture need to support?

4.  What is the difference between scalability and elasticity?

5.  What is the definition of a composite architectural characteristic?
    Provide one example.

Chapter 6: Measuring and Governing Architecture Characteristics

1.  Why is cyclomatic complexity such an important metric to analyze for
    architecture?

2.  What are architecture fitness functions? How can they be used to
    analyze an architecture?

3.  Provide an example of an architecture fitness function to measure
    the scalability of an architecture.

4.  What is the most important criterion for an architecture
    characteristic to allow architects and developers to create fitness
    functions?

Chapter 7: The Scope of Architectural Characteristics

1.  What is an architectural quantum, and why is it important to
    architecture?

2.  Assume a system consisting of a single user interface with four
    independently deployed services, each containing its own separate
    database. Would this system have a single quantum or four quanta?
    Why?

3.  What is the difference between static and dynamic coupling? Provide
    an example of each.

4.  Why does synchronous communication have a bigger potential impact on
    operational architectural characteristics than asynchronous ones?

Chapter 8: Component-Based Thinking

1.  We define the term component as a building block of an
    application—something the application does. A component usually
    consists of a group of classes or source files. How do components
    typically manifest within an application or service?

2.  What is the difference between technical partitioning and domain
    partitioning? Provide an example of each.

3.  What is the advantage of domain partitioning?

4.  Under what circumstances would technical partitioning be a better
    choice than domain partitioning?

5.  What is the Entity Trap? Why is it not a good approach for component
    identification?

6.  When might you choose the Workflow approach over the Actor/Action
    approach when identifying core components?

Chapter 9: Foundations

1.  List the eight fallacies of distributed computing.

2.  Name three challenges that distributed architectures have that
    monolithic architectures don’t.

3.  What is stamp coupling? What are some ways of addressing stamp
    coupling?

4.  What is the difference between technical versus domain partitioning?

5.  List three characteristics that distinguish an architectural style
    from a pattern.

Chapter 10: Layered Architecture Style

1.  What is the difference between an open layer and a closed layer?

2.  Describe the concept of layers of isolation and its benefits.

3.  What is the Architecture Sinkhole antipattern?

4.  What are some of the main architecture characteristics that would
    drive you to use a layered architecture?

5.  Why isn’t testability well supported in the layered architecture
    style?

6.  Why isn’t agility well supported in the layered architecture style?

Chapter 11: Modular Monolith Architecture Style

1.  How does the modular monolith differ from the n-tiered layered
    architecture?

2.  Describe the difference between the peer-to-peer and mediator
    approaches when communicating between modules.

3.  What are the three common risks associated with the modular monolith
    architectural style?

4.  Name three primary strengths of the modular monolith and when you
    should consider using it.

5.  Given its modularity, why aren’t operational characteristics such as
    scalability and fault tolerance good in the modular monolith?

Chapter 12: Pipeline Architecture Style

1.  Can pipes be bidirectional in a pipeline architecture?

2.  Name the four types of filters and their purpose.

3.  Can a filter send data out through multiple pipes?

4.  Explain why the pipeline architecture is well suited for cloud-based
    environments.

5.  Is the pipeline architecture style technically partitioned or domain
    partitioned?

6.  In what way does the pipeline architecture support modularity?

Chapter 13: Microkernel Architecture Style

1.  What is another name for the microkernel architecture style?

2.  Under what situations is it OK for plug-in components to be
    dependent on other plug-in components?

3.  What are some of the tools and frameworks that can be used to manage
    plug-ins?

4.  What would you do if you had a third-party plug-in that didn’t
    conform to the standard plug-in contract in the core system?

5.  Provide two examples of the microkernel architecture style.

6.  What characteristics of the core system determine its degree of
    “microkern-ality”?

7.  Why is the microkernel architecture always a single architecture
    quantum?

8.  What is domain/architecture isomorphism?

Chapter 14: Service-Based Architecture Style

1.  Why are services in service-based architecture called domain
    services?

2.  Name two common risks associated with service-based architecture.

3.  Which database topologies (monolithic, domain, and dedicated) can
    you use with service-based architecture?

4.  What techniques can you use to manage database changes within a
    service-based architecture?

5.  Do domain services require a container (such as Docker) to run?

6.  Which architecture characteristics does the service-based
    architecture style support well?

7.  Why isn’t elasticity typically well supported in a service-based
    architecture?

8.  How can you increase the number of architecture quanta in a
    service-based architecture?

Chapter 15: Event-Driven Architecture Style

1.  Name four differences between events and messages.

2.  What’s the difference between an initiating event and a derived
    event?

3.  What is a poison event?

4.  Can an event processor trigger multiple derived events? If so, why
    would you want to do this?

5.  Why would you trigger an event from an event processor that no other
    event processor responds to?

6.  What are some of the negative trade-offs in using asynchronous
    processing?

7.  Describe the Swarm of Gnats antipattern and explain why you should
    avoid it.

8.  Give two primary reasons why event-driven architecture is highly
    responsive and has great performance characteristics.

9.  What are some of the techniques for preventing data loss when
    sending and receiving messages from a queue?

Chapter 16: Space-Based Architecture Style

1.  Where does space-based architecture get its name from?

2.  What is a primary aspect of space-based architecture that
    differentiates it from other architecture styles?

3.  Name the four components that make up the virtualized middleware
    within a space-based architecture.

4.  What is the role of a data writer in space-based architecture?

5.  Under what conditions would a service need to access data in a
    database through the data reader?

6.  Does a small cache size increase or decrease the chances for a data
    collision?

7.  What is the difference between a replicated cache and a distributed
    cache? Which one is typically used in space-based architecture?

8.  List the three most strongly supported architecture characteristics
    in space-based architecture.

9.  Why does testability rate so low for space-based architecture?

Chapter 17: Orchestration-Driven Service-Oriented Architecture

1.  What was the main driving force behind service-oriented
    architecture?

2.  What are the four primary service types within a service-oriented
    architecture?

3.  List some of the factors that led to the downfall of
    service-oriented architecture.

4.  Is SOA technically partitioned or domain partitioned?

5.  How is domain reuse addressed in SOA? How is operational reuse
    addressed?

6.  What is the primary use for this architecture style in modern
    systems?

Chapter 18: Microservices Architecture

1.  Describe the bounded context concept in microservices. Why is it so
    critical for microservices architectures?

2.  Why is it so important to isolate data in a microservices
    architecture?

3.  Describe what is meant by protocol-aware heterogeneous
    interoperability and how microservices supports it.

4.  What is the difference between orchestration and choreography in
    microservices? Provide examples where each of these communication
    styles would be an appropriate choice.

5.  Why does microservices use the database-per-service topology? Can it
    use a monolithic or domain database topology?

6.  What are two of the biggest risks in the microservices architecture?

7.  Why are agility, testability, and deployability so well supported in
    microservices?

8.  What are three reasons that performance is usually an issue in
    microservices?

9.  Describe a topology where a microservices ecosystem might have only
    a single quantum.

Chapter 19: Choosing the Appropriate Architecture Style

1.  In what way does a system’s data architecture (the structure of the
    logical and physical data models) influence your choice of
    architecture style?

2.  Delineate the steps an architect uses to determine a system’s
    architecture style, data partitioning, and communication styles.

3.  What factor leads an architect toward a distributed architecture?

4.  What two input analyses does an architecture need to perform to
    choose an appropriate architectural style?

Chapter 20: Architectural Patterns

1.  Name two patterns that implement the architectural concern of
    separation of operational and domain concerns.

2.  What component does an orchestrated workflow have that is absent
    from choreographed ones?

3.  What are some advantages of using a single broker in an event-driven
    architecture? What are some disadvantages?

4.  What two data operations does CQRS break apart?

Chapter 21: Architectural Decisions

1.  What is the Covering your Assets antipattern?

2.  What are some techniques for avoiding the Email-Driven Architecture
    antipattern?

3.  What are the five factors Michael Nygard defines for identifying
    something as architecturally significant?

4.  What are the five basic sections of an architecture decision record?

5.  In which section of an ADR do you typically add the justification
    for an architecture decision?

6.  Assuming you don’t need a separate Alternatives section, in which
    section of an ADR would you list the alternatives to your proposed
    solution?

7.  What are three basic scenarios in which you would mark the status of
    an ADR as Proposed?

Chapter 22: Analyzing Architecture Risk

1.  What are the two dimensions of the risk assessment matrix?

2.  Describe the three main activities in risk storming.

3.  Why does risk storming need to be a collaborative exercise?

4.  Why does the identification activity within risk storming need to be
    an individual activity and not a collaborative one?

5.  What would you do if three participants identified risk as high (6)
    for a particular area of the architecture, but another participant
    identified it as only medium (3)?

6.  What risk rating (1–9) would you assign to unproven or unknown
    technologies?

Chapter 23: Diagramming Architecture

1.  What is irrational artifact attachment, and why is it significant
    with respect to documenting and diagramming architecture?

2.  What are the 4 Cs of the C4 modeling technique?

3.  When diagramming architecture, what do dotted lines between
    components mean?

4.  Why is it always important to include a title and key in an
    architecture diagram?

Chapter 24: Making Teams Effective

1.  What are the three types of architect personalities? What type of
    boundary does each personality create?

2.  What five factors should you consider in determining your level of
    involvement with the team?

3.  What are three warning signs that your team is getting too big?

4.  List three basic checklists that would be good for a development
    team to use.

Chapter 25: Negotiation and Leadership Skills

1.  Why is negotiation such an important skill for an architect?

2.  Name some negotiation techniques for a scenario when a business
    stakeholder insists on five nines of availability, but only three
    nines are really needed.

3.  What can you derive from a business stakeholder telling you, “I
    needed it yesterday”?

4.  Why is the demonstration defeats discussion technique so effective?

5.  What is the divide-and-conquer rule? How can it be applied when
    negotiating architecture characteristics with a business
    stakeholder? Provide an example.

6.  List the 4 Cs of architecture.

7.  Explain why it is important for an architect to be both pragmatic
    and visionary.

8.  What are some techniques for managing and reducing the number of
    meetings you are invited to?

Chapter 26: Architectural Intersections

1.  What techniques can you use to ensure structural alignment with the
    architecture during implementation?

2.  Explain why aligning architecture and infrastructure is so
    important, and provide an example of this alignment.

3.  Give an example of when a team’s topology might not be aligned with
    the architecture.

4.  Why should an architect in charge of a particular system be
    concerned about the intersection of architecture and systems
    integration? Provide an example of where architecture might get
    misaligned with system integration.

5.  What is domain/architecture isomorphism, and why is it so important
    when considering the intersection of architecture and the business?

6.  Provide an example of the intersection of architecture and the
    enterprise.

Chapter 27: The Laws of Software Architecture, Revisited

1.  List three generic advantages of a shared library over a shared
    service. Do these advantages mean an architect should always choose
    a shared library when this trade-off appears?

2.  What is the first corollary of the First Law of Software
    Architecture?

3.  Why does the second corollary to the First Law of Software
    Architecture insist that trade-off analysis must occur over and
    over?

4.  Why are so many software architecture decisions best understood on a
    spectrum rather than as convenient binaries?

Index

A

- abstractness (modularity metric), Core Metrics
- accidental complexity, Distance from the Main Sequence, The 4 Cs of
  Architecture
- Accidental SOA antipattern, Common Risks
- ACID (atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability) database
  transactions, Style Specifics, Style Characteristics
- active/active state, Data Collisions
- ADRs (see Architectural Decision Records)
- Advanced Message Queueing Protocol (AMQP), Preventing Data Loss
- afferent coupling, Coupling, Static Coupling
- Agile methodologies, Architecture and Engineering Practices
- agility, Architecture and Engineering Practices
- Ambulance pattern, Elasticity
- AMQP (Advanced Message Queueing Protocol), Preventing Data Loss
- Analysis Paralysis antipattern, The Covering Your Assets Antipattern
- anemic events, Anemic events
- antipatterns
  - Accidental SOA, Common Risks
  - Analysis Paralysis, The Covering Your Assets Antipattern
  - architectural decision-related, Architectural Decision
    Antipatterns-Email-Driven Architecture Antipattern
  - Architecture Sinkhole, Adding Layers
  - Big Ball of Mud, Big Ball of Mud-Big Ball of Mud
  - Bottleneck Trap, Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding
  - Covering Your Assets, The Covering Your Assets Antipattern-The
    Covering Your Assets Antipattern
  - defined, Architectural Decision Antipatterns
  - DLL Hell, Peer-to-peer approach
  - Email-Driven Architecture, Email-Driven Architecture Antipattern
  - Entity Trap, The Entity Trap-The Entity Trap, Data Isolation
  - Frozen Caveman, Technical Breadth
  - generic architecture, Limiting and Prioritizing Architectural
    Characteristics
  - Grains of Sand, Common Risks
  - Groundhog Day, Groundhog Day Antipattern
  - Irrational Artifact Attachment, Tools
  - Out of Context, Out of Context Antipattern
  - Swarm of Gnats, The Swarm of Gnats Antipattern-The Swarm of Gnats
    Antipattern
- Apache Kafka, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use Cases
- application services, Application services
- application silos, Understand and Navigate Politics
- ArchiMate technical diagramming standard, ArchiMate
- architects (see software architect)
- architectural characteristics
  - analyzing when creating logical components, Analyzing Architectural
    Characteristics
  - defined, Architectural Characteristics Defined-Trade-Offs and Least
    Worst Architecture
    - cloud characteristics, Cloud Characteristics
    - cross-cutting architectural characteristics, Cross-Cutting
      Architectural Characteristics-Cross-Cutting Architectural
      Characteristics
    - non-functional requirements, as term, Architectural
      Characteristics Defined
    - operational architectural characteristics, Operational
      Architectural Characteristics
    - partial listing of characteristics, Architectural Characteristics
      (Partially) Listed-Cross-Cutting Architectural Characteristics
    - self-assessment questions, Chapter 4: Architecture Characteristics
      Defined
    - structural architectural characteristics, Structural Architectural
      Characteristics
    - system design, Architectural Characteristics and System
      Design-Architectural Characteristics and System Design
  - defining, Defining Software Architecture
  - fitness functions, Fitness Functions-Distance from the Main Sequence
    fitness function
  - identifying, Identifying Architectural Characteristics-Limiting and
    Prioritizing Architectural Characteristics
    - architecture katas origins, Extracting Architectural
      Characteristics
    - composite architectural characteristics, Composite Architectural
      Characteristics-Composite Architectural Characteristics
    - design versus architecture and trade-offs, Implicit
      Characteristics
    - extracting architectural characteristics, Extracting Architectural
      Characteristics
    - extracting architectural characteristics from domain concerns,
      Extracting Architectural Characteristics from Domain Concerns
    - kata: Silicon Sandwiches, Kata: Silicon Sandwiches-Implicit
      Characteristics
    - limiting/prioritizing architectural characteristics, Limiting and
      Prioritizing Architectural Characteristics-Limiting and
      Prioritizing Architectural Characteristics
    - self-assessment questions, Chapter 5: Identifying Architectural
      Characteristics
    - working with katas, Working with Katas
  - intersection of architecture with data topologies, Architectural
    Characteristics
  - ISO definitions, Cross-Cutting Architectural
    Characteristics-Cross-Cutting Architectural Characteristics
  - measuring, Measuring and Governing Architecture
    Characteristics-Process Measures
    - cyclomatic complexity, Structural Measures-Structural Measures
    - multiple definitions of performance, Operational Measures
    - operational measures, Operational Measures-Operational Measures
    - process measures, Process Measures
    - self-assessment questions, Chapter 6: Measuring and Governing
      Architecture Characteristics
    - structural measures, Structural Measures-Structural Measures
  - overspecificity in Vasa case, Limiting and Prioritizing
    Architectural Characteristics
  - scope of, The Scope of Architectural Characteristics-Scoping and the
    Cloud
    - architectural quanta and granularity, Architectural Quanta and
      Granularity-Architectural Quanta and Granularity
    - impact of scoping, The Impact of Scoping-Kata: Going Green
    - kata: Going Green, Kata: Going Green
    - scoping and architectural style, Scoping and Architectural
      Style-Scoping and Architectural Style
    - scoping and the cloud, Scoping and the Cloud
    - self-assessment questions, Chapter 7: The Scope of Architectural
      Characteristics
    - synchronous communication, Synchronous Communication
  - trade-offs and least worst architecture, Trade-Offs and Least Worst
    Architecture-Trade-Offs and Least Worst Architecture
  - worksheet for determining characteristics critical to success,
    Limiting and Prioritizing Architectural Characteristics-Limiting and
    Prioritizing Architectural Characteristics
- architectural constraints, Architectural Constraints
- Architectural Decision Records (ADRs), Architectural Decision
  Records-Using ADRs with Existing Systems
  - basic structure, Basic Structure-Notes
    - Compliance section, Compliance-Compliance
    - Consequences section, Consequences
    - Context section, Context
    - Decision section, Decision
    - Notes section, Notes
    - status section, Status-Status
    - title section, Title
  - documentation provided by, ADRs as Documentation
  - example: Going, Going, Gone, Example-Example
  - storing, Storing ADRs-Storing ADRs
  - using for standards, Using ADRs for Standards
  - using with existing systems, Using ADRs with Existing Systems
- architectural decisions, Architectural Decisions-Leveraging Generative
  AI and LLMs in Architectural Decisions
  - antipatterns, Architectural Decision Antipatterns-Email-Driven
    Architecture Antipattern
    - Covering Your Assets, The Covering Your Assets Antipattern-The
      Covering Your Assets Antipattern
    - Email-Driven Architecture antipattern, Email-Driven Architecture
      Antipattern
    - Groundhog Day antipattern, Groundhog Day Antipattern
  - Architectural Decision Records, Architectural Decision Records-Using
    ADRs with Existing Systems
    - as documentation, Storing ADRs-Storing ADRs
    - basic structure, Basic Structure-Notes
    - example: Going, Going, Gone, Example-Example
    - storing ADRs, Storing ADRs-Storing ADRs
    - using ADRs for standards, Using ADRs for Standards
    - using with existing systems, Using ADRs with Existing Systems
  - architecturally significant decisions, Architectural
    Significance-Architectural Significance
  - defining, Defining Software Architecture
  - leveraging generative AI and LLMs in, Leveraging Generative AI and
    LLMs in Architectural Decisions
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 21: Architectural Decisions
- architectural extensibility, Analyzing Trade-Offs, Topology
- architectural fitness function, Fitness Functions, Architecture and
  Engineering Practices
  - (see also fitness functions)
- architectural intersections (see intersections of architecture)
- architectural katas (see katas)
- architectural patterns, Architectural Patterns-Broker-Domain Pattern
  - architectural styles versus, Styles Versus Patterns-Styles Versus
    Patterns, Architectural Patterns
  - communication, Communication-Orchestration Versus Choreography
  - CQRS, CQRS
  - infrastructure, Infrastructure-Broker-Domain Pattern
    - Broker–Domain pattern, Broker-Domain Pattern-Broker-Domain Pattern
    - Domain–Broker pattern, Broker-Domain Pattern-Broker-Domain Pattern
  - orchestration versus choreography, Orchestration Versus
    Choreography-Orchestration Versus Choreography
  - reuse, Reuse-Service Mesh
  - separating domain and operational coupling, Separating Domain and
    Operational Coupling-Service Mesh
- architectural quanta, Architectural Quanta and
  Granularity-Architectural Quanta and Granularity
  - domain-driven design's bounded context, Architectural Quanta and
    Granularity
  - scope and, The Impact of Scoping-Kata: Going Green
- architectural risk, analyzing, Analyzing Architecture Risk-Summary
  - risk assessments, Risk Assessments-Risk Assessments
  - risk matrix, Risk Matrix-Risk Matrix
  - risk storming, Risk Storming-Phase 3: Risk Mitigation
    - phase 1: identification, Phase 1: Identification
    - phase 2: consensus, Phase 2: Consensus-Phase 2: Consensus
    - phase 3: mitigation, Phase 3: Risk Mitigation
    - use case, Risk-Storming Use Case-Security
    - user-story risk analysis, User-Story Risk Analysis
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 22: Analyzing Architecture Risk
- architectural styles, Defining Software Architecture, Foundations-On
  to Specific Styles
  - (see also specific styles, e.g.: event-driven architecture style)
  - architecture partitioning, Architecture Partitioning-Technical
    partitioning
  - architecture patterns and (see architectural patterns)
  - characteristics described by, Styles Versus Patterns-Styles Versus
    Patterns
  - choosing the appropriate style, Choosing the Appropriate
    Architecture Style-Distributed Case Study: Going, Going, Gone
    - decision criteria, Decision Criteria-Decision Criteria
    - distributed case study: Going, Going, Gone, Distributed Case
      Study: Going, Going, Gone-Distributed Case Study: Going, Going,
      Gone
    - factors in shifting fashions in architecture, Shifting “Fashion”
      in Architecture-Shifting “Fashion” in Architecture
    - monolith case study: Silicon Sandwiches, Monolith Case Study:
      Silicon Sandwiches-Microkernel
    - self-assessment questions, Chapter 19: Choosing the Appropriate
      Architecture Style
  - defining, Defining Software Architecture
  - fundamental patterns, Fundamental Patterns-Three-tier
  - kata: Silicon Sandwiches, Kata: Silicon
    Sandwiches—Partitioning-Technical partitioning
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 9: Foundations
- architectural thinking, Architectural Thinking-There’s More to
  Architectural Thinking
  - analyzing trade-offs, Analyzing Trade-Offs-Analyzing Trade-Offs
  - architecture versus design, Architecture Versus Design-The
    Significance of Trade-Offs
    - level of effort, Level of Effort
    - significance of trade-offs, The Significance of Trade-Offs
    - strategic versus tactical decisions, Strategic Versus Tactical
      Decisions
  - balancing architecture and hands-on coding, Balancing Architecture
    and Hands-On Coding-Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 2: Architectural Thinking
  - technical breadth, Technical Breadth-Rings
    - 20-minute rule, The 20-Minute Rule-The 20-Minute Rule
    - developing a personal radar for technological change, Developing a
      Personal Radar-Rings
  - understanding business drivers, Understanding Business Drivers
- architecturally significant decisions, Architectural
  Significance-Architectural Significance
- architecture isomorphism, Decision Criteria
- architecture risk-assessment matrix, Risk Matrix-Risk Matrix
- Architecture Sinkhole antipattern, Adding Layers
- architecture vitality, Continually Analyze the Architecture
- architecture, design versus, Architecture Versus Design-The
  Significance of Trade-Offs, Implicit Characteristics
  - level of effort, Level of Effort
  - significance of trade-offs, The Significance of Trade-Offs
  - strategic versus tactical decisions, Strategic Versus Tactical
    Decisions
- ArchUnit, Distance from the Main Sequence fitness function
- asynchronous communication, Decision Criteria
- auto acknowledge mode, Preventing Data Loss
- availability, as implicit characteristic, Implicit Characteristics
- AWS Step Functions, Cloud Considerations

B

- Backends for Frontends (BFF) pattern, Microkernel
- best practices, architecture patterns versus, Architectural Patterns
- Big Ball of Mud antipattern, Big Ball of Mud-Big Ball of Mud
- Bottleneck Trap antipattern, Balancing Architecture and Hands-On
  Coding
- bounded context, Bounded Context
  - domain-driven design and, Architectural Quanta and Granularity
  - microservices and, Microservices Architecture
- BPEL (Business Process Execution Language), Mediated Event-Driven
  Architecture
- BPM (Business Process Management), Mediated Event-Driven Architecture
- brittle architecture, Architectural Quanta and Granularity
- business drivers, as part of architectural thinking, Understanding
  Business Drivers
- business environment, intersection of architecture with, Architecture
  and the Business Environment-Architecture and the Business Environment
- Business Process Execution Language (BPEL), Mediated Event-Driven
  Architecture
- Business Process Management (BPM), Mediated Event-Driven Architecture
- business services, Business services
- business stakeholders, negotiating with, Negotiating with Business
  Stakeholders-Negotiating with Business Stakeholders
- business-domain expertise, Know the Business Domain

C

- C4 (context, container, component, class) technical diagramming
  standard, C4
- caching
  - near-cache considerations, Near-cache considerations
  - replicated and distributed caching, Replicated and distributed
    caching-Replicated and distributed caching
- CC (see Cyclomatic Complexity)
- chaos engineering, Distance from the Main Sequence fitness function
- checklists
  - fitness functions as, Distance from the Main Sequence fitness
    function
  - leveraging, Leveraging Checklists-Software-Release Checklist
    - developer code-completion checklist, Developer Code-Completion
      Checklist-Developer Code-Completion Checklist
    - Hawthorne effect, Leveraging Checklists
    - software release checklist, Software-Release Checklist
    - unit and functional testing checklist, Unit and Functional Testing
      Checklist
- Chidamber and Kemerer Object-Oriented Metrics Suite, Cohesion
- choreography
  - in microservices, Choreography and Orchestration-Choreography and
    Orchestration
  - orchestration versus, Orchestration Versus
    Choreography-Orchestration Versus Choreography
- CID (correlation ID), Request-Reply Processing
- client acknowledge mode, Preventing Data Loss
- client/server architecture, Client/Server-Three-tier
  - browser and web server, Browser and web server
  - desktop and database server, Desktop and database server
  - single-page JavaScript applications, Single-page JavaScript
    applications
  - three-tier architecture, Three-tier
- closed layers, Layers of Isolation
- cloud environments
  - architectural characteristics, Cloud Characteristics
  - event-driven architecture, Cloud Considerations
  - intersection of architecture and infrastructure, Architecture and
    Infrastructure
  - layered architecture, Cloud Considerations
  - microkernel architecture, Cloud Considerations
  - microservices architecture, Cloud Considerations
  - modular monolith architecture, Cloud Considerations
  - orchestration-driven service-oriented architecture, Cloud
    Considerations
  - pipeline architecture, Cloud Considerations-Cloud Considerations
  - scoping and, Scoping and the Cloud
  - service-based architecture, Cloud Considerations
  - space-based architecture, Cloud Considerations
- code reviews, Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding
- code smell, Structural Measures
- coding, balancing architecture work with, Balancing Architecture and
  Hands-On Coding-Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding
- cohesion, defined, Architectural Quanta and Granularity
- communication
  - diagramming architecture (see diagramming architecture)
  - in microservices, Communication-Communication
  - synchronous, Synchronous Communication
- compatibility, ISO definition, Cross-Cutting Architectural
  Characteristics
- compensating transaction framework, Transactions and Sagas
- compensating updates, Fallacy #10. Compensating updates always work
- compile-based plug-in components, Plug-In Components
- complexity, cyclomatic, Structural Measures-Structural Measures
- compliance with design principles/architecture decisions, Ensure
  Compliance with Decisions
- complicated-subsystem teams, defined, Team Topologies and Architecture
- component coupling, Component Coupling-The Law of Demeter
  - Law of Demeter, The Law of Demeter-The Law of Demeter
  - static coupling, Static Coupling
  - temporal coupling, Temporal Coupling
- component identification, Identifying Core Components-The Entity Trap
  - Actor/Action approach, The Actor/Action approach-The Actor/Action
    approach
  - Entity Trap antipattern, The Entity Trap-The Entity Trap
  - Workflow approach, The Workflow approach
- component-based thinking, Component-Based Thinking-Case Study: Going,
  Going, Gone—Discovering Components
  - case study: Going, Going, Gone (discovering components), Case Study:
    Going, Going, Gone—Discovering Components-Case Study: Going, Going,
    Gone—Discovering Components
  - component coupling, Component Coupling-The Law of Demeter
    - Law of Demeter, The Law of Demeter-The Law of Demeter
    - static coupling, Static Coupling
    - temporal coupling, Temporal Coupling
  - creating a logical architecture, Creating a Logical
    Architecture-Restructuring Components
    - analyzing architectural characteristics, Analyzing Architectural
      Characteristics
    - analyzing roles/responsibilities, Analyzing Roles and
      Responsibilities-Analyzing Roles and Responsibilities
    - assigning user stories to components, Assigning User Stories to
      Components-Assigning User Stories to Components
    - identifying core components, Identifying Core Components-The
      Entity Trap
    - restructuring components, Restructuring Components
  - defining logical components, Defining Logical Components-Defining
    Logical Components
  - logical versus physical architecture, Logical Versus Physical
    Architecture-Logical Versus Physical Architecture
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 8: Component-Based Thinking
- components, modules and, From Modules to Components
- composite architectural characteristics, Composite Architectural
  Characteristics-Composite Architectural Characteristics
- concert ticketing system use case, Concert Ticketing System
- connascence, Connascence-Connascence properties
  - dynamic, Dynamic connascence-Dynamic connascence
  - properties, Connascence properties-Connascence properties
  - static, Static connascence-Static connascence
- connascence of values, Transactions and Sagas
- constraints, defined, Architectural Constraints
- construction techniques, defined, Architectural Significance
- consumer filters, Filters
- Conway's Law, Architecture Partitioning
- correlation ID (CID), Request-Reply Processing
- coupling, Component Coupling-The Law of Demeter
  - architectural quanta and, Architectural Quanta and
    Granularity-Architectural Quanta and Granularity
  - component coupling, Component Coupling-The Law of Demeter
    - Law of Demeter, The Law of Demeter-The Law of Demeter
    - static coupling, Static Coupling
    - temporal coupling, Temporal Coupling
  - orthogonal, Service Mesh
  - separating domain coupling and operational coupling, Separating
    Domain and Operational Coupling-Service Mesh
    - Hexagonal architecture, Hexagonal architecture-Hexagonal
      architecture
    - Service Mesh, Service Mesh-Service Mesh
  - static, Static Coupling
  - temporal, Temporal Coupling
- Covering Your Assets antipattern, The Covering Your Assets
  Antipattern-The Covering Your Assets Antipattern
- CQRS (Command–Query–Responsibility–Segregation) pattern, CQRS
- cross-cutting architectural characteristics, Cross-Cutting
  Architectural Characteristics-Cross-Cutting Architectural
  Characteristics
- customizability, Implicit Characteristics
- Cyclic Dependencies antipattern, Cyclic dependencies-Cyclic
  dependencies
- Cyclomatic Complexity (CC), Structural Measures-Structural Measures
  - defined, Structural Measures
  - formula for calculating, Structural Measures
  - limitations of metric, Distance from the Main Sequence
  - threshold value for, Structural Measures

D

- data abstraction layer, Data Readers
- data collisions, Data Collisions-Data Collisions
- data isolation, Data Isolation
- data latency, Style Characteristics
- data pumps, Data Pumps-Data Pumps
- data topologies, intersection of architecture with, Architecture and
  Data Topologies-Read/Write Priority
  - architectural characteristics, Architectural Characteristics
  - data structure, Data Structure
  - database topologies, Database Topology-Database Topology
  - read/write priority, Read/Write Priority
- data-based event payload, Data-based event payloads-Data-based event
  payloads
- Database-per-Service pattern, Dedicated Data Topology-Dedicated Data
  Topology, Data Topologies-Data Topologies
- DDD (see domain-driven design)
- decisions, strategic versus tactical, Strategic Versus Tactical
  Decisions
- declarative transactions, Data Topologies
- dedicated database topology, Dedicated Data Topology-Dedicated Data
  Topology
- dependencies, defined, Architectural Significance
- dependency-free plug-ins, Plug-In Dependencies
- derived event, Topology
- design principles
  - architect's role in defining, Make Architecture Decisions
  - architect's role in ensuring compliance with, Ensure Compliance with
    Decisions
  - communicating to team, Providing Guidance-Providing Guidance
- design, architecture versus, Architecture Versus Design-The
  Significance of Trade-Offs, Implicit Characteristics
- developer code-completion checklist, Developer Code-Completion
  Checklist-Developer Code-Completion Checklist
- developers
  - flow state, Integrating with the Development Team
  - negotiating with, Negotiating with Developers-Negotiating with
    Developers
  - technical depth versus technical breadth, Technical Breadth
- development teams, making effective, Making Teams Effective-Summary
  - appropriate level of involvement for software engineer, How Much
    Involvement?-How Much Involvement?
  - architect personality types, Architect Personalities-The Effective
    Architect
    - armchair architect, The Armchair Architect-The Armchair Architect
    - control-freak architect, The Control-Freak Architect
    - effective architect, The Effective Architect
  - collaboration, Collaboration-Collaboration
  - constraints and boundaries, Constraints and Boundaries-Constraints
    and Boundaries
  - impact of business justifications, Providing Guidance
  - leading by example, Leading Teams by Example-Leading Teams by
    Example
  - leveraging checklists, Leveraging Checklists-Software-Release
    Checklist
    - developer code-completion checklist, Developer Code-Completion
      Checklist-Developer Code-Completion Checklist
    - Hawthorne effect, Leveraging Checklists
    - software release checklist, Software-Release Checklist
    - unit and functional testing checklist, Unit and Functional Testing
      Checklist
  - negotiating with teams, Negotiating with Developers-Negotiating with
    Developers
  - providing guidance, Providing Guidance-Providing Guidance
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 24: Making Teams Effective
  - team topologies (see team topologies)
  - warning signs of too-large team, Team Warning Signs-Pluralistic
    Ignorance
    - diffusion of responsibility, Pluralistic Ignorance
    - pluralistic ignorance, Pluralistic Ignorance
    - process loss, Process Loss
- DevOps, Architecture and Infrastructure
- diagramming architecture, Diagramming Architecture-Summary
  - guidelines, Diagram Guidelines-Keys
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 23: Diagramming Architecture
  - standards, Diagramming Standards: UML, C4, and ArchiMate-ArchiMate
    - ArchiMate, ArchiMate
    - C4, C4
    - UML, UML
  - tools, Tools-Tools
  - using layers semantically, Tools
- diffusion of responsibility, Pluralistic Ignorance
- direction of risk, Risk Assessments-Risk Assessments
- Distance from the Main Sequence metric
  - basics, Distance from the Main Sequence-Distance from the Main
    Sequence
  - verification using fitness functions, Distance from the Main
    Sequence fitness function-Distance from the Main Sequence fitness
    function
- distributed architectures
  - Going, Going, Gone case study, Distributed Case Study: Going, Going,
    Gone-Distributed Case Study: Going, Going, Gone
  - microservices as, Topology
  - monolithic architectures versus, Monolithic Versus Distributed
    Architectures-Fallacy #11. Observability is optional (for
    distributed architectures)
    - fallacy #1: reliable network, Fallacy #1: The Network Is Reliable
    - fallacy #2: zero latency, Fallacy #2: Latency Is Zero
    - fallacy #3: infinite bandwidth, Fallacy #3: Bandwidth Is Infinite
    - fallacy #4: secure network, Fallacy #4: The Network Is Secure
    - fallacy #5: unchanging topology, Fallacy #5: The Topology Never
      Changes
    - fallacy #6: single administrator, Fallacy #6: There Is Only One
      Administrator
    - fallacy #7: zero transport cost, Fallacy #7: Transport Cost Is
      Zero
    - fallacy #8: homogeneous network, Fallacy #8: The Network Is
      Homogeneous
    - fallacy #9: easy versioning, Fallacy #9. Versioning is easy
    - fallacy #10: reliable compensating updates, Fallacy #10.
      Compensating updates always work
    - fallacy #11: observability as optional, Fallacy #11. Observability
      is optional (for distributed architectures)
  - scoping and, Scoping and Architectural Style
- distributed caching, Replicated and distributed caching-Replicated and
  distributed caching
- DLL Hell antipattern, Peer-to-peer approach
- domain coupling, separating operational coupling from, Separating
  Domain and Operational Coupling-Service Mesh
- domain database topology, Domain Database Topology-Domain Database
  Topology
- domain partitioning, Architecture Partitioning-Architecture
  Partitioning, Domain partitioning
  - microkernel architecture and, Architecture Characteristics Ratings
  - modular monolithic topology, Topology
  - service-based architecture and, Style Characteristics
  - teams and, Architecture and Team Topologies
- domain services, Topology
- domain-driven design (DDD)
  - bounded context and, Architectural Quanta and Granularity
  - domain partitioning in, Architecture Partitioning
  - microservices and, Microservices Architecture
  - modular monolithic architecture and, The Modular Monolith
    Architecture Style
- domain-to-architecture isomorphism, Architecture and the Business
  Environment
- domains, in modular monolithic architecture, Style Specifics
- durable subscriber, Preventing Data Loss
- dynamic connascence, Dynamic connascence-Dynamic connascence,
  Transactions and Sagas
- dynamic coupling, Architectural Quanta and Granularity
  - communication as, Synchronous Communication
  - in microservices, Governance
- dynamic quantum entanglement, Asynchronous Capabilities

E

- EasyMeals use case, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use Cases
- EDA (see event-driven architecture (EDA) style)
- EDI (electronic data interchange) tools, When Not to Use
- effective architect personality type, The Effective Architect
- efferent coupling, Coupling, Static Coupling
- Elastic Leadership, How Much Involvement?
- elastic scale, Architecture and Infrastructure
- elasticity, Explicit Characteristics-Explicit Characteristics
- electronic data interchange (EDI) tools, When Not to Use
- Email-Driven Architecture antipattern, Email-Driven Architecture
  Antipattern
- enabling teams, defined, Team Topologies and Architecture
- enforced heterogeneity, Communication
- engineering practices
  - intersection of architecture with, Architecture and Engineering
    Practices-Architecture and Engineering Practices
  - software engineering and, Architecture and Engineering Practices
- ensuring compliance, Ensure Compliance with Decisions
- enterprise service bus (ESB), Orchestration engine and message bus,
  Governance-Governance
- enterprise services, Enterprise services
- enterprise, intersection of architecture with, Architecture and the
  Enterprise
- Entity Trap antipattern, The Entity Trap-The Entity Trap, Data
  Isolation
- essential complexity, Distance from the Main Sequence
- ETL (extract, transform, and load) tools, When Not to Use
- event mediator, Mediated Event-Driven Architecture
- event payloads, Event Payload-Anemic events
  - anemic events, Anemic events
  - data-based, Data-based event payloads-Data-based event payloads
  - key-based, Key-based event payload-Key-based event payload
  - trade-off summary, Trade-off summary
- event-based application, Event-Driven Architecture Style
- event-driven architecture (EDA) style, Event-Driven Architecture
  Style-Examples and Use Cases
  - choosing between request-based and event-based models, Choosing
    Between Request-Based and Event-Based Models
  - cloud considerations, Cloud Considerations
  - common risks, Common Risks
  - data topologies, Data Topologies-Dedicated Data Topology
    - dedicated data topology, Dedicated Data Topology-Dedicated Data
      Topology
    - domain database topology, Domain Database Topology-Domain Database
      Topology
    - monolithic database topology, Monolithic Database
      Topology-Monolithic Database Topology
  - examples and use cases, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use
    Cases
  - governance, Governance
  - style characteristics, Style Characteristics-Choosing Between
    Request-Based and Event-Based Models
  - style specifics, Style Specifics-Mediated Event-Driven Architecture
    - asynchronous capabilities, Asynchronous Capabilities-Asynchronous
      Capabilities
    - broadcast capabilities, Broadcast Capabilities
    - derived events, Derived Events-Derived Events
    - error handling, Error Handling-Error Handling
    - event payload, Event Payload-Anemic events
    - events versus messages, Events Versus Messages-Events Versus
      Messages
    - mediated event-driven architecture, Mediated Event-Driven
      Architecture-Mediated Event-Driven Architecture
    - preventing data loss, Preventing Data Loss-Preventing Data Loss
    - request-reply processing, Request-Reply Processing-Request-Reply
      Processing
    - Swarm of Gnats antipattern, The Swarm of Gnats Antipattern-The
      Swarm of Gnats Antipattern
    - triggering extensible events, Triggering Extensible Events
  - team topology considerations, Team Topology Considerations-Team
    Topology Considerations
  - topology, Topology-Topology
- eventual consistency, Style Characteristics
- explicit architectural characteristics, Explicit
  Characteristics-Explicit Characteristics
- extensible derived event, Triggering Extensible Events
- extract, transform, and load (ETL) tools, When Not to Use

F

- facilitation, as requirement for software architect, Possess
  Interpersonal Skills
- fallacies of distributed computing
  - fallacy #1: reliable network, Fallacy #1: The Network Is Reliable
  - fallacy #2: zero latency, Fallacy #2: Latency Is Zero
  - fallacy #3: infinite bandwidth, Fallacy #3: Bandwidth Is Infinite
  - fallacy #4: secure network, Fallacy #4: The Network Is Secure
  - fallacy #5: unchanging topology, Fallacy #5: The Topology Never
    Changes
  - fallacy #6: single administrator, Fallacy #6: There Is Only One
    Administrator
  - fallacy #7: zero transport cost, Fallacy #7: Transport Cost Is Zero
  - fallacy #8: homogeneous network, Fallacy #8: The Network Is
    Homogeneous
  - fallacy #9: easy versioning, Fallacy #9. Versioning is easy
  - fallacy #10: reliable compensating updates, Fallacy #10.
    Compensating updates always work
  - fallacy #11: observability as optional, Fallacy #11. Observability
    is optional (for distributed architectures)
- fan-in coupling (see afferent coupling)
- fan-out coupling (see efferent coupling)
- federated broker, Topology
- filters, in pipeline architectural style, Filters
- fire-and-forget communication, Topology, Asynchronous Capabilities
- First Law of Software Architecture, Laws of Software Architecture,
  First Law: Everything in Software Architecture Is a Trade-Off-Second
  Corollary: You Can’t Do It Just Once
  - architecture partitioning and, Architecture Partitioning
  - example: shared library versus shared service, Shared Library Versus
    Shared Service-Shared Library Versus Shared Service
  - example: synchronous versus asynchronous messaging, Synchronous
    Versus Asynchronous Messaging-Synchronous Versus Asynchronous
    Messaging
  - first corollary: missing trade-offs, First Corollary: Missing
    Trade-Offs-First Corollary: Missing Trade-Offs
  - second corollary: trade-off analysis as primary job for architects,
    Second Corollary: You Can’t Do It Just Once
- fitness functions
  - architectural characteristics, Fitness Functions-Distance from the
    Main Sequence fitness function
  - cyclic dependencies, Cyclic dependencies-Cyclic dependencies
  - Distance from the Main Sequence, Distance from the Main Sequence
    fitness function-Distance from the Main Sequence fitness function
- flow state, Integrating with the Development Team
- 4 Cs of architecture leadership (communication, collaboration, clear,
  concise), The 4 Cs of Architecture-The 4 Cs of Architecture
- Front Controller pattern, Choreography and Orchestration
- frontends, Frontends-Frontends
- Frozen Caveman antipattern, Technical Breadth
- full-time equivalency (FTE) rate, Status
- function point analysis, Architectural Characteristics Defined
- functional cohesion, Architectural Quanta and Granularity,
  Architectural Quanta and Granularity
- functional suitability, Cross-Cutting Architectural Characteristics

G

- generative AI
  - inability to evaluate trade-offs, Introduction
  - intersection of architecture with, Architecture and Generative
    AI-Generative AI as an Architect Assistant
    - Gen AI as architect assistant, Generative AI as an Architect
      Assistant-Generative AI as an Architect Assistant
    - incorporating Gen AI into architecture, Incorporating Generative
      AI into Architecture
  - leveraging in architectural decisions, Leveraging Generative AI and
    LLMs in Architectural Decisions
- generic architecture antipattern, Limiting and Prioritizing
  Architectural Characteristics
- Going Green (kata)
  - architecture quantum as scope for architectural characteristics,
    Kata: Going Green-Kata: Going Green
  - microkernel architecture for, Core System-Core System
  - service-based architecture, Style Characteristics-Examples and Use
    Cases
- Going, Going, Gone (GGG)
  - ADR example, Example-Example
  - discovering components, Case Study: Going, Going, Gone—Discovering
    Components-Case Study: Going, Going, Gone—Discovering Components
  - distributed architectures, Distributed Case Study: Going, Going,
    Gone-Distributed Case Study: Going, Going, Gone
  - EDA style, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use Cases
- governance, Governance and Fitness Functions
  - architectural characteristics, Governance and Fitness Functions
  - EDA style, Governance
  - layered architectural style, Governance
  - microkernel architectural style, Governance
  - microservices architectural style, Governance-Governance
  - modular monolith architectural style, Governance-Governance
  - orchestration-driven service-oriented architecture,
    Governance-Governance
  - pipeline architectural style, Governance-Governance
  - service-based architectural style, Governance
  - space-based architecture style, Governance-Governance
- Grains of Sand antipattern, Common Risks
- granularity
  - architectural quanta and, Architectural Quanta and
    Granularity-Architectural Quanta and Granularity
  - modularity versus, Modularity Versus Granularity
- Groundhog Day antipattern, Groundhog Day Antipattern
- guaranteed delivery, Preventing Data Loss

H

- handshakes, Leading Teams by Example
- happy path, Core System
- Hawthorne effect, Leveraging Checklists
- Hexagonal architecture, Hexagonal architecture-Hexagonal architecture
- hugging, Leading Teams by Example

I

- implementation coupling, Architectural Quanta and Granularity
- implementation, intersection of architecture with, Architecture and
  Implementation-Architectural Constraints
  - architectural constraints, Architectural Constraints
  - operational concerns, Operational Concerns-Operational Concerns
  - structural integrity, Structural Integrity-Structural Integrity
- implicit architectural characteristics
  - importance of, Architectural Characteristics and System Design
  - modularity and, Modularity
  - Silicon Sandwiches (kata example), Implicit Characteristics-Implicit
    Characteristics
- in-memory replicated cache, Operational Concerns
- incoming coupling (see afferent coupling)
- infrastructure services, Infrastructure services
- infrastructure, intersection of architecture with, Architecture and
  Infrastructure-Architecture and Infrastructure
- initiating event, Topology
- instability (modularity metric), Core Metrics
- insurance claims processing use case, Examples and Use Cases
- interfaces, defined, Architectural Significance
- International Organization for Standards (ISO) definitions for
  architectural characteristics, Cross-Cutting Architectural
  Characteristics-Cross-Cutting Architectural Characteristics
- interpersonal skills, Possess Interpersonal Skills
- intersections of architecture, Architectural Intersections-Summary
  - with data topologies, Architecture and Data Topologies-Read/Write
    Priority
    - architectural characteristics, Architectural Characteristics
    - data structure, Data Structure
    - database topologies, Database Topology-Database Topology
    - read/write priority, Read/Write Priority
  - with engineering practices, Architecture and Engineering
    Practices-Architecture and Engineering Practices
  - with generative AI, Architecture and Generative AI-Generative AI as
    an Architect Assistant
    - Gen AI as architect assistant, Generative AI as an Architect
      Assistant-Generative AI as an Architect Assistant
    - incorporating Gen AI into architecture, Incorporating Generative
      AI into Architecture
  - with implementation, Architecture and Implementation-Architectural
    Constraints
    - architectural constraints, Architectural Constraints
    - operational concerns, Operational Concerns-Operational Concerns
    - structural integrity, Structural Integrity-Structural Integrity
  - with infrastructure, Architecture and Infrastructure-Architecture
    and Infrastructure
  - with systems integration, Architecture and Systems Integration
  - with team topologies, Architecture and Team Topologies
  - with the business environment, Architecture and the Business
    Environment-Architecture and the Business Environment
  - with the enterprise, Architecture and the Enterprise
- Inverse Conway Maneuver, Architecture Partitioning
- Irrational Artifact Attachment antipattern, Tools
- ISO (International Organization for Standards) definitions for
  architectural characteristics, Cross-Cutting Architectural
  Characteristics-Cross-Cutting Architectural Characteristics

J

- Jakarta Messaging API, Preventing Data Loss
- Java, Three-tier
- Java 1.0, Defining Modularity
- JDepend, Cyclic dependencies

K

- katas, Extracting Architectural Characteristics
  - (see also Silicon Sandwiches; Going Green)
  - origins, Extracting Architectural Characteristics
  - working with, Working with Katas
- key-based event payloads, Key-based event payload-Key-based event
  payload
- knowledge pyramid, Technical Breadth-Technical Breadth
- known unknowns, Architecture and the Business Environment

L

- Lack of Cohesion in Methods (LCOM), Cohesion-Cohesion
- large language models (LLMs), Architecture and Generative
  AI-Generative AI as an Architect Assistant
- last participant support (LPS), Preventing Data Loss
- last responsible moment, The Covering Your Assets Antipattern
- Law of Demeter (Principle of Least Knowledge), The Law of Demeter-The
  Law of Demeter
- Law of Diminishing Returns, Leveraging Checklists
- laws of software architecture, The Laws of Software Architecture,
  Revisited-The Spectrum Between Extremes
  - defining, Laws of Software Architecture-Laws of Software
    Architecture
  - First Law: everything in software architecture is a trade-off, Laws
    of Software Architecture, First Law: Everything in Software
    Architecture Is a Trade-Off-Second Corollary: You Can’t Do It Just
    Once
    - example: shared library versus shared service, Shared Library
      Versus Shared Service-Shared Library Versus Shared Service
    - example: synchronous versus asynchronous messaging, Synchronous
      Versus Asynchronous Messaging-Synchronous Versus Asynchronous
      Messaging
    - first corollary: missing trade-offs, First Corollary: Missing
      Trade-Offs-First Corollary: Missing Trade-Offs
    - second corollary: trade-off analysis as primary job for
      architects, Second Corollary: You Can’t Do It Just Once
  - Second Law: why is more important than how, Laws of Software
    Architecture, Second Law: Why Is More Important Than How
    - Out of Context antipattern, Out of Context Antipattern
  - Third Law: decisions exist on a spectrum, Laws of Software
    Architecture, The Spectrum Between Extremes
- layered architectural style, Layered Architecture Style-Examples and
  Use Cases
  - cloud considerations, Cloud Considerations
  - common risks, Common Risks
  - data topologies, Data Topologies
  - examples and use cases, Examples and Use Cases
  - governance, Governance
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 10: Layered Architecture Style
  - style characteristics, Style Characteristics-When Not to Use
  - style specifics, Style Specifics-Adding Layers
    - adding layers, Adding Layers-Adding Layers
    - layers of isolation, Layers of Isolation-Layers of Isolation
  - team topology considerations, Team Topology Considerations
  - topology, Topology-Topology
  - when not to use, When Not to Use
  - when to use, When to Use
- layered stack, Providing Guidance
- layers of isolation, Layers of Isolation
- layers, using semantically when diagramming, Tools
- LCOM (Lack of Cohesion in Methods), Cohesion-Cohesion
- leadership, The Software Architect as a Leader-Leading Teams by
  Example
  - (see also team topologies)
  - 4 Cs of architecture and, The 4 Cs of Architecture-The 4 Cs of
    Architecture
  - as requirement for software architect, Possess Interpersonal Skills,
    The Software Architect as a Leader-Leading Teams by Example
  - balancing pragmatism and vision, Be Pragmatic, Yet Visionary-Be
    Pragmatic, Yet Visionary
  - integrating with the development team, Integrating with the
    Development Team-Integrating with the Development Team
  - leading teams by example, Leading Teams by Example-Leading Teams by
    Example
- leadership skills
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 25: Negotiation and Leadership
    Skills
- leaf nodes, Defining Logical Components
- least worst architecture, Trade-Offs and Least Worst
  Architecture-Trade-Offs and Least Worst Architecture
- LLMs (large language models), Leveraging Generative AI and LLMs in
  Architectural Decisions, Architecture and Generative AI-Generative AI
  as an Architect Assistant
- logical architecture, creating
  - analyzing architectural characteristics, Analyzing Architectural
    Characteristics
  - analyzing roles/responsibilities, Analyzing Roles and
    Responsibilities-Analyzing Roles and Responsibilities
  - assigning user stories to components, Assigning User Stories to
    Components-Assigning User Stories to Components
  - creating, Creating a Logical Architecture-Restructuring Components
  - identifying core components
    - Actor/Action approach, The Actor/Action approach-The Actor/Action
      approach
    - Entity Trap antipattern, The Entity Trap-The Entity Trap
    - Workflow approach, The Workflow approach
  - physical architecture versus, Logical Versus Physical
    Architecture-Logical Versus Physical Architecture
  - restructuring components, Restructuring Components
- logical components, Defining Software Architecture
  - (see also component-based thinking)
  - defining, Defining Logical Components-Defining Logical Components
  - restructuring, Restructuring Components
- LPS (last participant support), Preventing Data Loss

M

- maintainability, ISO definition, Cross-Cutting Architectural
  Characteristics
- mean time to recover (MTTR), Common Risks, Style Characteristics
- mediated event-driven architecture, Mediated Event-Driven
  Architecture-Mediated Event-Driven Architecture
- medical monitoring system use case, Examples and Use Cases-Examples
  and Use Cases
- meetings, when integrating with development team, Integrating with the
  Development Team-Integrating with the Development Team
- message bus, Orchestration engine and message bus
- microfrontends, Frontends
- microkernel architectural style, Microkernel Architecture
  Style-Examples and Use Cases
  - architecture characteristics ratings, Architecture Characteristics
    Ratings-Architecture Characteristics Ratings
  - cloud considerations, Cloud Considerations
  - common risks, Common Risks
  - contracts, Contracts
  - core system, Core System-Core System
  - data topologies, Data Topologies
  - examples and use cases, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use
    Cases
  - plug-in components, Plug-In Components-Plug-In Components
  - registry, Registry
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 13: Microkernel Architecture
    Style
  - Silicon Sandwiches case study, Microkernel-Microkernel
  - spectrum of microkern-ality, The Spectrum of “Microkern-ality”
  - team topology considerations, Team Topology Considerations
  - topology, Topology
- microservices architectural style, Styles Versus Patterns,
  Microservices Architecture-Examples and Use Cases
  - cloud considerations, Cloud Considerations
  - common risks, Common Risks-Common Risks
  - data topologies, Data Topologies-Data Topologies
  - enforced heterogeneity, Communication
  - examples and use cases, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use
    Cases
  - governance, Governance-Governance
  - intersection of architecture and infrastructure, Architecture and
    Infrastructure
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 18: Microservices Architecture
  - style characteristics, Style Characteristics-Style Characteristics
  - style specifics, Style Specifics-Transactions and Sagas
    - API layer, API Layer
    - bounded context, Bounded Context
    - choreography and orchestration, Choreography and
      Orchestration-Choreography and Orchestration
    - communication, Communication-Communication
    - data isolation, Data Isolation
    - frontends, Frontends-Frontends
    - granularity, Granularity
    - operational reuse, Operational Reuse-Operational Reuse
    - transactions and sagas, Transactions and Sagas-Transactions and
      Sagas
  - team topology considerations, Team Topology Considerations-Team
    Topology Considerations
  - topology, Topology-Topology
- modular monolith architectural style, The Modular Monolith
  Architecture Style-Examples and Use Cases
  - cloud considerations, Cloud Considerations
  - common risks, Common Risks
  - data topologies, Data Topologies
  - domain partitioning in, Architecture Partitioning
  - examples and use cases, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use
    Cases
  - governance, Governance-Governance
  - Silicon Sandwiches case study, Modular Monolith-Modular Monolith
  - style characteristics, Style Characteristics-When Not to Use
    - when not to use, When Not to Use
    - when to use, When to Use
  - style specifics, Style Specifics-Mediator approach
    - modular structure, Modular Structure
    - module communication, Module Communication-Mediator approach
    - monolithic structure, Monolithic Structure
  - team topology considerations, Team Topology Considerations
  - topology, Topology
- modular programming languages, Defining Modularity
- modularity, Modularity-From Modules to Components
  - defining, Defining Modularity-Defining Modularity
  - granularity versus, Modularity Versus Granularity
  - Java package namespace, Defining Modularity
  - metrics, Measuring Modularity-Connascence properties
    - abstractness, Core Metrics
    - cohesion, Cohesion-Cohesion
    - connascence, Connascence-Connascence properties
    - coupling, Coupling
    - Distance from the Main Sequence, Distance from the Main
      Sequence-Distance from the Main Sequence
    - instability, Core Metrics
    - limitations of, Distance from the Main Sequence
  - modular reuse before classes, Defining Modularity
  - modules to components, From Modules to Components
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 3: Modularity
- module communication, Module Communication-Mediator approach
  - mediator approach, Mediator approach
  - peer-to-peer, Peer-to-peer approach
- monolithic architectures
  - case study: Silicon Sandwiches, Monolith Case Study: Silicon
    Sandwiches-Microkernel
    - microkernel architecture, Microkernel-Microkernel
    - modular monolith, Modular Monolith-Modular Monolith
  - distributed architectures versus, Monolithic Versus Distributed
    Architectures-Fallacy #11. Observability is optional (for
    distributed architectures)
  - scoping and, Scoping and Architectural Style
- monolithic database topology, Monolithic Database Topology-Monolithic
  Database Topology
- monolithic frontend, Frontends
- MTTR (mean time to recover), Common Risks, Style Characteristics

N

- n-tiered architectural style (see layered architectural style)
- namespaces, Defining Modularity
- near-cache model, Near-cache considerations
- negotiation skills, Negotiation and Facilitation-Negotiating with
  Developers
  - negotiating with business stakeholders, Negotiating with Business
    Stakeholders-Negotiating with Business Stakeholders
  - negotiating with developers, Negotiating with Developers-Negotiating
    with Developers
  - negotiating with other architects, Negotiating with Other
    Architects-Negotiating with Other Architects
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 25: Negotiation and Leadership
    Skills
- Netflix, Chaos Monkey, Distance from the Main Sequence fitness
  function
- non-functional characteristics, Architectural Significance
- non-functional requirements, longevity of term, Architectural
  Characteristics Defined
- nondeterministic workflows, Style Characteristics

O

- object-oriented programming languages, Defining Modularity
- observability, Fallacy #11. Observability is optional (for distributed
  architectures)
- online auction system use case, Online Auction System
  - (see also Going, Going, Gone (GGG))
- open layers, Layers of Isolation
- operational architectural characteristics, Operational Architectural
  Characteristics
- operational concerns, Operational Concerns-Operational Concerns
- operational coupling, separating domain coupling from, Separating
  Domain and Operational Coupling-Service Mesh
- operational measures, of architectural characteristics, Operational
  Measures-Operational Measures
- orchestration
  - choreography versus, Orchestration Versus Choreography-Orchestration
    Versus Choreography
  - in microservices, Choreography and Orchestration-Choreography and
    Orchestration
- orchestration engine, Orchestration engine and message bus
- orchestration-driven service-oriented architecture,
  Orchestration-Driven Service-Oriented Architecture-Examples and Use
  Cases
  - cloud considerations, Cloud Considerations
  - common risks, Common Risks
  - data topologies, Data Topologies
  - declarative transactions, Data Topologies
  - examples and use cases, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use
    Cases
  - governance, Governance-Governance
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 17: Orchestration-Driven
    Service-Oriented Architecture
  - style characteristics, Style Characteristics-Style Characteristics
  - style specifics, Style Specifics-Reuse…and Coupling
    - application services, Application services
    - business services, Business services
    - enterprise services, Enterprise services
    - infrastructure services, Infrastructure services
    - message flow, Message flow
    - orchestration engine and message bus, Orchestration engine and
      message bus
    - reuse and coupling, Reuse…and Coupling-Reuse…and Coupling
    - taxonomy, Taxonomy-Message flow
  - team topology considerations, Team Topology Considerations
  - topology, Topology
- orthogonal coupling, Service Mesh
- outgoing coupling (see efferent coupling)

P

- package namespace (Java 1.0), Defining Modularity
- packaging, modularity and, Defining Modularity
- patient monitoring system use case, Examples and Use Cases-Examples
  and Use Cases
- patterns in architecture, architectural styles versus, Styles Versus
  Patterns-Styles Versus Patterns
- performance efficiency, ISO definition, Cross-Cutting Architectural
  Characteristics
- performance, multiple definitions of, Operational Measures
- persisted queues, Data Synchronization and Consistency
- personal boundaries, Leading Teams by Example
- Pets.com, Architecture and Infrastructure
- physical architecture
  - defined, Logical Versus Physical Architecture
  - logical architecture versus, Logical Versus Physical
    Architecture-Logical Versus Physical Architecture
- pipeline architectural style, Pipeline Architecture Style-Examples and
  Use Cases
  - cloud considerations, Cloud Considerations-Cloud Considerations
  - common risks, Common Risks
  - data topologies, Data Topologies
  - examples and use cases, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use
    Cases
  - filters, Filters
  - governance, Governance-Governance
  - pipes, Pipes
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 12: Pipeline Architecture Style
  - style characteristics, Style Characteristics-When Not to Use
    - when not to use, When Not to Use
    - when to use, When to Use
  - team topology considerations, Team Topology Considerations
  - topology, Topology
- platform teams, defined, Team Topologies and Architecture
- plug-in components
  - dependencies, Plug-In Dependencies
  - microkernel architectural style, Plug-In Components-Plug-In
    Components
- plug-in registry, Registry
- pluralistic ignorance, Pluralistic Ignorance
- POCs (proofs-of-concept), Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding
- point-to-point communication, Plug-In Components
- poison event, Topology
- politics, understanding/navigating, Understand and Navigate Politics
- portability, ISO definition, Cross-Cutting Architectural
  Characteristics
- pragmatism, defined, Be Pragmatic, Yet Visionary
- Principle of Least Knowledge (Law of Demeter), The Law of Demeter-The
  Law of Demeter
- process loss, Process Loss
- process, defined, Architecture and Engineering Practices
- producer filters, Filters
- product-based applications, microkernel architecture for, Microkernel
  Architecture Style
- productivity flow, Integrating with the Development Team
- proofs-of-concept (POCs), Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding
- protocol-aware heterogeneous interoperability, Communication
- pseudosynchronous communications (request-reply messaging),
  Request-Reply Processing-Request-Reply Processing

R

- read/write priority, Read/Write Priority
- reliability, ISO definition, Cross-Cutting Architectural
  Characteristics
- replicated caching, Replicated and distributed caching
- replication latency (RL), Data Collisions
- representational consistency, Diagramming Architecture
- Request for Comments (RFC), Status
- request-based application, Event-Driven Architecture Style
- request-reply messaging, Request-Reply Processing-Request-Reply
  Processing
- residuality theory, Architecture and the Business Environment
- risk (see architecture risk)
- risk assessments, Risk Assessments-Risk Assessments
- risk storming, Risk Storming-Phase 3: Risk Mitigation
  - phase 1: identification, Phase 1: Identification
  - phase 2: consensus, Phase 2: Consensus-Phase 2: Consensus
  - phase 3: mitigation, Phase 3: Risk Mitigation
  - use case, Risk-Storming Use Case-Security
    - availability risk, Availability-Availability
    - elasticity risk, Elasticity
    - security risk, Security-Security
  - user-story risk analysis, User-Story Risk Analysis
- risk-assessment matrix, Risk Matrix-Risk Matrix
- RL (replication latency), Data Collisions
- rules engine, Examples and Use Cases
- runtime plug-in components, Plug-In Components

S

- Saga pattern, Transactions and Sagas
- scalability, Explicit Characteristics
- scoping (see architectural characteristics, scope of)
- security
  - as implicit characteristic, Implicit Characteristics
  - ISO definition, Cross-Cutting Architectural Characteristics
- self-assessment questions, Chapter 1: Introduction
- semantic coupling, Architectural Quanta and Granularity
- semantic decoupling, Broadcast Capabilities
- separation of concerns, Topology
- separation of technical concerns, Architecture Partitioning
- serialization, three-tier architecture and, Three-tier
- serverless architectural style, Cloud Considerations
- service discovery, Operational Reuse
- Service Mesh pattern
  - microservices and, Operational Reuse
  - separating domain coupling and operational coupling, Service
    Mesh-Service Mesh
- service plane, Operational Reuse
- service-based architectural style, Service-Based Architecture
  Style-Examples and Use Cases
  - cloud considerations, Cloud Considerations
  - common risks, Common Risks
  - data topologies, Data Topologies-Data Topologies
  - examples and use cases, Examples and Use Cases-Examples and Use
    Cases
  - governance, Governance
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 14: Service-Based Architecture
    Style
  - style characteristics, Style Characteristics-Style Characteristics
  - style specifics, Style Specifics-API Gateway Options
    - API Gateway options, API Gateway Options
    - service design and granularity, Service Design and Granularity
    - user interface options, User Interface Options-User Interface
      Options
  - team topology considerations, Team Topology Considerations
  - topology, Topology-Topology
- service-level agreements (SLAs), Availability
- service-level objectives (SLOs), Availability
- service-oriented architecture (SOA), Style Specifics
  - (see also orchestration-driven service-oriented architecture)
- services, origins and evolution of term, Style Specifics
- Sidecar pattern, Operational Reuse-Operational Reuse, Service Mesh
- Silicon Sandwiches (kata example), Kata: Silicon Sandwiches-Implicit
  Characteristics
  - explicit characteristics, Explicit Characteristics-Explicit
    Characteristics
  - implicit characteristics, Implicit Characteristics-Implicit
    Characteristics
  - monolithic architecture case study, Monolith Case Study: Silicon
    Sandwiches-Microkernel
    - microkernel architecture, Microkernel-Microkernel
    - modular monolith, Modular Monolith-Modular Monolith
  - partitioning, Kata: Silicon Sandwiches—Partitioning-Technical
    partitioning
    - domain partitioning, Domain partitioning
    - technical partitioning, Technical partitioning
- single monolithic database topology, Monolithic Database
  Topology-Monolithic Database Topology
- Single-Broker pattern, Broker-Domain Pattern
- SLAs (service-level agreements), Availability
- SLOs (service-level objectives), Availability
- SOA (service-oriented architecture), Style Specifics
  - (see also orchestration-driven service-oriented architecture)
- soft skills
  - architectural decisions (see architectural decisions)
  - diagramming architecture (see diagramming architecture)
  - leadership (see leadership)
  - making teams effective (see development teams, making effective)
  - negotiation (see negotiation skills)
- software architects
  - collaboration with development team, Collaboration-Collaboration
  - integrating with the development team, Integrating with the
    Development Team-Integrating with the Development Team
  - leadership by (see leadership)
  - negotiations between, Negotiating with Other Architects-Negotiating
    with Other Architects
  - personality types, Architect Personalities-The Effective Architect
    - armchair architect, The Armchair Architect-The Armchair Architect
    - control-freak architect, The Control-Freak Architect
    - effective architect, The Effective Architect
  - role in making teams effective (see development teams, making
    effective)
  - role/expectations of, Expectations of an Architect-Understand and
    Navigate Politics
    - continually analyzing architecture, Continually Analyze the
      Architecture
    - ensuring compliance with decisions/design principles, Ensure
      Compliance with Decisions
    - interpersonal skills, Possess Interpersonal Skills
    - keeping current with latest technology/trends, Keep Current with
      Latest Trends
    - knowing the business domain, Know the Business Domain
    - making architecture decisions, Make Architecture Decisions
    - political skills, Understand and Navigate Politics
    - understanding of diverse technologies, Understand Diverse
      Technologies
  - technical breadth as requirement for, Technical Breadth-Rings
  - technical depth versus technical breadth, Technical Breadth
  - tips and techniques for deepening technical abilities, Balancing
    Architecture and Hands-On Coding-Balancing Architecture and Hands-On
    Coding
- software architecture (basics)
  - defining, Defining Software Architecture-Defining Software
    Architecture
  - four dimensions of, Defining Software Architecture-Defining Software
    Architecture
  - laws of software architecture, Laws of Software Architecture-Laws of
    Software Architecture
  - role/expectations of software architect, Expectations of an
    Architect-Understand and Navigate Politics
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 1: Introduction
- software developers (see developers; development teams, making
  effective)
- software release checklist, Software-Release Checklist
- solutions, architecture patterns versus, Architectural Patterns
- source code (see implementation)
- space-based architectural style, Space-Based Architecture Style-Online
  Auction System
  - cloud considerations, Cloud Considerations
  - common risks, Common Risks-Data Collisions
    - data collisions, Data Collisions-Data Collisions
    - data synchronization and consistency, Data Synchronization and
      Consistency
    - frequent reads from database, Frequent Reads from the Database
    - high data volumes, High Data Volumes
  - data grid, Data Grid-Near-cache considerations
    - near-cache considerations, Near-cache considerations
    - replicated and distributed caching, Replicated and distributed
      caching-Replicated and distributed caching
  - data pumps, Data Pumps-Data Pumps
  - data readers, Data Readers-Data Readers
  - data topologies, Data Topologies
  - data writers, Data Writers-Data Writers
  - deployment manager, Deployment Manager
  - examples and use cases, Examples and Use Cases-Online Auction System
    - concert ticketing system, Concert Ticketing System
    - online auction system, Online Auction System
  - governance, Governance-Governance
  - messaging grid, Messaging Grid
  - processing grid, Processing Grid
  - processing unit, Processing Unit
  - self-assessment questions, Chapter 16: Space-Based Architecture
    Style
  - style characteristics, Style Characteristics-Style Characteristics
  - team topology considerations, Team Topology Considerations-Team
    Topology Considerations
  - topology, Topology-Topology
  - virtualized middleware, Virtualized Middleware
- stability, as implicit characteristic, Implicit Characteristics
- stakeholders, negotiating with, Negotiating with Business
  Stakeholders-Negotiating with Business Stakeholders
- stale expertise, Technical Breadth
- stamp coupling, Fallacy #3: Bandwidth Is Infinite, Data-based event
  payloads-Data-based event payloads, Governance
- static connascence, Static connascence-Static connascence
- static coupling, Architectural Quanta and Granularity, Static
  Coupling, Governance
- strategic decisions, tactical decisions versus, Strategic Versus
  Tactical Decisions
- stream-aligned teams, defined, Team Topologies and Architecture
- structural architectural characteristics, Structural Architectural
  Characteristics
- structural integrity, Structural Integrity-Structural Integrity
- structured programming languages, Defining Modularity
- Swarm of Gnats antipattern, The Swarm of Gnats Antipattern-The Swarm
  of Gnats Antipattern
- synchronous communication, Synchronous Communication
  - as factor in choosing architectural style, Decision Criteria
  - in microservices, Communication
- synchronous send, Preventing Data Loss
- system design, architectural characteristics and, Architectural
  Characteristics and System Design-Architectural Characteristics and
  System Design
- systems integration, intersection of architecture with, Architecture
  and Systems Integration

T

- TAB (Technology Advisory Board), The Thoughtworks Technology Radar
- tactical decisions, strategic decisions versus, Strategic Versus
  Tactical Decisions
- tags, in pipeline architecture, Governance-Governance
- tax preparation software use case
  - microkernel architecture and, Examples and Use Cases
  - registry for, Registry
- team topologies, Team Topologies and Architecture
  - EDA style and, Team Topology Considerations-Team Topology
    Considerations
  - intersection of architecture with, Architecture and Team Topologies
  - Inverse Conway Maneuver and, Architecture Partitioning
  - layered architectural style and, Team Topology Considerations
  - microservices architectural style and, Team Topology
    Considerations-Team Topology Considerations
  - modular monolith architectural style and, Team Topology
    Considerations
  - orchestration-driven service-oriented architectural style and, Team
    Topology Considerations
  - pipeline architectural style and, Team Topology Considerations
  - service-based architectural style and, Team Topology Considerations
  - space-based architectural style and, Team Topology
    Considerations-Team Topology Considerations
  - team types that intersect with software architecture, Team
    Topologies and Architecture
- teams, making effective (see development teams, making effective)
- teamwork, as requirement for software architect, Possess Interpersonal
  Skills
- technical breadth, Technical Breadth-Rings
  - 20-minute rule, The 20-Minute Rule-The 20-Minute Rule
  - developing a personal radar for technological change, Developing a
    Personal Radar-Rings
  - technical depth versus, Understand Diverse Technologies, Technical
    Breadth
  - Thoughtworks Technology Radar, The Thoughtworks Technology
    Radar-Rings
- technical debt, Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding
- technical depth, technical breadth versus, Understand Diverse
  Technologies, Technical Breadth
- technical leaders, architects as, Architecture and Engineering
  Practices
- technical partitioning, Architecture Partitioning, Technical
  partitioning
  - microkernel architecture and, Architecture Characteristics Ratings
  - teams and, Architecture and Team Topologies
- technical top-level partitioning, Architecture Partitioning
- technically partitioned architecture
  - layered architecture as, Topology
  - pipeline architecture style as, Style Characteristics
- Technology Advisory Board (TAB), The Thoughtworks Technology Radar
- technology bubbles, Developing a Personal Radar
- technology radar (see Thoughtworks Technology Radar)
- temporal coupling, Temporal Coupling
- temporary queue, Request-Reply Processing-Request-Reply Processing
- tester filters, Filters
- Thoughtworks Haiven, Generative AI as an Architect Assistant
- Thoughtworks Technology Radar, The Thoughtworks Technology Radar-Rings
  - four quadrants, Parts
  - four rings, Rings
- three-tier architecture, Three-tier
- time to market, agility and, Architecture and Engineering Practices
- top-level partitioning, Architecture Partitioning-Architecture
  Partitioning
- trade-off analysis, Implicit Characteristics
- trade-offs
  - analyzing, as part of architectural thinking, Analyzing
    Trade-Offs-Analyzing Trade-Offs
  - architecture versus design, The Significance of Trade-Offs
  - First Law of software architecture, First Law: Everything in
    Software Architecture Is a Trade-Off-Second Corollary: You Can’t Do
    It Just Once
  - in architectural characteristics, Trade-Offs and Least Worst
    Architecture-Trade-Offs and Least Worst Architecture
- transactions, in microservices, Transactions and Sagas-Transactions
  and Sagas
- transformer filters, Filters
- tuple space, Topology
- 20-minute rule, The 20-Minute Rule-The 20-Minute Rule

U

- UML technical diagramming standard, UML
- unit and functional testing checklist, Unit and Functional Testing
  Checklist
- unitary architecture, Unitary Architecture
- unknown unknowns, Architecture and the Business Environment
- unstructured monolith, Common Risks
- usability, ISO definition, Cross-Cutting Architectural Characteristics
- user stories
  - assigning to logical components, Assigning User Stories to
    Components-Assigning User Stories to Components
  - user-story risk analysis, User-Story Risk Analysis

V

- Vasa (Swedish warship), Limiting and Prioritizing Architectural
  Characteristics
- visionary, defined, Be Pragmatic, Yet Visionary

W

- Workflow Event pattern, Error Handling-Error Handling

Z

- Zone of Pain, Distance from the Main Sequence
- Zone of Uselessness, Distance from the Main Sequence

About the Authors

Mark Richards is an experienced hands-on software architect involved in
the architecture, design, and implementation of microservices and other
distributed architectures. He is the founder of
DeveloperToArchitect.com, a website devoted to assisting developers in
the journey from developer to software architect.

Neal Ford is director, software architect, and meme wrangler at
Thoughtworks, a global IT consultancy with an exclusive focus on
end-to-end software development and delivery. Before joining
Thoughtworks, Neal was the chief technology officer at The DSW Group,
Ltd., a nationally recognized training and development firm.

Colophon

The animal on the cover of Fundamentals of Software Engineering is the
red-fan parrot (Deroptyus accipitrinus), a native of South America,
where it is known by several names such as loro cacique in Spanish, or
anacã, papagaio-de-coleira, and vanaquiá in Portuguese. This New World
bird makes its home up in the canopies and tree holes of the Amazon
rainforest, where it feeds on the fruits of the Cecropia tree, aptly
known as “snake fingers,” as well as the hard fruits of various palm
trees.

As the only member of the genus Deroptyus, the red-fan parrot is
distinguished by the deep red feathers that cover its nape. Its name
comes from the fact that those feathers will “fan” out when it feels
excited or threatened and reveal the brilliant blue that highlights each
tip. The head is topped by a white crown and yellow eyes, with brown
cheeks that are streaked in white. The parrot’s breast and belly are
covered in the same red feathers dipped in blue, in contrast with the
layered bright green feathers on its back.

Between December and January, the red-fan parrot will find its lifelong
mate and then begin laying two to four eggs a year. During the 28 days
in which the female is incubating the eggs, the male will provide her
with care and support. After about 10 weeks, the young are ready to
start fledging in the wild and begin their 40-year life span in the
world’s largest tropical rainforest.

While the red-fan parrot’s current conservation status is designated as
of Least Concern, many of the animals on O’Reilly covers are endangered;
all of them are important to the world.

The cover illustration is by Karen Montgomery, based on a black and
white engraving from Lydekker’s Royal Natural History. The series design
is by Edie Freedman, Ellie Volckhausen, and Karen Montgomery. The cover
fonts are Gilroy Semibold and Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe
Minion Pro; the heading font is Adobe Myriad Condensed; and the code
font is Dalton Maag’s Ubuntu Mono.
