Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...



                          THE LEARNING HEALTH SYSTEM SERIES




                           Generative Artificial Intelligence
                              in Health and Medicine
                                 Opportunities and Responsibilities
                                  for Transformative Innovation




                   Thomas Maddox, Dianne Babski, Peter Embí,
           Jackie Gerhart, Jennifer Goldsack, Ravi Parikh, and Troy Sarich

                           Sunita Krishnan and Audrey Elliott, Editors




                                             WASHINGTON, DC
                                                NAM.EDU




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS                      500 Fifth Street, NW           Washington, DC 20001

             This publication has undergone peer review according to procedures established by the National
             Academy of Medicine (NAM). Publication by the NAM signifies that it is the product of a carefully
             considered process and is a contribution worthy of public attention but does not constitute an
             endorsement of conclusions and recommendations by the NAM. The views presented in this
             publication are those of individual contributors and do not represent formal consensus positions
             of the authors’ organizations; the NAM; or the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
             Medicine.

             This publication was completed with support from the Doris Duke Foundation and the Gordon
             and Betty Moore Foundation. Any opinions, findings, or conclusions expressed in this publication
             do not necessarily reflect the views of any organization or agency that provided support for this
             publication.

             International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-73369-4
             International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-73369-7
             Digital Object Identifier: https://doi.org/10.17226/28907

             Copyright 2025 by the National Academy of Sciences. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
             and Medicine and National Academies Press and the graphical logos for each are all trademarks of
             the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

             Printed in the United States of America.

             Suggested citation: National Academy of Medicine. 2025. Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health
             and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative Innovation. Krishnan, S., and A.
             Elliott, editors. NAM Special Publication. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. https://doi.
             org/10.17226/28907.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                       “Knowing is not enough; we must apply.
                                        Willing is not enough; we must do.”
                                                   —GOETHE




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                     AB OUT THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF MEDICINE

             The National Academy of Medicine is one of three Academies constituting
             the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (the National
             Academies).The National Academies provide independent, objective analysis and
             advice to the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems
             and inform public policy decisions. The National Academies also encourage
             education and research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and
             increase public understanding in matters of science, engineering, and medicine.

             The National Academy of Sciences was established in 1863 by an Act of
             Congress, signed by President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution
             to advise the nation on issues related to science and technology. Members are
             elected by their peers for outstanding contributions to research. Dr. Marcia
             McNutt is president.

             The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964 under the
             charter of the National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering
             to advising the nation. Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary
             contributions to engineering. Dr. John L. Anderson is president.

             The National Academy of Medicine (formerly the Institute of Medicine)
             was established in 1970 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences
             to advise the nation on issues of health, health care, and biomedical science and
             technology. Members are elected by their peers for distinguished contributions to
             medicine and health. Dr.Victor J. Dzau is president.

             Learn more about the National Academy of Medicine at NAM.edu.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                        GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
                             IN HEALTH AND MEDICINE


          Author Group

          THOMAS MADDOX (Chair), BJC HealthCare/Washington University
            School of Medicine
          DIANNE BABSKI, National Institutes of Health
          PETER EMBÍ, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
          JACKIE GERHART, Epic
          JENNIFER GOLDSACK, Digital Medicine Society
          RAVI PARIKH, Emory University
          TROY SARICH, Johnson & Johnson

          NAM Staff

            Development of this publication was facilitated by contributions of the
          following current and former NAM staff, under the guidance of J. Michael
          McGinnis, Leonard D. Schaeffer Executive Officer and Executive Director of the
          NAM Leadership Consortium:

          SUNITA KRISHNAN, Senior Program Officer
          AUDREY ELLIOTT, Associate Program Officer
          ANNIE MURFF, Research Associate
          STEPHANIE STAN, Research Associate (June 2023–March 2024)




                                                               v



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       DISCLOSURE OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

             See Author Information on p. 43.




                                                               vi



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                      CONSULTATIVE EXPERTS

            The author group would like to express its sincere gratitude to the following
          experts, who were called upon to share their views on emerging applications,
          opportunities, and risks of generative artificial intelligence for health and medicine.
          Their insights and knowledge have informed the final form of this publication.

          PETER LEE, Microsoft
          KENNETH MANDL, Harvard University




                                                               vii



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                  REVIEWERS

            This NAM Special Publication was reviewed in draft form by individuals
          chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of this
          independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the
          National Academy of Medicine in making the publication as sound as possible
          and to ensure that it meets the institutional standards for quality, objectivity, and
          evidence. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to
          protect the integrity of the deliberative process.
            The author group thanks the following individuals for their review of this
          report:

             DAVID W. BATES, Harvard University
             DAVID C. CLASSEN, University of Utah
             WILLIAM W. STEAD, Vanderbilt University

            The reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments and
          suggestions, but they were not asked to endorse the publication’s content and did
          not see the final draft before it was published.
            Review of this publication was overseen by PAUL C. TANG, Stanford
          University School of Medicine. Responsibility for the final content rests entirely
          with the author group and the National Academy of Medicine.




                                                               ix



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                 CONTENTS

          Preface                                                                                           xv

          Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                                      xvii

          1    Introduction                                                                                   1

          2    Opportunities and Early Evidence for Generative
               Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine                                                 5

          3    Risks of Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health
               and Medicine                                                                                 11

          4    Application Readiness Cadence                                                                15

          5    The Path Forward                                                                             21

          References                                                                                        35

          Author Information                                                                                43

          Appendix: Rapid Field Development and Progress                                                    47




                                                               xi



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                      FIGURES AND TABLES

                                                     FIGURES

          1-1     The history of artificial intelligence use in health care, 2

          4-1     Large language model application readiness cadence, 16

                                                      TABLES

          5-1     Similarities in Monitoring Generative and Predictive/Analytical Artificial
                  Intelligence, 23
          5-2     Differences in Monitoring Generative and Predictive/Analytical Artificial
                  Intelligence, 24
          5-3     Opportunities for Cross-Sector Collaboration Across the Artificial
                  Intelligence Life Cycle Phases, 27
          5-4     Responsibility Assignment Matrix Defining the Current Roles and
                  Responsibilities of Collaborating Stakeholders During Different Phases of
                  Generative Artificial Intelligence Model Development and Deployment
                  in Health and Health Care, 30




                                                              xiii



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                   PREFACE

             The fundamental goal of modern health care is to enhance the well-being
          of individuals and populations, ensuring that each person has the opportunity
          to achieve their full health potential. Today, we stand at the threshold of a
          technological revolution that has the potential to transform health and medicine
          as we know it: the rise of generative artificial intelligence (AI) and large language
          models (LLMs). These innovations hold promise for improving health care
          delivery, advancing medical research, and augmenting the capacity of clinicians to
          provide personalized care at an unprecedented scale.
             The introduction of these powerful tools comes at a time when the health
          system faces significant challenges, including workforce shortages, inequities
          in care access, rising costs, and the burden of navigating increasingly complex
          terrain. As we integrate generative AI into this landscape, the potential for
          both breakthrough innovation and unintended consequences demands careful
          consideration.These technologies, while transformative, also raise concerns about
          privacy, bias, and the role of human judgment in clinical decision making.
             In response to the opportunities and risks posed by generative AI, the National
          Academy of Medicine’s (NAM’s) Digital Health Action Collaborative convened
          a workshop in the fall of 2023 to enhance common understanding among health
          professionals and health system leaders, technology developers, and government
          agencies of the nature and health care implications of LLMs and generative AI.
          Leading experts across clinical medicine, biomedical research, AI ethics, and health
          policy were engaged to assess the future impact of generative AI on health and
          medicine.The discussions focused on how LLMs can augment clinical workflows,
          reduce administrative burden, support diagnostic decision making, and empower
          patients through more accessible, tailored health information. At the same time,
          participants examined the ethical, legal, and regulatory frameworks needed to
          ensure these technologies are used responsibly and equitably.



                                                               xv



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             xvi | Preface


                This NAM Special Publication, Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and
             Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative Innovation, addresses
             both the promise and the potential unintended consequences related to the use of
             generative AI in health, medicine, and biomedical science. It highlights how LLMs
             might transform all aspects of care, from patient triage and clinical documentation
             to drug discovery and public health analytics.Yet, it also emphasizes the importance
             of human oversight, transparency, and ensuring that AI-driven solutions are free
             from bias and accessible to all populations.
                Generative AI will not replace health professionals, but it will reshape their
             roles, enabling them to focus on the aspects of care that require empathy, creativity,
             and complex decision making. By enhancing professional education, addressing
             workforce needs, and reimagining patient engagement, this publication offers a
             roadmap for ensuring that the integration of generative AI in health and medicine
             benefits all stakeholders—patients, providers, and the broader health ecosystem.
                As part of the NAM’s continued commitment to advancing equitable and
             innovative health solutions, we look forward to supporting this transformative
             shift and working with stakeholders across sectors to ensure that the future of
             health and medicine is one in which technology best serves humanity, advancing
             both individual well-being and the health of people everywhere.

             J. Michael McGinnis, MD, MPP			                                            Victor Dzau, MD
             Leonard D. Schaeffer Executive Officer                                             President
             National Academy of Medicine		                                National Academy of Medicine




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                         ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

          AI                   artificial intelligence

          CDS                  clinical decision support

          DT                   digital twin

          EHR                  electronic health record
          EU                   European Union

          FDA                  U.S. Food and Drug Administration

          GenAI                generative AI

          IST                  in silico trial

          LHS                  Learning Health System
          LLM                  large language model

          ML                   machine learning

          NAM                  National Academy of Medicine

          WHO                  World Health Organization




                                                              xvii



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                           1
                                           INTRODUCTION

             Generative AI (GenAI) is a type of artificial intelligence (AI) that produces
          a variety of content, including text, imagery, and audio. Large language models
          (LLMs) are a subset of GenAI that specializes in interpreting and generating
          human language to create text (see Figure 1-1). GenAI models are trained on vast
          amounts of text and use the content and relationships of that text to predict and
          generate new text (Accenture, 2024; Briganti, 2023). Users of GenAI guide the
          creation of text using prompts and post-processing actions to further refine and,
          if needed, correct potential errors, omissions, and fabrications.
             GenAI tools currently have a range of potential applications in health, health
          care, and biomedicine. For example, GenAI can enable clinical work and
          reduce cognitive burden by drafting administrative documents, aiding in clinical
          documentation tasks, and supporting decision making (Gandhi et al., 2023). It
          also can help patients to better understand and engage with their health care
          (Pahune and Rewatkar, 2024). GenAI can also facilitate health care payment tasks
          by summarizing patient data and generating written authorization for health care
          services (Shoja et al., 2023). Clinically relevant summaries and recommendations
          generated by LLMs might also help provide potential diagnoses, allowing health
          care professionals to expedite treatment decisions for their patients (Briganti,
          2023). GenAI also has the potential to assimilate scientific evidence and help
          identify novel therapeutics as well as prioritize potential repurposing candidates
          for existing drugs (Yan et al., 2024).
             While these early experiences hold promise, the evidence for real-world
          impact of GenAI tools remains limited. Furthermore, applications of GenAI
          in health and biomedicine raise unique risks. These include information
          inaccuracy relevant to medical decision making due to so-called hallucinations
          or confabulations; inequitable access, utility, and applicability of LLMs in lower-
          resourced environments; and the perpetuation of biases present in training data or
          introduced by AI engineers (Yang et al., 2023; Zhang and Kamel Boulos, 2023).
                                                               1



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             2 |




                                                                                                     FIGURE 1-1 | The history of artificial intelligence use in health care.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                            Introduction | 3

             As is the case with all AI tools, the safe, effective, ethical, and equitable use and
          implementation of GenAI in health and medicine is essential to maximizing
          its benefits while minimizing risks. As further expanded on below, ensuring
          such trustworthy and responsible use of GenAI tools in health care requires
          approaches that are both similar to and different than those applied to predictive
          and analytical AI tools. As these technologies evolve, so too must the policies and
          best practices that guide such trustworthy practices. Accountability mechanisms
          could include creating and implementing a governance framework across health
          systems and organizations; enhancing standards for testing and training LLMs and
          GenAI on diverse data sets; and requiring health care providers to have training
          and certification on LLMs and GenAI use in clinical settings. In addition, clinical
          workflows will need modification to allow for effective GenAI interaction and
          human oversight. Furthermore, once workflows are designed and implemented,
          periodic local testing, validation, and oversight of GenAI in real-world clinical
          settings will be essential (Ratwani et al., 2024).
             Achieving the opportunities above will require many parties and skill sets
          to work toward the ultimate goal of upholding and promoting a continuously
          learning health system. A Learning Health System (LHS) has been defined by the
          National Academy of Medicine (NAM) as

               one in which science, informatics, incentives, and culture are aligned for
               continuous improvement, innovation, and equity—with best practices and
               discovery seamlessly embedded in the delivery process, individuals and families
               as active participants in all elements, and new knowledge generated as an integral
               by-product of the delivery experience. (NAM, n.d.)

             As part of a larger effort to achieve a Learning Health System and improve
          alignment across these domains, the NAM developed a set of Shared Commitments
          as a trust framework for health and health care services, emphasizing system
          performance that is accessible, affordable, transparent, accountable, and adaptive
          (McGinnis et al., 2024).To this end, the NAM Digital Health Action Collaborative
          convened a workshop on October 25, 2023, and a follow-on meeting with federal
          agency representatives on October 26, 2023, to enhance common understanding
          among health professionals and health system leaders, technology developers,
          and government agencies of the nature and health care implications of LLMs
          and GenAI. Workshop sessions focused on the possible GenAI benefits, risks and
          necessary guideposts, and guardrails in health care. This publication builds on
          those discussions and key takeaways, outlining GenAI’s potential opportunities,
          risks, and paths forward.



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                           2
              OPPORTUNITIES AND EARLY EVIDENCE FOR
              GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN
                     HEALTH AND MEDICINE

             Early experience with generative AI (GenAI) has shown promise with
          potentially reducing clinician burden and delays in care (Albrecht et al., 2024;
          Tierney et al., 2024). GenAI’s potential also extends beyond daily patient care
          to support biomedical discovery in areas like drug development, diagnostics, and
          clinical trial management. It also shows promise in areas like health equity and
          patient support network engagement.We discuss these specific applications below.

                                      CHART SUMMARIZATION

             Medical chart abstraction and summarization is an essential and often time-
          consuming part of clinical practice, and it is an area where GenAI has shown
          early promise for reducing burden. Recent research supports that, when clinicians
          are asked to summarize a chart, it takes about 7 minutes, whereas a GenAI large
          language model (LLM) can perform a similar task in less time. Furthermore,
          when comparing clinician-generated summaries to GenAI summaries, clinicians
          preferred the GenAI summaries more than half the time (Van Veen et al., 2024).
          GenAI-created summaries have also been deemed comparable to physician-
          created summaries in terms of completeness, correctness, and trustworthiness
          (Schoonbeek et al., 2024).

                                      NOTE D O CUMENTATION

            GenAI has shown potential in assisting clinicians with ambulatory clinic note
          generation. Using an ambient recording of the clinic visit, GenAI LLMs can
          process the recording and generate an encounter note that follows a designated

                                                               5



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             6 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             template format. In one evaluation of the approach, clinicians at the Permanente
             Medical Group and their patients reported favorable experiences with GenAI-
             supported note generation. They also reported that the approach generated
             high-quality note drafts for editing and was linked to reduced documentation
             time (Tierney et al., 2024). In contrast, a study from Atrium Health found no
             overall differences in electronic health record (EHR) or financial metrics with
             the use of the GenAI-supported note generation approach, although there were
             some small signals of benefit among low-volume clinicians, high utilizers of the
             GenAI-supported note generation approach, and family medicine clinicians
             (Liu, Hetherington, Dharod, et al., 2024). Despite these mixed results, GenAI-
             generated notes are being rapidly adopted (Epic, 2024; Tierney et al., 2024), so
             it will be important to continually assess the overall value of this approach as it
             becomes more widespread.

                                      DRAFT PATIENT MESSAGING

                GenAI can also assist with routine patient communications. A study performed
             at the University of California, San Diego (Tai-Seale et al., 2024), explored the
             benefits GenAI might pose for administrative clinical workflow. Physicians that
             participated noted GenAI-assisted patient message responses relieved clinician
             cognitive burden by providing an empathetic draft. However, the study also found
             that using GenAI was associated with an increase in read time and longer replies.
             Another study from the Mayo Clinic showed that nurses saved approximately 30
             seconds per message when using GenAI-drafted responses, a small but valuable
             time savings over the course of a shift (Cacciaglia, 2024). These studies suggest
             that human input is still necessary as there are large improvements that need to
             be met with GenAI tools.

                             POPULATION HEALTH AND RESEARCH

               GenAI is showing early potential to assist with population health analytics
             and research. Data queries can be conducted using conversational language as
             prompts, which the GenAI tool translates into data queries (Epic, 2024). GenAI
             can also help manage the large and ever-growing corpus of medical literature
             and research-derived evidence. GenAI can help clinicians stay abreast of the latest
             evidence-based practices and clinical guidelines by synthesizing and summarizing
             current research findings accurately, ensuring that patient care decisions are




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                    Opportunities and Early Evidence | 7

          informed by the most current scientific knowledge. However, this use of GenAI
          is also subject to hallucinations, so development and evaluation of this capability
          will need to mitigate that risk.

                                 PRIOR AUTHORIZATIONS AND
                                INSURANCE COMMUNICATIONS

             Another source of clinical administrative burden relates to the common work
          of requesting prior authorization for a clinical test or trying to contact insurance
          companies on behalf of a patient who had a test denied. GenAI has the potential
          to reduce the burden of these tasks by helping draft request letters and denial
          appeals. Rather than foraging for the specific data that support the denial appeal,
          GenAI tools can abstract them from a patient’s chart and compile it into an appeal
          letter (Kirby, 2024).

                                  CLINICAL DECISION SUPPORT

             While GenAI’s current role in enabling clinical decision support (CDS) is
          nascent, in part due to concerns related to errors and bias (Ratwani et al., 2024),
          there are emerging roles for GenAI in the creation of explainable CDS (Liu,
          McCoy, and Peterson, et al., 2024) and in assessing and optimizing CDS to make
          it more useful and less burdensome (Liu, McCoy, and Wright, et al., 2024). Over
          time, we anticipate that the use of GenAI in enabling clinical decision making via
          supportive approaches will continue to evolve.

                                             CLINICAL TRIALS

             GenAI has significant potential in enhancing clinical trial processes by
          automating tasks like trial design, evidence summarization, and regulatory
          compliance. It has the potential to streamline participant recruitment, improving
          enrollment speed and diversity (Carroll and Anderson, 2024; Gangwal et al.,
          2024; Merk et al., 2018; Ng, 2024). For example, its capabilities to standardize
          and analyze unstructured text from clinical notes or reports hold potential for
          increasing the efficiency and reliability of research data (Hutson, 2024). GenAI
          also supports patient education by presenting enrollment information in multiple
          languages and comprehension levels.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             8 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


                            DRUG DISCOVERY AND REPOSITIONING

                In drug development, GenAI can facilitate the identification of novel molecular
             structures, potentially enabling faster development of new therapeutics, such as
             targeted antibody therapies (Marinov et al., 2024). Early evidence also indicates
             the capacity to identify not only new molecules that might be created, but new
             applications for existing medicines (Yan et al., 2024).

                          DIAGNOSTICS AND DISEASE MONITORING

               GenAI also has the potential to accelerate and improve diagnostic efficiency
             and accuracy. Early evidence shows promise in improving diagnostic accuracy,
             such as differentiating forms of dementia (Xue et al., 2024), and to assist clinicians
             in developing differential diagnoses in cases that require complex diagnostic
             reasoning (Kanjee et al., 2023). GenAI applications may also have potential
             for enhancing monitoring of conditions like hypertension through enabling
             improved patient engagement (Andreadis et al., 2024).

                                                 HEALTH EQUIT Y

                GenAI has the potential to significantly impact health equity by addressing
             various disparities and barriers to health care access. First, given current access
             limitations for many people and populations, equity can be positively affected
             by GenAI solutions that can either directly enable care interactions or indirectly
             increase the availability of clinicians to see more patients due to decreased burden.
                Second, GenAI’s capabilities can also bridge communication gaps between
             health care providers and patients. Such tools can translate educational materials
             and health information into multiple languages, enabling non–English speaking
             patients to receive information in their preferred language. This has the potential
             to improve understanding and even build trust between a patient and a provider,
             which can lead to higher treatment adherence levels. GenAI can also tailor
             health care information and interventions to the specific cultural contexts and
             social determinants of health affecting individual patients or communities.
             This personalized approach acknowledges and addresses the broader factors
             influencing health, from socioeconomic status to environmental conditions,
             thereby promoting more equitable health care delivery.
                Third, GenAI—as previously discussed—can improve reimbursement for health
             care services through prior authorization and claims adjudication generation. In
             addition, GenAI tools such as patient-facing chatbots can improve appointment



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                    Opportunities and Early Evidence | 9

          scheduling processes, allowing more patients to find health care encounters
          that match their schedules and circumstances (Clark and Bailey, 2024). Both of
          these applications may make health care services more accessible and reduce
          administrative burdens that disproportionately affect lower-income patients.
             Finally, GenAI trained on large datasets can also incorporate information
          gleaned from training data and help identify and illuminate health disparities that
          exist across populations. By analyzing and summarizing data, GenAI can uncover
          patterns of inequity in disease prevalence, treatment outcomes, and access to
          care. This insight can guide health care providers and policy makers in targeting
          interventions and resources to underserved communities, thereby addressing gaps
          in care. That said, GenAI could worsen equity as well, given the risks of using
          non-representative or biased data in generating its output or applying its output
          in inequitable ways. As such, careful evaluation and monitoring of GenAI models
          and their training sets is needed to mitigate this potential risk.
             Although these applications of GenAI hold promise in improving health
          equity, empiric evidence of this impact is currently absent and validation of these
          approaches is needed. Accordingly, it will be important to continually monitor
          the use of GenAI in the context of health equity and address any inequities to
          which it may be contributing.

                PATIENT AND SUPPORT NET WORK ENGAGEMENT

             GenAI can potentially increase patients’ and their support networks’ engagement
          in health care by providing personalized, accessible, and interactive tools for health
          management and education. By leveraging its capabilities in natural language
          processing and data analysis, GenAI can transform complex medical information
          into understandable, patient-friendly formats. This demystification of medical
          jargon plays a crucial role in helping patients, their families, and their broader
          support network comprehend diagnoses, treatment plans, and health guidelines,
          leading to better informed and more engaged patients.
             Specifically, GenAI can assist through personalized patient education. GenAI
          systems can tailor educational content to individual health conditions and
          learning preferences, making information more relevant and engaging. For
          example, GenAI can generate patient information for a personalized diet plan,
          exercise suggestions, and information on managing blood sugar levels, all in
          easy-to-understand language. Additionally, GenAI-powered chatbots and virtual
          health assistants can provide 24/7 support to patients and their support network
          by answering queries, providing health tips, and reminding patients about
          medication and appointments. This constant availability is especially beneficial



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             10 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             for chronic disease management, where ongoing monitoring and adherence to
             treatment are crucial. Importantly, these chatbots and health assistants will require
             ongoing clinical oversight and monitoring to ensure adequate performance. For
             family members and other members of a patient’s support network that serve as
             a caregiver, GenAI can provide educational resources and support tools, helping
             them understand and manage their loved one’s health conditions effectively.
             Finally, GenAI-enabled platforms can connect patients and networks with
             additional support networks and communities, providing emotional support and
             shared experiences with others in similar situations.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                           3
                  RISKS OF GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL
               INTELLIGENCE IN HEALTH AND MEDICINE

            Generative AI (GenAI) poses several risks, which are important to identify
          and mitigate to effectively use the technology. Primary risks of GenAI include
          data privacy and security, bias, output limitations, algorithmic brittleness, and
          hallucinations.

                                 DATA PRIVACY AND SECURIT Y

             Key among the risks of GenAI is the concern over data privacy and security.
          GenAI systems require access to vast amounts of sensitive patient data, and it is
          important to ensure these data are handled securely. Because the output of GenAI
          algorithms is fed back into the transformer engine to refine future output, there
          is a significant risk of sensitive information disclosure to non-authorized parties.
          Health systems and related entities will need to understand GenAI data flows
          and uses, then take measures to ensure that protected health information is not
          inadvertently shared in the public domain.

                                            BIAS AND EQUIT Y

            As with other forms of AI, GenAI solutions fundamentally could worsen equity,
          given the risks of using non-representative or biased data in generating its output
          or applying its output in inequitable ways. Accordingly, it will be important to
          continually monitor the use of GenAI in the context of health equity and move
          to address any inequities to which it may be contributing. Large language models
          (LLMs) and GenAI rely on vast amounts of training data to generate responses
          and recommendations. If the training data are biased, incomplete, or incorrect,
          or are not representative of the activities, populations, and specific environments

                                                               11



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             12 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             to which resultant GenAI will be applied, the result can worsen care or lead
             to unfair treatment for certain patient groups, affecting diagnostic accuracy
             and treatment recommendations. Models trained using historical data may
             reflect biases already present in the health care system. If certain demographic
             groups are underrepresented in the training data or if there are disparities in
             how patients from different backgrounds are diagnosed and treated, the model
             may perpetuate these human-induced biases. A phenomenon known as AI drift
             occurs when LLMs begin to exhibit unpredictable or unwanted behaviors that
             deviate from their original parameters. This may develop when new data points
             are introduced or when attempts are made to improve certain components of AI
             models, inadvertently causing its performance to degrade over time. As a result,
             the model may provide skewed diagnostic or treatment recommendations, which
             can negatively affect patient care and perpetuate health disparities. Transparency
             and rigorous validation methodologies that employ bias detection are essential for
             identifying and mitigating bias in health care algorithms.

                                            OUTPUT LIMITATIONS

                The lack of originality in LLM-generated responses for diagnoses can diminish
             the quality of patient care.To understand this, consider a scenario in which a health
             care organization uses a GenAI-powered chatbot to assist patients with health
             inquiries and symptom assessments. When patients interact with the chatbot and
             describe their symptoms or medical history, the responses generated are based on
             pre-existing patterns learned from previous training data. As a result, they may
             only get generic or repetitive answers that lack specificity. If multiple patients
             present with similar symptoms, the chatbot may provide identical responses
             for each, without considering each patient’s specific medical history, leading to
             frustration, dissatisfaction, and lack of trust in the technology.To address this issue,
             health care organizations can implement strategies like incorporating dynamic
             response generation techniques that consider individual patient characteristics
             and contextual factors and continuously update and refine models based on
             feedback from patients.
                Furthermore, the use of generative AI in clinical settings could pose negative
             outcomes or harm patients if not responsibly designed, developed, and deployed.
             Safeguards are crucial to help minimize risks and ensure patient safety. For example,
             health care organizations should create processes to assess the use of new AI tools,
             monitor AI-related safety issues, and identify and address challenges.While health
             care organizations may vary in size and resources, federal guidelines such as the
             National Institute of Standards and Technology AI Risk Management Framework



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                               Risks of Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine | 13

          and the Executive Order on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use
          of AI provide a foundation for establishing consistent practices in AI governance,
          promoting ethical usage, and ensuring patient safety across diverse settings
          (National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2024; The White House, 2023).

                                   ALGORITHMIC BRIT TLENESS

             Another risk is algorithmic brittleness, which refers to an algorithm’s
          vulnerability to errors, breakdowns, or failures when encountering unexpected
          inputs or situations (Eliot, 2024). While an algorithm may perform well under
          specific conditions, it can yield inaccurate or unreliable results when dealing
          with data or scenarios different from its training environment. Brittleness arises
          from an algorithm’s inability to effectively generalize across datasets or adapt to
          environmental changes. Consequently, brittle algorithms lack robustness and
          reliability, posing challenges in critical domains like health care.

               GenAI “HALLUCINATIONS” OR “CONFABULATIONS”

            A “hallucination” or “confabulation” is when a GenAI tool produces information
          that is incorrect, misleading, or not based on fact despite seeming plausible
          (Farquhar, 2024). Hallucinations, as we refer to them here, are a consequence of
          the way GenAI is designed to predict and generate novel, but seemingly relevant,
          words and phrases. Awareness of this inherent limitation is essential among users
          who might otherwise take the seemingly accurate output at face value.
            The following case illustrates this scenario: After discovering a study on tick
          behavior and following up with a query for the referenced scientific paper
          supporting the study claims, GenAI provided a citation to a paper authored by
          known experts in the field, complete with a reference. On further investigation it
          was discovered that the paper’s title, authors, and other citation information were
          fake (Goddard, 2023).The impact of hallucinations or fake information from using
          GenAI in health care underscore the importance of validating generated outputs,
          maintaining transparency in systems’ capabilities and limitations, and integrating
          human oversight into health care processes to ensure safety and quality of care.
          For example, one reliable approach to reduce hallucinations is to use two models
          to address the same issue, then compare their outputs. Discrepancies can reveal
          inaccuracies, biases, or areas prone to hallucinations. Additionally, effective prompt
          engineering, combined with high-quality knowledge bases and fact-checking
          models that cross-reference verified sources, enhances accuracy and minimizes
          hallucinations by grounding responses.



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             14 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


                              COLLAB ORATION TO MITIGATE RISKS

                To mitigate these and other GenAI risks, the path forward for integrating
             GenAI into health care should involve engaging multiple stakeholders, including
             health care providers, patients, policy makers, technology developers, insurance
             providers, medical researchers, and ethicists. Collaboration among these groups
             is essential to ensure that the deployment and use of GenAI are intentional,
             coordinated, and ethically sound. It is important for stakeholders to work together
             to establish guidelines and regulations that protect patient data, ensure fairness
             and transparency, and evaluate the effectiveness and safety of GenAI applications
             in health care.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                           4
                       APPLICATION READINESS CADENCE

             Large language models (LLMs) powered by advancements in generative AI
          (GenAI) and natural language processing, hold promise in augmenting patient
          care and clinical workflows. At the same time, the risks inherent in GenAI and
          their application to health care require careful consideration and development. As
          a result, some lower-risk applications of GenAI in health care, such as ambient
          LLM scribing for ambulatory clinic visits, are closer to clinical deployment than
          higher-risk applications such as virtual health assistants (Tierney et al., 2024).
          Below and in Figure 4-1, we identify near-, mid-, and long-term applications of
          LLMs in medicine and health care, organized by their specific opportunities and
          risks for patients, clinicians, and health systems.

                                    NEAR-TERM APPLICATIONS

                                 Patient Education and Engagement

             LLMs are poised to enhance patient education and engagement through
          personalized health information dissemination. AI-based conversational agents
          have already demonstrated reasonable proof of concept in areas like mental health,
          with prospective studies demonstrating reductions in depression and distress (Li et
          al., 2023). The underlying learning architecture of modern chatbots has evolved
          from predictive natural language processing and speech recognition software to
          generative LLMs that process large text-based datasets to translate, predict, and
          produce content. Chatbots and virtual assistants powered by LLMs can augment
          prior efforts by providing tailored responses to patient queries in patient-friendly,
          culturally appropriate language, improving health literacy and adherence to
          treatment plans. There is already emerging evidence that LLM chatbots can
          improve understandability and readability of decision support around informed

                                                               15



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             16 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine




             FIGURE 4-1 | Large language model application readiness cadence.



             consent for surgery, although, unchecked, such chatbots may reinforce biased
             decision making (Decker et al., 2023; Omiye et al., 2023).

                                               Information Synthesis

                LLMs can facilitate automated summarization of medical records, aiding
             clinicians in quickly extracting relevant information during patient encounters
             and reducing administrative burdens (Van Veen et al., 2024). Large EHR vendors
             have already integrated LLMs to summarize information from EHRs and these
             programs have been implemented in several health systems (Goodman et al., 2024).
             Cohort retrieval is a particular application of LLMs, with existing applications
             involved in recruitment for clinical trials, protocol design, and retrospective
             studies (Jin et al., 2023). Additionally, LLMs show promise in accelerating clinical
             decision making through real-time literature review and evidence synthesis. By
             analyzing vast volumes of medical literature, these models can assist clinicians in
             staying abreast of the latest research findings and treatment guidelines, thereby
             supporting evidence-based practice. However, without careful tailoring of clinical
             questions, LLMs are prone to factual inaccuracies in evidence synthesis (Tang et
             al., 2023).




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                     Application Readiness Cadence | 17

                                     MID-TERM APPLICATIONS

                                             Precision Medicine

             A large strength of LLMs is their ability to synthesize large amounts of
          information for prognostic and predictive risk assessments. By analyzing multi-
          modal data, including EHRs, genomics, and imaging studies, LLMs may be on a
          path to assist in treatment selection (Wilhelm et al., 2023). That said, early efforts
          in this capacity have demonstrated some limitations, such as confusing or incorrect
          recommendations, so significant quality improvements will be needed before this
          capacity is ready for real-world deployment. In areas like precision oncology, a
          major limitation of current LLMs for personalized treatment and decision support
          is their inability to generate accompanying evidence that is useful for clinicians
          (Benary et al., 2023). This inability to include clinical domain knowledge into
          decision making may explain the suboptimal performance of current LLMs for
          treatment selection and disease management and may foreshadow the need for
          integrating neurosymbolic reasoning for next-generation decision support to
          improve interpretability and generalizability.

                                     Treatments for Rare Diseases

             There is an urgent need for novel therapies of rare diseases, including genetic
          diseases, but clinical trials in this space are often underpowered, fail to meet
          enrollment targets, or do not yield effective therapies (Rees et al., 2019). GenAI
          can provide powerful insights and knowledge linking between the emerging
          mechanistic understanding of an increasing number of rare diseases with existing
          therapeutics that might prevent or treat those rare diseases. Computational
          simulations of clinical trials, termed in silico trials (ISTs), have the potential to
          salvage some of the resources devoted to failed pharmacological studies in rare
          diseases and speed the development of promising therapies by enabling better
          powered trials, simulating control and efficacy arms, and optimizing patient
          recruitment and drug protocols (Kolla et al., 2021). Digital twins (DTs) are a
          related concept, defined as a computational representation of an individual
          patient or disease (Moingeon et al., 2023). DTs may represent a specific organ,
          disease process, or entire patient modeled from high-resolution imaging, genetic,
          or physiologic function. DTs aim to facilitate virtual experiments and subgroup
          analyses of investigational agents that would otherwise be difficult or risky to
          conduct in real patients; this is particularly salient in rare diseases, where treatments
          may carry a higher risk profile. Many current DTs utilize AI and machine



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             18 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             learning (ML) methods for functions that include better optimizing patient
             matching, simulating counterfactuals, and predicting downstream response. It can
             be challenging to create separate digital twins for specific diseases; the advent of
             LLM foundation models can facilitate cross-disease digital twins that could be
             used to simulate the effectiveness of various drug combinations (Bartlett et al.,
             2019; Cosmas et al., 2024).

                               Streamlining Documentation and Coding

                Through natural language understanding, LLMs can automatically generate
             comprehensive clinical notes and assign appropriate billing codes, enhancing
             revenue cycle management in health care settings (Yang et al., 2023). Generation
             of appropriate billing and procedural codes may also ensure reliable claims-based
             datasets that are used for observational and economic studies in health care (Yang
             et al., 2023). Such tools could also be used to extract important metrics of social
             determinants of health from unstructured clinical text (Guevara et al., 2024).
             Platforms like ChatGPT have had markedly high accuracy in detecting diagnosis
             codes from unstructured text and inferring disease modifiers, although this
             performance may vary by disease. Furthermore, similar general-purpose LLMs
             may have large levels of inaccuracy with diagnosis codes, especially with rarer
             diseases (Hadi et al., 2024; Harada et al., 2024).

                                                   Genome Mining

               Despite the progress made in understanding genetic contributions to disease
             through efforts such as the Human Genome Project, the phenotypic impact
             of many variants in the exome and transcriptome remains unknown. LLMs
             can be trained on billions of genomic variants to predict effects of heretofore
             uncharacterized genomic variants. So-called DNA language models may
             augment traditional genome-wide association studies and lead to more accurate
             characterization of variants of unknown significance, which can uncover new
             therapeutic options for diseases like cancer.

                                       LONG-TERM APPLICATIONS

                                            Virtual Health Assistants

               Given appropriate validation, LLM-powered virtual health assistants can
             conduct symptom assessments, provide triage recommendations, and facilitate



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                     Application Readiness Cadence | 19

          remote consultations, expanding access to care in regions where access to in-
          person health care is limited. Such models may be able to adapt to new evidence
          and treatment faster than traditional medical professionals, offering access
          improvements (Sezgin, 2024; Tadesse et al., 2023).

                                            Disease Sur veillance

            LLMs can contribute to the development of disease outbreak detection and
          management tools. By ingesting diverse data sources, including population
          health data, laboratory data, social media trends, and environmental factors, these
          models can generate more comprehensive insights to aid in early identification
          of public health threats and inform timely interventions. Such efforts to bolster
          pandemic preparedness and response efforts may be extremely beneficial for
          future outbreaks akin to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, safe and effective
          deployment in this space is limited by access to real-time reliable sources of data
          to inform forecasting models.

                                              Medical Education

            The current paradigm of medical education is based on potentially identifiable
          patient vignettes or hypothetical cases of limited disease phenotypes. In areas
          requiring visual interpretation, like radiology and dermatology, datasets are
          often limited to specific populations while underrepresenting other groups
          or pathologies. When armed with representative data and appropriate clinical
          domain knowledge, LLMs may generate synthetic images and cases that can
          inform more representative, equitable medical education materials that represent
          diverse pathologies (Safranek et al., 2023).




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                           5
                                       THE PATH FORWARD

             To effectively navigate the path forward to realize the potential of generative AI
          (GenAI) in health care and health, several foundational activities will be required.
          These include skill generation; model testing, implementation, and monitoring;
          resources and infrastructure; and standardized oversight and guidelines.

                                           SKILL GENERATION

             To effectively use GenAI in health care, it is important that clinicians develop
          proficiency in using GenAI tools effectively and be attuned to discerning
          and interpreting GenAI-driven outputs. For instance, as with many artificial
          intelligence (AI) solutions, recommendations such as a likely diagnosis or
          treatment recommendations, or generated responses to patient queries, should be
          considered in context as possible, but not certain, such that they supplant clinical
          judgment and diligence. As confidence in the reliability and validity of GenAI-
          driven guidance improves, clinicians will make use of these tools more effectively
          to improve patient outcomes and enhance health care delivery.
             The advancement and sustainable integration of AI tools in health care
          necessitate a comprehensive expansion of training and educational programs.
          Professional training programs for clinicians should incorporate core curricula
          focused on teaching the appropriate use of data science and AI products and
          services. Continuous education for health care professionals should empower
          them to become more informed consumers of AI technologies, capable of
          providing feedback to continually refine AI-driven results. Additionally, consumer
          education campaigns are essential to inform patients of their rights, and to build
          and maintain trust across various educational levels. Patients need to actively
          engage with their health care providers to discuss the potential benefits and risks
          of AI-driven interventions, to ensure that patients have a clear understanding of
          how AI will impact their care.
                                                               21



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             22 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


                             MODEL TRAINING, IMPLEMENTATION,
                                    AND MONITORING

                For the foreseeable future, the responsible and safe use of AI, including GenAI,
             will require a combination of sociotechnical approaches spanning the individual
             and systems levels to ensure benefits while mitigating harms, as has been described.
             To that point, it is also incumbent upon multiple health system stakeholders, from
             regulators, to health AI vendors, to health systems and providers, to consider and
             enable testing, evaluation, local validation, and ongoing monitoring, all as part of a
             web of solutions to enable comprehensive governance of such AI models applied
             to practice (Shah et al., 2023). Monitoring for errors, biases, and adverse effects of
             GenAI will in some ways be like monitoring for those in predictive and analytical
             AI, but GenAI also presents some unique challenges due to its very nature. As has
             been true with predictive and analytical AI solutions, GenAI’s processes are often
             difficult to discern and monitor for accuracy and veracity (the so-called black box
             issue). However, this makes the need for ongoing, multi-faceted monitoring of
             implemented AI solutions, including GenAI, following an “algorithmovigilance”
             approach even more important (Embí, 2021).
                Many of the training, implementation, and monitoring needs are similar
             between predictive and generative AI. However, important differences exist as
             well and will require attention as the application of GenAI in health care matures.
             These tables provide a structured comparison, detailing current considerations
             of the areas where monitoring approaches align (see Table 5-1) and where they
             diverge (see Table 5-2) for generative versus predictive/analytical AI models.
                To mitigate the risks of GenAI, thorough testing and validation across diverse
             datasets representative of real-world clinical scenarios should be integrated into
             algorithm training, paired with ongoing monitoring and refinement based on
             feedback from clinicians. A recent Biden administration Office of Management
             and Budget memo recommended that “testing conditions should mirror as
             closely as possible the conditions in which the AI will be deployed” (Office of
             Management and Budget, 2024).Validation should occur on the local population
             with the local operational software where the AI is being used. Such a local
             electronic health record (EHR) software safety monitoring program has been
             operationalized nationwide and is currently used annually by more than 3,000
             hospitals (Classen et al., 2023).
                Finally, GenAI health care applications must also consider patient privacy
             and ethical considerations. Given the rapidly evolving and complex nature of
             these tools, it is crucial to involve domain experts, ethicists, and stakeholders




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                    The Path Forward | 23

          TABLE 5-1 | Similarities in Monitoring Generative and Predictive/Analytical Artificial
          Intelligence
          Aspect                Description
          Bias and fairness     Both types of AI require continuous monitoring to ensure that bias does
          checks                not influence outcomes. This is crucial to avoid reinforcing stereotypes
                                or making unfair predictions that could adversely affect members of
                                subpopulations, particularly those who are underrepresented in training
                                data and often are among the most vulnerable.
          Performance           AI models are susceptible to degradation over time as data patterns shift
          degradation and       or as the model “drifts” from its original quality or relevance. Routine
          drift management      performance monitoring and retraining are necessary for both to keep
                                them accurate and effective in their respective tasks.
          Ethical and societal Both generative and predictive/analytical AI can have broader societal
          impact assessments impacts. Monitoring requires a clear understanding of each model’s
                               societal and ethical implications, particularly where outputs could affect
                               user behavior, decision making, or public trust.
          Regulatory and        As AI technology becomes more integrated into sectors like health
          compliance            care, both types of models face increasing regulatory scrutiny. Ensuring
          oversight             compliance with privacy, transparency, fairness, and equity standards is
                                essential, especially for high-stakes applications such as in health care.
          User feedback         User feedback is valuable for refining both generative and predictive
          integration           AI, as it provides real-world insights into how well the AI is performing
                                and where adjustments may be needed. Regular feedback loops improve
                                accuracy and align outputs with user expectations or industry standards.



          throughout the development, deployment, and monitoring process to ensure that
          the AI systems are trustworthy, reliable, and fair.

                              RESOURCES AND INFRASTRUCTURE

             Lack of resources and infrastructure pose significant barriers to the widespread
          implementation of large language models (LLMs) and GenAI in health care.
          Many health care organizations lack the necessary technical expertise, financial
          resources, and IT infrastructure to deploy and maintain AI systems effectively.
             The deployment of LLMs and GenAI in health care introduces significant
          complexities and costs. Integrating AI systems into existing workflows and EHR
          systems demands substantial investments of time, resources, and training. These
          investments represent a significant financial burden for health care organizations,
          particularly for smaller institutions or those with limited budgets, potentially
          hindering widespread adoption across health care systems. In addition, local
          adoption of such programs is critically dependent on establishing the trust of
          frontline clinicians, which can be very resource intensive.


                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             24 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             TABLE 5-2 | Differences in Monitoring Generative and Predictive/Analytical Artificial In-
             telligence
             Aspect                Generative AI                             Predictive/Analytical AI
             Output evaluation The primary outputs are new content, These models generate quantitative
             and quality control such as text, images, and audio, where predictions, making performance
                                 quality is subjective and context       assessment more straightforward
                                 dependent. Monitoring focuses on        through accuracy, precision, and
                                 coherence, relevance, and ensuring      recall metrics. The emphasis is
                                 ethical content generation, as well as on accuracy within defined data
                                 preventing issues like “hallucinations” parameters rather than subjective
                                 or factual inaccuracies.                quality.
             Bias manifestation    Bias can appear in subtle ways, shaping Bias checks focus on ensuring that
             and detection         content tone, language, or framing.     model predictions are fair across
                                   Monitoring involves detecting biases different groups. Monitoring bias
                                   in generated language or other output in these models often involves
                                   media and preventing the spread         fairness audits and statistical checks
                                   of misinformation or unintended         on outcomes rather than subjective
                                   stereotypes.                            analysis of generated content.
             Performance           Quality degradation may appear            Model drift often relates to
             degradation and       as reduced coherence or creativity,       underlying data shifts, requiring
             adaptation and        requiring frequent content review         statistical tracking of accuracy
             dynamic nature        and adjustments. User feedback is         and regular retraining. The
                                   often essential in detecting subtle       process is more data driven and
                                   shifts in output quality. Also, GenAI     straightforward, as performance is
                                   models are often designed to evolve       measured against historical accuracy
                                   over time, learning from new data,        benchmarks.
                                   so monitoring requires ongoing
                                   vigilance to adapt to changes.
             Impact on users       The potential for misuse of               Impacts are more directly related to
             and society           generative content (e.g., for spreading   decision making, where inaccurate
                                   misinformation) adds a unique layer       predictions can affect outcomes in
                                   of impact monitoring, requiring           areas like medicine or eligibility
                                   checks on ethical content generation      for services. Monitoring focuses on
                                   and user satisfaction. Societal impacts   ensuring reliable decision support
                                   include privacy, misinformation, and      and fairness in model applications.
                                   the psychological effect on users.
             Compliance            Content produced by generative AI     These models often operate
             and legal             can raise unique compliance issues    in industries with established
             considerations        related to privacy, misinformation,   regulatory frameworks (e.g., finance
                                   and ethical standards. Monitoring     or health care), so monitoring
                                   involves regulatory checks on content focuses on meeting interpretability,
                                   generation standards and adherence to privacy, and compliance
                                   ethical guidelines.                   requirements within well-defined
                                                                         legal standards.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                    The Path Forward | 25

            Finally, disparities in health care access may worsen if patients lacking reliable
          internet or digital devices are excluded from benefiting from timely GenAI-
          driven diagnostics. Such exclusions could widen existing gaps in health care
          access and outcomes, further exacerbating inequities in health care delivery.

                   STANDARDIZED OVERSIGHT AND GUIDELINES

            Given the cross-cutting nature of LLMs and GenAI, whose impact spans
          sectors and stakeholders, collaboration and coordination among federal and state
          regulators, non-governmental bodies, and organizations responsible for health
          care delivery is important to ensure adequate oversight of these technologies.
          Health care regulators with authority over industry developers and enablers of
          AI solutions (e.g., the U.S. Food and Drug Administration [FDA], the Assistant
          Secretary for Technology Policy/Office of the National Coordinator for
          Health Information Technology) should develop clear guidelines and standards
          for evaluating AI systems, including GenAI, as well as robust mechanisms for
          monitoring their safe and ethical use in health care. Health care organizations
          will need to navigate a complex regulatory landscape, including privacy laws, data
          security regulations, and health care standards, to ensure compliance with legal and
          ethical guidelines governing the effective and equitable use of GenAI in health
          care. Even as the number of FDA-regulated AI solutions grows, there currently are
          and likely will remain many more AI-enabled solutions in health care that are not
          regulated in the same fashion and yet will be increasingly relied upon for health
          care delivery and processes. From the summarization of health care data and
          the creation of new clinical data at the point of care, to the recommendation of
          diagnostic and therapeutic interventions and the use of GenAI-enabled chatbots
          that interact directly with patients as health care “agents,” there are numerous uses
          and downstream risks associated with GenAI in health care. Even as the federal
          regulatory landscape matures relative to AI vendors and enablers, regulations
          are also being clarified to define the responsibilities of health care providers to
          ensure that their adoption and use of AI does not lead to discriminatory care and
          inequities (Office for Civil Rights, 2024). Indeed, GenAI presents a formidable
          challenge for health care organizations seeking to harness the benefits of GenAI
          technology to improve patient care and clinical outcomes as well as drive new
          discoveries.
            Even as the regulatory landscape around the approval and use of GenAI for
          care continues to unfold, new and refined regulatory and payment structures
          will need to evolve to incentivize appropriate innovation and sustainability
          of GenAI-driven health care solutions. Health care payers and policy makers



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             26 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             should develop flexible reimbursement models and regulatory frameworks
             that support the adoption and integration of GenAI technologies into clinical
             practice while safeguarding patient safety and health equity. Properly structured
             to foster alignment of incentives among different stakeholders, such frameworks
             can promote collaboration and knowledge sharing in an AI-driven health care
             ecosystem.
                The need for new GenAI evaluation metrics and procedures is evident as
             traditional evaluation methods may not capture the unique characteristics and
             challenges of health care AI systems. New approaches, such as real-world local
             validation studies and standardized benchmarks, are needed to accurately assess
             the safety, efficacy, and usability of GenAI-driven health care technologies. Health
             care providers and GenAI developers should develop and implement a shared
             responsibility between using specialized expertise to optimize performance
             for specific tasks and ensuring that GenAI algorithms remain flexible and
             generalizable enough to adapt to evolving clinical needs and support diverse
             patient populations (Ratwani et al., 2024).

                                      AREAS FOR COLLAB ORATION

               As we evaluate the opportunities and risks associated with the integration of
             LLMs and GenAI in health care, it becomes evident that the potential benefits
             of these technologies have the capacity to vastly outweigh the inherent risks.
             However, realizing these benefits will require intentional, coordinated actions by
             multiple stakeholder groups, including health care providers, researchers, policy
             makers, regulatory bodies, and technology developers. There is a pressing need
             to pivot toward a collective call for collaboration. By fostering collaboration and
             partnership across diverse stakeholder groups, GenAI-related challenges can be
             collectively addressed to harness the transformative potential of LLMs and GenAI
             to advance medicine, improve patient outcomes, and revolutionize the landscape
             of health care delivery.
               Table 5-3 highlights a selection of key phases in the GenAI life cycle and
             examples of where collaboration can advance policies and practices that optimize
             the benefit–risk ratio and assessment.The extraordinarily high costs associated with
             developing and implementing GenAI models are a driving force for collaboration.
             Multi-stakeholder, multi-organizational cooperation to develop shared data assets
             and identify best practices presents substantial opportunities for cost sharing and
             commercial risk reduction. The use of standards and collaboration approaches
             used in the software life cycle can be of benefit in this area (Association for the
             Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 2020).



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                    The Path Forward | 27

          TABLE 5-3 | Opportunities for Cross-Sector Collaboration Across the Artificial Intelligence
          Life Cycle Phases
          Phase               Sectors                   Example Opportunities for Collaboration
          Prioritizing        • Health care             1. Identify unmet needs that can be most suitably
          problems              professionals and          and acceptably addressed by GenAI, helping
                                systems                    maximize the impact of GenAI on the health
                              • GenAI developers           care industry and lives.
                                and manufacturers       2. Develop requests for applications and funding
                              • Representative             opportunities for specific program areas.
                                patients and
                                communities
                              • Researchers
          Data creation,      • Health care             1. Define the minimum viable data elements for
          acquisition, and      professionals and          algorithm training and evaluation.
          assurance             systems                 2. Generate and govern shared, representative data
                              • GenAI developers           assets meeting these minimum requirements.
                                and manufacturers       3. Ensure adherence to privacy, security, individual
                              • Representative             autonomy, and transparency.
                                patients and
                                communities
                              • Policy makers and
                                regulators
                              • Researchers
          Model               • Health care             1. External validation of models across diverse care
          development           professionals and          settings.
                                systems                 2. Identify ground truth labels for model
                              • GenAI developers           development to increase model applicability and
                                and manufacturers          reduce bias.
                              • Representative
                                patients and
                                communities
                              • Researchers
          Model evaluation • Health care                1. Define the characteristics beyond performance
                             professionals and             that should be evaluated to determine whether
                             systems                       a model is trustworthy and fit for purpose.
                           • GenAI developers           2. Perform significant testing and validation to
                             and manufacturers             ensure accuracy of GenAI outputs as new
                           • Representative                information is incorporated into LLMs.
                             patients and               3. Ensure the reproducible quality of LLM
                             communities                   outputs.
                           • Policy makers and          4. Practice red-teaming and adversarial approaches
                             regulators                    to ensure model robustness against biased inputs.
                           • Researchers

                                                                                                      continued




                         Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             28 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             TABLE 5-3 | Continued
             Phase                Sectors                  Example Opportunities for Collaboration
             Model standards      • Health care            1. Develop a regulatory framework to ensure
                                    professionals and         responsible use of GenAI while continuing to
                                    systems                   promote innovation.
                                  • GenAI developers       2. Determine the proper process for regulatory
                                    and manufacturers         review.
                                  • Representative         3. Continually monitor and update the regulatory
                                    patients and              framework as GenAI technology and use cases
                                    communities               evolve.
                                  • Policy makers and
                                    regulators
                                  • Researchers
             Model                • Health care            1. Ensure that GenAI products are suitable for
             implementation         professionals and         existing and future clinical workflows.
             and diffusion          systems                2. Identify and develop the skills needed for model
                                  • GenAI developers          selection and governance.
                                    and manufacturers      3. Support the equitable deployment of patient-
                                  • Representative            facing GenAI solutions.
                                    patients and           4. Adapt pre-trained models to new domains,
                                    communities               tasks, and settings.
                                  • Researchers            5. Identify whether sufficient evaluation has been
                                                              conducted to translate an existing model to a
                                                              new setting.
             Model monitoring • Health care                1. Define optimal roles and responsibilities—as
             and maintenance    professionals and             well as funding mechanisms—for monitoring
                                systems                       and managing changes in model performance
                              • GenAI developers              over time.
                                and manufacturers          2. Determine optimal time points for model
                              • Representative                retraining.
                                patients and               3. Manage different versions of AI models for
                                communities                   ongoing reporting.
                              • Policy makers and
                                regulators
                              • Researchers



               The complexity and interdisciplinary nature of developing, evaluating,
             implementing, and monitoring GenAI models in health care, coupled with the
             increased risk of harm when deploying these tools in an industry that exists to care
             for people and is defined by information asymmetry, also drives the need for deep
             interdisciplinary collaboration. There is no single stakeholder group capable of
             identifying and capturing the full spectrum of potential benefits and opportunities
             for GenAI in health care, nor to identify and mitigate all the associated risks.
             However, defining the current roles and responsibilities of different stakeholders



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                    The Path Forward | 29

          collaborating to develop and deploy GenAI in health care (see Table 5-4) reveals a
          high burden on certain stakeholders and challenges the notion that policy makers
          and regulators are ultimately responsible for the implementation of GenAI that
          helps, not harms, in health care.
             Health care professionals are most often ultimately accountable for guaranteeing
          performance at key phases of GenAI development and/or deployment. While
          many of their collaborators, including developers, GenAI manufacturers, and
          researchers, are responsible for tasks and costs associated with these phases,
          the burden of decision making—and the assumption of risk for harm—most
          commonly sits with health care professionals. Even in a collaborative model,
          discrepancies in the roles and responsibilities should be addressed, and AI
          developers should collaborate with health care professionals and share in these
          responsibilities. In an ecosystem where health care professionals are the backdrop
          of responsible AI, equity issues will arise, as differently resourced health care
          systems and organizations will provide variable levels of support for the health
          care professionals driving GenAI strategies. Without proper support, there is also
          the risk of fueling further provider burnout as new GenAI models are introduced.
             To reduce these risks, appropriate resources, training, and support should be
          provided to health care professionals in all settings, equipping them with the
          knowledge, operational capacity, and skills to serve as the stewards of responsible
          AI. The broader community should also intentionally implement strategies
          that seek to reduce this burden on health care professionals. An example is the
          development of more robust medical education and training opportunities to
          support the workforce required for scale and sustainability.
             Policy makers and regulators are essential collaborators in almost all key phases
          of GenAI development and deployment in health care, responsible for creating
          the necessary incentives for action and enforcing best practices and standards. To
          illuminate where incentives may be necessary, Table 5-4 highlights examples of
          where collaboration can advance policies and practices that optimize the benefit–
          risk ratio and ensure appropriate benefit–risk assessment. Policies and incentives
          should drive the broad adoption and adaptation of this collaborative approach
          across all contexts and settings.
             Finally, representative patients and communities should be engaged as critical
          collaborators throughout the total product life cycle of GenAI models in health and
          health care.There is no phase of the development or deployment of GenAI models
          that can be successfully completed without the insights from the individuals the
          health care industry exists to serve, specifically patients representing communities
          where specific models will be implemented. Establishing shared values that define




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
                                                               TABLE 5-4 | Responsibility Assignment Matrix Defining the Current Roles and Responsibilities of Collaborating Stakeholders During Different
                                                               Phases of Generative Artificial Intelligence Model Development and Deployment in Health and Health Care                                                 30 |

                                                                              Health Care     GenAI          Representative Policy
                                                                              Professionals   Developers and Patients and   Makers and
                                                               Phase          and Systems     Manufacturers Communities Regulators       Researchers   Commentary
                                                               Prioritizing   A, R            C              R              I            R             With health GenAI solutions being developed for health
                                                               problems                                                                                care providers and payers, health care professionals and
                                                                                                                                                       systems are accountable for prioritizing the problems
                                                                                                                                                       that GenAI models could solve. They are also responsible,
                                                                                                                                                       in conjunction with patients, communities, and
                                                                                                                                                       researchers, for defining these problems. Once these are
                                                                                                                                                       determined, then GenAI manufacturers and developers
                                                                                                                                                       are consulted in order to determine if GenAI models are
                                                                                                                                                       an appropriate solution (either in whole or in part) to
                                                                                                                                                       the prioritized problems. Finally, policy makers should be
                                                                                                                                                       informed of these prioritized problems so that they can
                                                                                                                                                       assist in identifying any relevant regulatory considerations.
                                                               Data creation, R               A, R           C              C            C             GenAI developers and manufacturers are accountable
                                                               acquisition,                                                                            for ensuring that data used for algorithms adhere
                                                               and assurance                                                                           to minimum viable data standards, including being
                                                                                                                                                       representative, secure, and compliant with privacy
                                                                                                                                                       standards. They are also responsible, along with health
                                                                                                                                                       professionals and systems, for ensuring that the data they
                                                                                                                                                       produce adhere to these standards. Policy makers and
                                                                                                                                                       regulators, patients and communities, and researchers
                                                                                                                                                       should all be consulted in these activities to ensure
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.




                                                                                                                                                       responsible and comprehensive data use in GenAI
                                                                                                                                                       applications.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...
                                                               Model         C   A, R   C   I      R   GenAI developers and manufacturers are ultimately
                                                               development                             accountable in how and which models are developed,
                                                                                                       though the responsibility for actually developing those
                                                                                                       models and identifying ground truth labels that optimize
                                                                                                       model applicability and minimize bias is a collaborative
                                                                                                       endeavor between developers, manufacturers, and
                                                                                                       researchers. Health systems and patient stakeholders
                                                                                                       should be consulted to identify optimal features and
                                                                                                       outcomes, while regulators should be informed of which
                                                                                                       models may be coming to their attention.
                                                               Model         C   C      C   A, R   C   Policy makers and regulators bear primary accountability
                                                               standards                               and responsibility for developing and disseminating
                                                                                                       regulatory standards for model performance, bias, and
                                                                                                       interoperability. These standards ought to be developed in
                                                                                                       consultation with all other stakeholders.
                                                               Model         A   R      C   C      R   With consultation from patients, communities, policy
                                                               evaluation                              makers, and regulators, health care professionals and
                                                                                                       systems are ultimately accountable for defining the
                                                                                                       parameters of trustworthiness and fit for purpose
                                                                                                       of models designed for implementation into their
                                                                                                       workflows, systems, organizations, and clinical decision
                                                                                                       making, and recommending them to their patients.
                                                                                                       GenAI developers, manufacturers, and researchers are
                                                                                                       responsible for creating the evidence to support these
                                                                                                       evaluations.

                                                                                                                                                          continued
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.




                                                                                                                                                                      | 31
                                                                                                                                                                             Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...
                                                               TABLE 5-4 | Continued
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     32 |
                                                                             Health Care     GenAI          Representative Policy
                                                                             Professionals   Developers and Patients and   Makers and
                                                               Phase         and Systems     Manufacturers Communities Regulators       Researchers   Commentary
                                                               Model imple- A, R             R              C              I            C             GenAI developers, manufacturers, health care
                                                               mentation and                                                                          professionals, and health systems assume responsibility for
                                                               diffusion                                                                              building tools suitable for clinical workflows and diverse
                                                                                                                                                      patient populations, with consultation from patients
                                                                                                                                                      and communities to ensure appropriate prioritization
                                                                                                                                                      and from researchers to ensure evidence-based rollouts.
                                                                                                                                                      However, health care professionals remain ultimately
                                                                                                                                                      accountable for the integration of these tools into their
                                                                                                                                                      workflows and patient care; advocating for investment
                                                                                                                                                      and training to select, implement, and govern these
                                                                                                                                                      models; and adapting pre-trained models to new domains.
                                                                                                                                                      Policy makers do not play a large role in implementation,
                                                                                                                                                      although they should be informed of implementation
                                                                                                                                                      challenges in order to cross-reference against standards to
                                                                                                                                                      ensure safe implementation.
                                                               Model mon-    A, R            R              C              R            R             GenAI developers, manufacturers, regulators, and
                                                               itoring and                                                                            researchers play a critical role in monitoring and
                                                               maintenance                                                                            managing changes in model performance over time.
                                                                                                                                                      Similarly, policy makers and regulators should standardize
                                                                                                                                                      performance parameters and generate incentives for this
                                                                                                                                                      monitoring. Health care professionals and systems are
                                                                                                                                                      ultimately accountable for ensuring that models deployed
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.




                                                                                                                                                      in their organizations, care workflows, or patients’ lives
                                                                                                                                                      are trustworthy and fit for purpose, even long after initial
                                                                                                                                                      implementation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                    The Path Forward | 33



                              Key for Responsibility Assignment Matrix

             Responsible (R): Those who are assigned the “Responsible” level of responsibility
             do the work to achieve the task. For every task or deliverable, there should be at least
             one role with this level of responsibility. However, other roles can be delegated to assist
             in the work required (see below for separately identifying those who participate in a
             supporting role).

             Accountable (A): Those who are assigned the “Accountable” level of responsibility
             are those that are ultimately answerable for the correct and thorough completion of the
             deliverable or task.They are also the ones who may delegate the work to those who are
             “Responsible.” In other words, an “Accountable” should sign off or approve the work
             that a “Responsible” does. For every task or deliverable, there should be only one role
             with this level of responsibility.

             Consulted (C): Those who are assigned the “Consulted” level of responsibility are
             those whose opinions are sought during the work to complete the task or deliverable,
             or who help to review the result of the work to ensure it meets the necessary goals.
             They are typically subject matter experts or those who may be directly affected by the
             work, and two-way communications with them are usually maintained throughout the
             work process.

             Informed (I): Those who are assigned the “Informed” level of responsibility have
             no required work to support a task or deliverable but are usually kept up to date on
             work progress, or they may only be notified once the work or deliverable is completed.
             Typically, communications with those in an “Informed” role are purely one-way from
             those who are Accountable or Responsible.



          patient input as table stakes in health GenAI is critical to capturing the promise
          of these new technologies to improve health and health care.

                                                CONCLUSION

            The integration of LLMs and GenAI in health care holds significant potential
          to transform the practice of medicine, the work and experiences of health care
          providers, and the health and well-being of patients. GenAI can support clinical
          decision making and streamline workflows, promote patients’ and their support
          networks’ engagement in care processes, address health equity issues, and support


                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             34 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             clinical research. However, successful, ethical, and equitable implementation
             of GenAI requires careful consideration of the associated risks, particularly
             those concerning data privacy, bias, transparency, and infrastructure limitations.
             Collaboration among stakeholders, including health care providers, patients,
             policy makers, ethicists, and researchers, along with a cross-sector commitment
             to maximizing the benefit of GenAI while minimizing the risks, is important
             for navigating the complexities associated with GenAI in health care. Federal
             and organizational oversight; standardized guidelines for GenAI development,
             implementation, and responsible and ethical use; and continuous practitioner and
             patient education can facilitate the ethical and effective application of LLMs in
             health and medicine to improve patient outcomes, increase equitable access to
             care, and revolutionize medicine, research, and health care.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                               REFERENCES

          Accenture. 2024. What is generative AI? https://www.accenture.com/in-en/
            insights/generative-ai (accessed March 29, 2024).
          Albrecht, M., D. Shanks, T. Shah, T. Hudson, J. Thompson, T. Filardi, K. Wright, G.
            Ator, and T. R. Smith. 2024. Enhancing clinical documentation workflow with
            ambient artificial intelligence: Clinician perspectives on work burden, burnout,
            and job satisfaction. MedRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.08.12.24311883.
          Andreadis, K., D.V. Rodriguez, A. Zakreuskaya, J. Chen, J. Gonzalez, and D. Mann.
            2024. Bridging gaps with generative AI: Enhancing hypertension monitoring
            through patient and provider insights. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics
            316:939–943. https://doi.org/10.3233/SHTI240565.
          Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. 2020. American
            National Standard: Safety and effectiveness of health IT software and systems.
            Part 4: Application of human factors engineering. https://array.aami.org/doi/
            abs/10.2345/9781570207594.ch1 (accessed August 9, 2023).
          Bartlett,V. L., S. S. Dhruva, N. D. Shah, P. Ryan, and J. S. Ross. 2019. Feasibility of
            using real-world data to replicate clinical trial evidence. JAMA Network Open
            2(10):e1912869. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.12869.
          Benary, M., X. D. Wang, M. Schmidt, D. Soll, G. Hilfenhaus, M. Nassir, C. Sigler,
            M. Knödler, U. Keller, D. Beule, U. Keilholz, U. Leser, and D. T. Rieke. 2023.
            Leveraging large language models for decision support in personalized
            oncology. JAMA Network Open 6(11):e2343689. https://doi.org/10.1001/
            jamanetworkopen.2023.43689.
          Briganti, G. 2023. A clinician’s guide to large language models. Future Medicine AI
            1(1). https://doi.org/10.2217/fmai-2023-0003.
          Cacciaglia, A. 2024. Gen AI saves nurses time by drafting responses to patient
            messages. EpicShare. https://www.epicshare.org/share-and-learn/mayo-ai-
            message-responses (accessed November 7, 2024).



                                                               35



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             36 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             Carroll, R., and K. Anderson. 2024. How pharma can benefit from using GenAI
               in drug discovery. EY Parthenon. https://www.ey.com/en_us/insights/life-
               sciences/how-pharma-can-benefit-from-using-genai-in-drug-discovery
               (accessed November 7, 2024).
             City of San Jose. n.d. Information Technology Department Generative AI Guidelines |
               City of San Jose. https://www.sanjoseca.gov/your-government/departments-
               offices/information-technology/itd-generative-ai-guideline (accessed February
               27, 2024).
             Clark, M., and S. Bailey. 2024. Chatbots in Health Care: Connecting Patients to
               Information: Emerging Health Technologies. Ottawa, ON: Canadian Agency for
               Drugs and Technologies in Health. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
               NBK602381 (accessed November 7, 2024).
             Classen, D. C., C.A. Longhurst,T. Davis, J.A. Milstein, and D.W. Bates. 2023. Inpatient
               EHR user experience and hospital EHR safety performance. JAMA Network
               Open 6(9):e2333152. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.33152.
             Cosmas, A., G. Cruz, S. Cubela, M. Huntington, S. Rahimi, and S. Tiwari. 2024.
               Digital Twins and Generative AI: A Powerful Pairing. McKinsey Digital. https://
               www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/tech-forward/
               digital-twins-and-generative-ai-a-powerful-pairing (accessed October 28, 2024).
             Decker, H., K. Trang, J. Ramirez, A. Colley, L. Pierce, M. Coleman, T.
               Bongiovanni, G. Melton, and E. Wick. 2023. Large language model−based
               chatbot vs surgeon-generated informed consent documentation for common
               procedures. JAMA Network Open 6(10):e2336997. https://doi.org/10.1001/
               jamanetworkopen.2023.36997.
             Eliot, L. 2024. Exposing the brittleness of generative AI as exemplified
               by the recent gibberish meltdown of ChatGPT. Forbes. https://www.
               forbes.com/sites/lanceeliot/2024/02/25/exposing-the-brittleness-of-
               generative-ai-as-exemplified-by-the-recent-gibber ish-meltdown-of-
               chatgpt/?sh=3ae6ed345096 (accessed February 25, 2024).
             Embí, P. J. 2021. Algorithmovigilance—Advancing methods to analyze and
               monitor artificial intelligence–driven health care for effectiveness and
               equity. JAMA Network Open 4(4):e214622. https://doi.org/10.1001/
               jamanetworkopen.2021.4622.
             Epic. 2024. SlicerDicer SideKick Epic Systems. https://www.epic.com/software/ai
               (accessed November 7, 2024).
             European Union. 2023. Commission welcomes political agreement on Artificial Intelligence
               Act. Press release, December 9. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/
               detail/en/ip_23_6473?utm_source=pocket_saves (accessed March 29, 2024).




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                            References | 37

          Farquhar, S., J. Kossen, L. Kuhn, and Y. Gal. 2024. Detecting hallucinations in
             large language models using semantic entropy. Nature 630:625–630. https://
             doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07421-0.
          Gandhi, T. K., D. Classen, C. A. Sinsky, D. C. Rhew, N. V. Garde, A. Roberts, and
             F. Federico. 2023. How can artificial intelligence decrease cognitive and work
             burden for front line practitioners? JAMIA Open 6(3):ooad079. https://doi.
             org/10.1093/jamiaopen/ooad079.
          Gangwal, A., A. Ansari, I. Ahmad, A. K. Azad, V. Kumarasamy, V. Subramaniyan,
             and L. S. Wong. 2024. Generative artificial intelligence in drug discovery:
             Basic framework, recent advances, challenges, and opportunities. Frontiers in
             Pharmacology 15. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2024.1331062.
          Goddard, J. 2023. Hallucinations in ChatGPT: A cautionary tale for biomedical
             researchers. American Journal of Medicine 136(11):1059–1060. https://doi.
             org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2023.06.012.
          Goodman, K. E., P. H.Yi, and D. J. Morgan. 2024. AI-generated clinical summaries
             require more than accuracy. JAMA 331(8):637–638. https://doi.org/10.1001/
             jama.2024.0555.
          Guevara, M., S. Chen, S. Thomas, T. L. Chaunzwa, I. Franco, B. H. Kann, S.
             Moningi, J. M. Qian, M. Goldstein, S. Harper, H. J. W. L. Aerts, P. J. Catalano,
             G. K. Savova, R. H. Mak, and D. S. Bitterman. 2024. Large language models to
             identify social determinants of health in electronic health records. npj Digital
             Medicine 7:6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-023-00970-0.
          Hadi,A., E.Tran, B. Nagarajan, and A. Kirpalani. 2024. Evaluation of ChatGPT as a
             diagnostic tool for medical learners and clinicians. PLoS ONE 19(7):e0307383.
             https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0307383.
          Harada, Y., T. Suzuki, T. Harada, T. Sakamoto, K. Ishizuka, T. Miyagami, R.
             Kawamura, K. Kunitomo, H. Nagano, T. Shimizu, and T. Watari. 2024.
             Performance evaluation of ChatGPT in detecting diagnostic errors and their
             contributing factors: An analysis of 545 case reports of diagnostic errors. BMJ
             Open Quality 13:e002654. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjoq-2023-002654.
          Hutson, M. 2024. How AI is being used to accelerate clinical trials. Nature
             627:8003. https://.doi.org/10.1038/d41586-024-00753-x.
          Jin, Q., Z. Wang, C. S. Floudas, F. Chen, C. Gong, D. Bracken-Clarke, E. Xue, Y.
             Yang, J. Sun, and Z. Lu. 2023. Matching patients to clinical trials with large
             language models. arXiv:2307.15051v2.
          Kanjee, Z., B. Crowe, and A. Rodman. 2023. Accuracy of a generative artificial
             intelligence model in a complex diagnostic challenge. JAMA 330(1):78–80.
             https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.8288.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             38 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             Kirby, M. 2024. How doctors are using AI to save time on prior authorization. Advisory Board.
               https://www.advisory.com/daily-briefing/2024/07/16/ai-prior-authorization
               (accessed November 7, 2024).
             Kolla, L., F. K. Gruber, O. Khalid, C. Hill, and R. B. Parikh. 2021. The case
               for AI-driven cancer clinical trials: The efficacy arm in silico. Biochimica et
               Biophysica Acta Reviews on Cancer 1876(1):188572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
               bbcan.2021.188572.
             Li, H., R. Zhang,Y. C. Lee, R. E. Kraut, and D. C. Mohr. 2023. Systematic review
               and meta-analysis of AI-based conversational agents for promoting mental
               health and well-being. npj Digital Medicine 6:236. https://doi.org/10.1038/
               s41746-023-00979-5.
             Liu, S., A. B. McCoy, J. F. Peterson,T. A. Lasko, D. F. Sittig, S. D. Nelson, J. Andrews,
               L. Patterson, C. M. Cobb, D. Mulherin, C. T. Morton, and A. Wright. 2024.
               Leveraging explainable artificial intelligence to optimize clinical decision
               support. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 31(4):968–974.
               https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocae019.
             Liu, S., A. B. McCoy, A. P. Wright, S. D. Nelson, S. S. Huang, H. B. Ahmad, S.
               E. Carro, J. Franklin, J. Brogan, and A. Wright. 2024. Why do users override
               alerts? Utilizing large language model to summarize comments and optimize
               clinical decision support. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
               31(6):1388–1396. https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocae041.
             Liu, T.-L., T. C. Hetherington, A. Dharod, T. Carroll, R. Bundy, H. Nguyen,
               H. E. Bundy, M. Isreal, A. McWilliams, and J. A. Cleveland. 2024. Does AI-
               powered clinical documentation enhance clinician efficiency? A longitudinal
               study. NEJM AI 1(12):AIoa2400659. https://doi.org/10.1056/AIoa2400659.
             Marinov, T. M., A. A. Abu-Shmais, A. K. Janke, and I. S. Georgiev. 2024. Design
               of antigen-specific antibody CDRH3 sequences using AI and germline-based
               templates. bioRxiv [Preprint]. https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.03.22.586241.
             McGinnis, J. M., H. V. Fineberg, and V. J. Dzau. 2024. Shared commitments for
               health and health care: A trust framework from the learning health system.
               NAM Perspectives. Commentary, National Academy of Medicine, Washington,
               DC. https://doi.org/10.31478/202412c.
             Merk, D., L. Friedrich, F. Grisoni, and G. Schneider. 2018. De novo design of
               bioactive small molecules by artificial intelligence. Molecular Informatics 37.
               https://doi.org/10.1002/minf.201700153.
             Moingeon, P., M. Chenel, C. Rousseau, E. Voisin, and M. Guedj. 2023. Virtual
               patients, digital twins and causal disease models: Paving the ground for in silico
               clinical trials. Drug Discovery Today 28(7):103605. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
               drudis.2023.103605.



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                            References | 39

          National Academy of Medicine. n.d. Collaboration for a learning health system. https://
            nam.edu/programs/value-science-driven-health-care (accessed December 17,
            2024).
          National Institute of Standards and Technology. 2024. Artificial Intelligence Risk
            Management Framework: Generative artificial intelligence profile. https://doi.
            org/10.6028/NIST.AI.600-1 (accessed January 3, 2025).
          Ng,W. L. 2024. Revolutionizing clinical trials with generative AI. Clinical Research News.
            https://www.clinicalresearchnewsonline.com/news/2024/07/19/revolutionizing-
            clinical-trials-with-generative-ai (accessed October 28, 2024).
          Office for Civil Rights. 2024. HHS issues new rule to strengthen nondiscrimination
            protections and advance civil rights in health care. https://www.hhs.gov/about/
            news/2024/04/26/hhs-issues-new-rule-strengthen-nondiscrimination-
            protections-advance-civil-rights-health-care.html (accessed October 28, 2024).
          Office of Management and Budget. 2024. Advancing governance, innovation, and
            risk management for agency use of artificial intelligence. https://www.whitehouse.
            gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/M-24-10-Advancing-Governance-
            Innovation-and-Risk-Management-for-Agency-Use-of-Ar tificial-
            Intelligence.pdf (accessed January 3, 2025).
          Omiye, J. A., J. C. Lester, S. Spichak,V. Rotemberg, and R. Daneshjou. 2023. Large
            language models propagate race-based medicine. npj Digital Medicine 6:195.
            https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-023-00939-z.
          Pahune, S., and N. Rewatkar. 2024. Large language models and GAI’s expanding
            role in health care. [Preprint]. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.20109.72168.
          Ratwani, R. M., D. Classen, and C. Longhurst. 2024. The compelling need for
            shared responsibility of AI oversight: Lessons from health IT certification.
            JAMA 332(10):787–788. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2024.12630.
          Rees, C. A., N. Pica, M. C. Monuteaux, and F. T. BourgReois. 2019.
            Noncompletion and nonpublication of trials studying rare diseases: A cross-
            sectional analysis. PLoS Medicine 16(11):e1002966. https://doi.org/10.1371/
            journal.pmed.1002966.
          Safranek, C.W., A. E. Sidamon-Eristoff, A. Gilson, and D. Chartash. 2023.The role
            of large language models in medical education: Applications and implications.
            JMIR Medical Education 9:e50945. https://doi.org/10.2196/50945.
          Schoonbeek, R., J. Workum, S. Schuit, J. Doornberg, T. P. van der Laan, and C.
            Bootsma-Robroeks. 2024. Completeness, correctness and conciseness of
            physician-written versus large language model generated patient summaries
            integrated in electronic health records. The Lancet. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
            ssrn.4835935.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             40 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             Sezgin, E. 2024. Redefining virtual assistants in health care: The future with large
               language models. Journal of Medical Internet Research 26:e53225. https://doi.
               org/10.2196/53225.
             Shah, N. H., J. D. Halamka, S. Saria, M. Pencina, T. Tazbaz, M. Tripathi, A.
               Callahan, H. Hildahl, and B. Anderson. 2023. A nationwide network of health
               AI assurance laboratories. JAMA 331(3):245–249. https://doi.org/10.1001/
               jama.2023.26930.
             Shoja, M. M, J. M. Monica Van de Ridder, and V. Rajput. 2023.The emerging role
               of generative artificial intelligence in medical education, research, and practice.
               Cureus June 24. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.40883.
             Tadesse, G. A., C. Cintas, K. R. Varshney, P. Staar, C. Agunwa, S. Speakman, J. Jia,
               E. E. Bailey, A. Adelekun, J. B. Lipoff, G. Onyekaba, J. C. Lester, V. Rotemberg,
               J. Zou, and R. Daneshjou. 2023. Skin Tone Analysis for Representation in
               Educational Materials (STAR-ED) using machine learning. npj Digital Medicine
               6:151. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-023-00881-0.
             Tai-Seale, M., S. L. Baxter, F. Vaida, A. Walker, A. M. Sitapati, C. Osborne, J. Diaz,
               N. Desai, S. Webb, G. Polston, T. Helsten, E. Gross, J. Thackaberry, A. Mandvi,
               D. Lillie, S. Li, G. Gin, S. Achar, H. Hofflich, C. Sharp, M. Millen, and C. A.
               Longhurst. 2024. AI-generated draft replies integrated into health records and
               physicians’ electronic communication. JAMA Network Open 7:4. https://doi.
               org/jamanetworkopen.2024.6565.
             Tang, L., Z. Sun, B. Idnay, J. G. Nestor, A. Soroush, P. A. Elias, Z. Xu, Y. Ding, G.
               Durrett, J. F. Rousseau, C. Weng, and Y. Peng. 2023. Evaluating large language
               models on medical evidence summarization. npj Digital Medicine 6:158. https://
               doi.org/10.1038/s41746-023-00896-7.
             Tierney, A. A., G. Gayre, B. Hoberman, B. Mattern, M. Ballesca, P. Kipnis, V. Liu,
               and K. Lee. 2024. Ambient artificial intelligence scribes to alleviate the burden
               of clinical documentation. NEJM Catalyst Innovations in Care Delivery 5:3.
               https://doi.org/10.1056/CAT.23.0404.
             Van Veen, D., C. V. Uden, L. Blankemeier, J. B. Delbrouck, A. Aali, C. Bluethgen,
               A. Pareek, M. Polacin, E. Pontes Reis, A. Seehofnerová, N. Rohatgi, P.
               Hosamani, W. Collins, N. Ahuja, C. P. Langlotz, J. Hom, S. Gatidis, J. Pauly and
               A. S. Chaudhari. 2024. Adapted large language models can outperform medical
               experts in clinical text summarization. Nature Medicine 30:1134–1142. https://
               doi.org/10.1038/s41591-024-02855-5.
             The White House. 2022. Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights | OSTP. https://www.
               whitehouse.gov/ostp/ai-bill-of-rights (accessed March 29, 2024).
             The White House. 2023. FACT SHEET: President Biden Issues Executive Order on
               Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence. https://www.whitehouse.gov/



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                            References | 41

            briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/10/30/fact-sheet-president-biden-
            issues-executive-order-on-safe-secure-and-trustworthy-artificial-intelligence
            (accessed March 29, 2024).
          Wilhelm, T. I., J. Roos, and R. Kaczmarczyk. 2023. Large language models for
            therapy recommendations across three clinical specialties: Comparative study.
            Journal of Medical Internet Research 25:e49324. https://doi.org/10.2196/49324.
          World Health Organization. 2021. Ethics and Governance of Artificial Intelligence for
            Health: WHO Guidance. Geneva: World Health Organization. https://iris.who.
            int/bitstream/handle/10665/341996/9789240029200-eng.pdf?sequence=1
            (accessed March 29, 2024).
          Xue, C., S. S. Kowshik, D. Lteif, S. Puducheri, V. H. Jasodanand, O. T. Zhou, A. S.
            Walia, O. B. Guney, J. D. Zhang, S. T. Pham, A. Kaliaev,V. C. Andreu-Arasa, B. C.
            Dwyer, C. W. Farris, H. Hao, S. Kedar, A. Z. Mian, D. L. Murman, S. A. O’Shea,
            A. B. Paul, S. Rohatgi, M. H. Saint-Hilaire, E. A. Sartor, B. N. Setty, J. E. Small,
            A. Swaminathan, O. Taraschenko, J. Yuan, Y. Zhou, S. Zhu, C. Karjadi, T. F. A.
            Ang, S. A. Bargal, B. A. Plummer, K. L. Poston, M. Ahangaran, R. Au, and V.
            B. Kolachalama. 2024. AI-based differential diagnosis of dementia etiologies
            on multimodal data. Nature Medicine 30:2977–2989. https://doi.org/10.1038/
            s41591-024-03118-z.
          Yan, C., M. E. Grabowska, A. L. Dickson, B. Li, Z.Wen, D. M. Roden, C. M. Stein,
            P. J. Embí, J. F. Peterson, Q. Feng, B. A. Malin, and W. Q. Wei. 2024. Leveraging
            generative AI to prioritize drug repurposing candidates for Alzheimer’s disease
            with real-world clinical validation. npj Digital Medicine 7(1):46. https://doi.
            org/10.1038/s41746-024-01038-3.
          Yang, R., T. F. Tan, W. Lu, A. J. Thirunavukarasu, D. S. W. Ting, and N. Liu.
            2023. Large language models in health care: Development, applications, and
            challenges. Health Care Science 2(4):255–263. https://doi.org/10.1002/hcs2.61.
          Zhang, P., and M. N. Kamel Boulos. 2023. GAI in medicine and health care:
            Promises, opportunities and challenges. Future Internet 15(9):286. https://doi.
            org/10.3390/fi15090286.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                   AUTHOR INFORMATION

          Dianne Babski is the director of the National Library of Medicine’s (NLM’s)
          User Services and Collection Division. She is responsible for the overall
          management of one of NLM’s largest divisions, including a national network of
          more than 9,000 academic, health science, and public libraries and community
          organizations. Babski serves as the scientific review administrator on the
          Literature Selection Technical Review Committee, a federal advisory committee
          responsible for recommending journals for inclusion to MEDLINE. Currently,
          Babski leads a pioneering generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) pilot project
          across NLM. Leveraging cutting-edge GenAI technologies, this endeavor seeks to
          unlock novel pathways of research, streamline operational processes, and elevate
          user experience across NLM resources. She holds a bachelor’s degree in biology
          and a master’s degree in information management. (Conflict and Interest
          Disclosures: None)

          Peter Embí is an internationally recognized researcher, educator, and leader in
          the field of clinical and translational research informatics. Dr. Embí serves as a
          professor and the chair of the Department of Biomedical Informatics, a professor
          of medicine, the co-director of the ADVANCE AI Center, and the senior vice-
          president for research and innovation at the Vanderbilt University Medical
          Center. Among his other leadership roles, he is the president of the American
          College of Medical Informatics (ACMI), was the past president and chair of the
          Board of Directors of the American Medical Informatics Association, and served
          on the National Advisory Council for the Agency for Healthcare Research and
          Quality. He is a Fellow of the American College of Physicians, Fellow of ACMI,
          Fellow of the International Academy of Health Sciences Informatics, and an
          elected member of the National Academy of Medicine. (Conflict and Interest
          Disclosures: None)



                                                               43



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             44 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             Jackie Gerhart is a family medicine physician and clinical informaticist at Epic
             in Verona, Wisconsin. She earned her medical degree from the Mayo Clinic
             College of Medicine in Rochester, Minnesota, and is a faculty member at the
             University of Wisconsin–Madison, where she still sees patients, including on the
             frontlines during this COVID-19 pandemic. Her passion is to reduce barriers
             to medical care through the best use of technology. She enjoys advocating to
             align policy with practice to improve clinician well-being and empower patients.
             At Epic she focuses on health care innovation such as the use of ambient voice
             for documentation and the use of electronic health record data to advance
             the knowledge of medicine and patient-centered care. She is the lead clinical
             researcher for Epic Research and publishes studies on Epicresearch.org. (Conflict
             and Interest Disclosures: Employment by Epic)

             Jennifer Goldsack founded and serves as the chief executive officer of the
             Digital Medicine Society, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization dedicated
             to advancing digital medicine to optimize human health. Goldsack’s work
             focuses on applied approaches to the safe, effective, and equitable use of digital
             technologies to improve health, health care, and health research. Goldsack sits on
             the boards of the Coalition for Health AI and Sage Bionetworks; is a member of
             the Roundtable on Genomics and Precision Health at the National Academies
             of Science, Engineering, and Medicine; and serves on the World Economic
             Forum Digital Health Action Collaborative. Goldsack earned her master’s degree
             in chemistry from the University of Oxford, England, her master’s degree in
             the history and sociology of medicine from the University of Pennsylvania, and
             her M.B.A. from The George Washington University. (Conflict and Interest
             Disclosures: None)

             Thomas Maddox is a professor of medicine (cardiology) at the Washington
             University School of Medicine. He is a practicing non-invasive cardiologist, a
             trained epidemiologist, and an accomplished health services researcher. He is also
             the vice president of digital products and innovation at BJC HealthCare and
             the Washington University School of Medicine, leading their digital health and
             innovation programs. He is a member of the National Academy of Medicine’s
             Digital Health Action Collaborative, the Healthcare Innovators Professional
             Society, and the inaugural U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s Digital Health
             Advisory Committee. He is a leader in cardiology professional societies and
             currently serves on the Board of Trustees for the American College of Cardiology.
             He is an elected fellow of the American College of Cardiology, an elected fellow
             of the American Heart Association, and an elected member of the American



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                  Author Information | 45

          Clinical and Climatological Association. (Conflict and Interest Disclosures:
          None)

          Ravi Parikh is a board-certified medical oncologist specializing in the treatment
          of genitourinary cancers. Dr. Parikh is an attending physician practicing at the
          Winship Cancer Institute at Emory Midtown. Dr. Parikh is an associate professor
          in the Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology at the Emory
          University School of Medicine. He serves as the medical director of the Winship
          Data and Technology Applications Shared Resource at Winship Cancer Institute
          of Emory University. Dr. Parikh received his M.D. at Harvard Medical School
          and his M.P.P. at the John F. Kennedy School of Government. He completed
          his residency in internal medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and his
          fellowship in hematology and oncology at the University of Pennsylvania.
          (Conflict and Interest Disclosures: None)

          Troy Sarich is the chief commercial data science officer at Johnson & Johnson. Dr.
          Sarich has been a key driver of global pharmaceutical research and development
          and commercial teams across multiple therapeutic areas for more than 25 years,
          delivering new medicines, major business transformations, and impact for
          patients. Dr. Sarich has led teams for major drug programs like XARELTO®
          and INVOKANA® and has expertise in data science, real-world evidence, digital
          health, precision medicine, clinical trials, clinical development, drug launches,
          market access, medical devices, and major business transformations. Dr. Sarich is
          a recipient of the prestigious Johnson Medal Award as part of the XARELTO®
          team’s effort to bring this innovative medicine to millions of patients around
          the world. He has authored more than 80 scientific abstracts and publications
          and is an internationally renowned speaker. He earned both his B.S. and Ph.D.
          from The University of British Columbia in Canada. (Conflict and Interest
          Disclosures: Employment and shareholder interests with Johnson & Johnson)




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                              APPENDIX
             RAPID FIELD DEVELOPMENT AND PRO GRESS

             The challenges that present in parallel to the acceleration of GenAI are complex
          and affect a range of stakeholders, including federal agencies, state- and local-level
          organizations, professional societies, and ultimately the individuals whose data
          provide the basis of the AI models and may be subject to their output. In response,
          multiple efforts to address the risks associated with GenAI have been initiated by
          regulatory bodies.
             On a global scale, the World Health Organization (WHO) released guidance
          around six principles on AI governance for health, and the European Union’s
          (EU’s) AI Act served as a comprehensive regulatory framework for AI systems
          across the EU (European Union, 2023; World Health Organization, 2021). From
          a domestic federal perspective, the Biden administration pulled a variety of policy
          levers to advance responsible AI in health-related fields. In 2022, the White House
          Office of Science and Technology Policy developed the AI Bill of Rights, which
          identifies five principles that guide the design, use, and deployment of automated
          systems to protect the American public in the age of AI (The White House,
          2022). Additionally, President Biden signed the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy
          Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence Executive Order on generative
          AI (The White House, 2023). In response, several cities have issued guidelines on
          generative AI use that seek to recognize the opportunities of AI while mitigating
          bias, privacy, and cybersecurity risks (City of San Jose, n.d.). At a local and
          community level, companies are deploying a range of strategies for developing
          and using GenAI, including pursuing partnerships and direct investments with AI
          developers for access to key technologies and inputs needed for AI development.
          As GenAI rapidly expands to include more applications in health care, it is
          expected that broad governance and guidance will include increasingly detailed
          aspects specifically for GenAI.
             It will be necessary to engage the diverse array of stakeholders influencing the
          governance and responsible use of GenAI in health care for the public good. The
                                                               47



                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             48 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             need for alignment among technology developers, health systems, government
             agencies, research and advocacy organizations, and patients in future GenAI
             regulation is crucial to ensure ethical and safe practices. The current applications
             of GenAI in medicine represent a transformative shift in health care. From aiding
             clinical decision making, to reducing administrative burden, expediting drug
             discovery, and enhancing patient education, the integration of GenAI is poised to
             revolutionize various aspects of the health care continuum, ultimately leading to
             improved patient outcomes and more efficient health care delivery.

                                         IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE

                This implementation guide provides a structured approach to effectively
             disseminate the insights and innovations from our work.Tailored messaging helps
             to address the specific needs and interests of different stakeholders, enhancing
             engagement and facilitating broader adoption. This guide serves as a strategic
             tool to organize key interests for diverse stakeholder groups and align them with
             tailored messaging strategies.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                              Appendix | 49


          Project Background                     The National Academy of Medicine’s Digital Health
                                                 Action Collaborative convened a workshop on October
                                                 25, 2023, and a subsequent meeting with federal agency
                                                 representatives on October 26, 2023, to enhance common
                                                 understanding among health professionals and health
                                                 system leaders, technology developers, and government
                                                 agencies of the nature and health care implications of
                                                 LLMs and GenAI. Workshop sessions focused on the
                                                 possible GenAI benefits, risks and necessary guideposts,
                                                 and guardrails in health care. This publication builds on
                                                 those discussions and key takeaways.
          Paper Overview and Takeaways           The integration of LLMs and GenAI in health care holds
                                                 the potential to transform the practice of medicine, the
                                                 work and experiences of health care providers, and the
                                                 health and well-being of patients. GenAI can support
                                                 clinical decision making and streamline workflows,
                                                 promote patients’ and their support networks’ engagement
                                                 in care processes, address health equity issues, and support
                                                 clinical research. However, successful, ethical, and equitable
                                                 implementation of GenAI requires careful consideration
                                                 of the associated risks, particularly those concerning data
                                                 privacy, bias, transparency, and infrastructure limitations.
                                                 Collaboration among stakeholders, including health care
                                                 providers, patients, policy makers, ethicists, and researchers,
                                                 along with a cross-sector commitment to maximizing
                                                 the benefit of GenAI while minimizing the risks, is
                                                 important for navigating the complexities associated
                                                 with GenAI in health care. Federal and organizational
                                                 oversight; standardized guidelines for GenAI development,
                                                 implementation, and responsible and ethical use; and
                                                 continuous practitioner and patient education can facilitate
                                                 the ethical and effective application of LLMs in health and
                                                 medicine to improve patient outcomes, increase equitable
                                                 access to care, and revolutionize medicine, research, and
                                                 health care.




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




             50 | Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine


             Stakeholder Group       Applications                              Strategies
             Providers/provider      • Improving patient outcomes              • Work with their care teams to
             associations (specialty • Streamlining clinical workflows           learn and adopt GenAI tools
             societies)              • Reducing administrative burden            that can help with improving
                                     • Enhancing diagnostic and                  workflow efficiencies
                                       treatment accuracy                      • Advocate for investment and
                                     • Clinical decision support                 training for selecting and
                                     • Continuing medical education              implementing GenAI models
                                                                                 within their institutions
             Payers                  • Improving care quality                  • Develop flexible
                                     • Ensuring patient satisfaction             reimbursement models
                                     • Reducing unnecessary health care          that support the adoption
                                       spending                                  and integration of GenAI
                                     • Resource allocation                       technologies into clinical
                                     • Administrative support                    practice while safeguarding
                                     • Improving patient care                    patient safety and privacy


             Regulators              •   Patient safety                        • Develop and disseminate
                                     •   Data privacy                            regulatory standards for
                                     •   Compliance with regulations             GenAI model performance,
                                     •   Equitable access to health care         bias, and interoperability
                                     •   AI regulation/certification           • Standardize performance
                                                                                 parameters and generate
                                                                                 practices for monitoring
                                                                                 model performance over time
             Public health           • Monitoring and controlling disease •      Learn and adapt GenAI tools
                                       outbreaks                                 for public health activities
                                     • Improving population health               such as monitoring and
                                       outcomes                                  analyzing data from various
                                     • Enhancing health data analytics           sources to detect and track
                                                                                 disease in real time
                                                                               • Consider approaches to using
                                                                                 AI-driven chatbots and tools
                                                                                 to provide accurate health
                                                                                 information, answer public
                                                                                 queries, and debunk myths
             Tech industry           • Drive innovation                        • GenAI manufacturers can
                                     • Health care market opportunities          monitor changes in model
                                                                                 performance over time,
                                                                                 working with health care
                                                                                 stakeholders to manage
                                                                                 ongoing evolution
                                                                               • Communicate with
                                                                                 health stakeholders to
                                                                                 understand key opportunities
                                                                                 and considerations for
                                                                                 implementation of GenAI in
                                                                                 health settings


                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                                                                                             Appendix | 51


          Stakeholder Group       Applications                             Strategies
          Patients and patient    • Receiving quality/personalized         • Patients and patient advocates
          advocates                 care                                     can be consulted throughout
                                  • Access to reliable health                the development, evaluation,
                                    information                              diffusion, and monitoring of
                                  • Data privacy and security                GenAI models
                                                                           • Use Gen AI to access
                                                                             information about treatment
                                                                             options, risks, and benefits,
                                                                             helping them make informed
                                                                             decisions about their care
          Medical education       • Train future health care           • When armed with
                                    professionals                        representative data and
                                  • Understand key uses of AI/LLMs       appropriate clinical domain
                                    in clinical care                     knowledge, LLMs may
                                  • Improve learning opportunities for   generate materials and
                                    students                             cases that can inform more
                                                                         representative, equitable
                                                                         medical education materials
                                                                         that represent diverse
                                                                         pathologies
                                                                       • Work together to ensure
                                                                         education reflects the
                                                                         appropriate ethical and
                                                                         professional guidelines for the
                                                                         use of GenAI tools in clinical
                                                                         practice




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative ...




                       Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
