[]

Toju Duke

Bedrock AI, London, UK

Paolo Giudici

University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

ISBN 979-8-8688-1165-4e-ISBN 979-8-8688-1166-1

https://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1

© TOJU DUKE and PAOLO GIUDIC 2025

This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively
licensed by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or
in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and
retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or
dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.

The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks,
service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the
absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the
relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general
use.

The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the
advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate
at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the
editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the
material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have
been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

This Apress imprint is published by the registered company APress Media,
LLC, part of Springer Nature.

The registered company address is: 1 New York Plaza, New York, NY 10004,
U.S.A.

Introduction

Autonomous cars, Internet of Things (IoT), smart homes, smart phones,
smart cities, recommender systems, personalized recommendations,
personalized health monitors, surveillance cameras, and so on and so
forth. What do these all have in common? In today’s world, the main
underlying technology driving these systems is artificial intelligence
(AI). When the term was introduced in 1956 by Alan Turing and a few
other professors, there was no clear vision or prediction on how this
technology would turn out. But one thing was sure – someday we’d have a
technology that could not only mimic human intelligence but possibly
surpass it. Ever since AI was introduced to our world, it’s made
incredible leaps and bounds that have wowed many, and we’re constantly
being introduced to a newer, more capable AI model on a daily basis.

These recent AI breakthroughs have changed the way we live, the way we
think and interact with one another, our devices, and the world at
large. We no longer conduct only “search” on the Internet, but we now
have conversations by chatting with it. We don’t only write emails, but
we’re able to have corrections, suggestions, and changes while doing it,
with the additional option to simply ask our AI assistant to complete
the task for us. Remember the days of Clippy, Microsoft’s
friendly-looking paper clip that couldn’t do much, but was a great
addition to Microsoft Office suite? Well, we’re now equipped with
numerous capable and efficient assistants that are so much more
productive, efficient, and interactive than Clippy ever was.

With the recent advancements in AI technologies, particularly Generative
AI which has not only taken the world by storm but has introduced the
way we interact and use technology in so many different and new ways,
there has been a steep increase in AI use and adoption over recent
years. From multimodal AI systems such as text to image, to video, to
audio, to voice, and robotics, we are seeing rapid development in one AI
system that can achieve tasks from different modalities.

However, with this increased advancement of AI technologies comes an
increase in concerns around its use, safety, transparency,
trustworthiness, security, privacy, and reliability. There’s also huge
concerns on the amount of energy these systems consume. These valid
concerns led to the quick introduction of regulation by several
regulatory bodies and countries across the world, including Western
countries and countries from the Global South. While there’s been a good
number of existing governing guidelines on AI development and use,
there’s little guidance on how to implement these ethical and
responsible requirements during AI development, deployment, monitoring,
and assessment.

We’re helping to bridge this knowledge gap with the introduction of
Responsible AI frameworks. Building on the framework introduced in
Building Responsible AI Algorithms by Duke (2023), this book can be
considered a sequel to this work. We’ve built an additional framework
that goes a step further by providing statistical and programming code
that can measure the various Responsible AI principles introduced in the
new and additional framework. We’ve also ensured existing regulatory
risk management frameworks are understood and referred to, enabling
proper governance and risk management analysis in AI development
workflows.

This work is born out of a genuine passion and desire to see more AI
systems built with the safety and well-being of the end user in mind, so
society and consumers can leverage the benefits of AI, while keeping the
challenges and dangers associated with this technology at a bare
minimum. We hope you gain the required insights and guidance from the
extensive work outlined in this book – to build, test, and deploy AI
systems safely which will benefit businesses and individuals alike and
reduce the several harms that have already impacted so many human lives.

Any source code or other supplementary material referenced by the author
in this book can be found here:
https://www.apress.com/gp/services/source-code.

Acknowledgments

This book is a result of extensive research and stakeholder management
between researchers and industry professionals particularly from the
statistical laboratory of the University of Pavia. Special thanks to the
experts and regulators at the European Supervisory Digital Finance
Academy of the European University Institute who helped to shape the
rationale and ideas behind this book. We also cannot thank Golnoosh
Babaei enough, who worked tirelessly on contributing to the case studies
and Python code presented in this book.

About the Authors

Toju Duke

[]

A person with long, dark hair smiles at the camera, wearing a black top.
The background is a textured, muted green.

, Recognized as one of the top women in AI, Toju is an entrepreneur,
speaker, author, thought leader, and advisor on Responsible AI, with
over 19 years of experience spanning advertising, retail, nonprofit, and
tech. She spent a decade at Google, where her last three years as a
Responsible AI Program Manager focused on leading Responsible AI
initiatives across Google’s product and research teams, with a focus on
large-scale models and Responsible AI processes. Toju is the founder and
CEO of Bedrock AI, an AI product and services company dedicated to
Responsible AI principles. She is also the founder of Diverse AI, a
community interest organization with a mission to support and champion
underrepresented groups to build a diverse and inclusive AI future. In
2023, she published Building Responsible AI Algorithms: A Framework for
Transparency, Fairness, Safety, Privacy, and Robustness (Apress).

 

Paolo Giudici

[]

A person in a suit stands smiling with arms crossed in front of a
bookshelf filled with various books. The setting appears to be an office
or library.

is Professor of Statistics at the University of Pavia and Professor of
Machine Learning at the European University Institute. He is author of
more than 200 scientific publications, with an h-index of 52 (Google
Scholar), 39 (Scopus), and 35 (Web of Science). The publications propose
statistical learning models that can measure the opportunities and risks
of artificial intelligence and financial technologies and improve their
quality and safety. He is Chief Editor of the scientific journal
Statistics (Taylor and Francis) and Editor of Artificial Intelligence in
Finance (Frontiers) and of International Journal of Data Science and
Analytics (Springer). Paolo has coordinated 14 funded scientific
projects, among which are the European Horizon 2020 projects “PERISCOPE:
Pan-European Response to the Impacts of COVID-19 and future Pandemics
and Epidemics” (2020–2023) and “FINTECH: Financial Supervision and
Technological Compliance” (2019–2020). The projects have supported the
research activity of 19 PhD students and of 17 postdoc researchers. He
has been a research fellow at the Bank for International Settlements and
a research expert for the European Commission, the European Insurance
and Occupational Pensions Authority, the Italian Ministry of
Development, the Bank of Italy, and the Italian Banking Association. He
has been a board member of the Credito Valtellinese bank (2010–2018),
and he is an honorary member of the Italian Financial Risk Management
Association. He is also an elected fellow of the International
Statistical Institute (ISI), and a member of the Institute of
Mathematical Statistics (IMS), the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM), the European Network for Business and Industrial Statistics
(ENBIS), and the Italian Statistical Society (SIS).

 

Part IIntroduction

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_1

1. Responsible AI and AI Governance

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

Responsible AI

Responsible AI is a new and nascent field, and the term “Responsible AI”
has been used interchangeably with the term “ethical AI” in recent
years. In this chapter, we’ll look at a brief history of Responsible AI
and the factors influencing its emergence as a new and incredibly
valuable part of AI development. We will also review new global AI
regulation and policies from UNESCO to the EU AI Act and a few other
global AI policies, highlighting the different principles in each policy
and the importance of adopting the recommendations to build AI
governance within your organization/project.

Responsible AI falls within the field of “ethical AI” and refers to the
governance, responsible, social, societal, and legal aspects of AI. Due
to the sporadic and unpredictable nature of AI applications which have
resulted in several risks and harms perpetuated on various members of
society, the need for more responsible development and deployment of AI
has increased over the years, which also includes its use.

In simple terms, Responsible AI can be defined as a body of work that
ensures the development, deployment, and use of AI models and
applications which have minimal risks and harms on every member of
society, regardless of race, gender, belief, sexual orientation, age,
and ability (disability).

The field of “responsible principles in AI” isn’t new and has been in
existence since the 1950s round about the time the term artificial
intelligence was coined in 1956 by John McCarthy of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) during the first academic conference on
computer programming construction and the ability for machines to think
– a concept introduced by Alan Turing, who is considered the father of
AI and one of the first pioneers in the field.

Due to the issues stemming from AI applications in the past few years,
which negatively affected users in various ways, organizations and
companies turned to the philosophical academic research that originated
in the 1950s, focused mainly on philosophical arguments ranging across
several principles from fairness, transparency, accountability, privacy,
safety, explainability, inclusivity, and sustainability.¹ These
arguments encompass the field of AI ethics and include Responsible AI
principles.

We’ve seen a steady growth of AI adoption over the years, and we’re
currently in an “AI summer,” mainly driven by the recent introduction of
generative AI – deep learning models that are able to generate
high-quality content ranging from text, audio, video, and speech. The
arrival of generative AI led to the AI arms race in 2022 where we saw a
plethora of rapid AI development built on the transformer architecture
(introduced by Google in 2017, a new neural network architecture for
language models²) with the introduction of text to image generators,
text to video, text to speech, text to image and video, and so many
other multimodalities, kicked off by the famous ChatGPT.

We’ve also seen a steady and quite concerning increase in the number of
human rights violations, psychological harms, data leakages, energy
consumption, disinformation, social inequities including
representational harms and biases, gender- and child-related violence,
which also includes an increase in child sexual abuse material (CSAM),
and threats to democracy and elections with a heightened increase in
deepfakes. These are very concerning issues that cannot go ignored.

In Building Responsible AI Algorithms by Toju Duke,³ a good number of
real-life examples of AI’s harms on various members of society were
discussed. Duke also introduced a Responsible AI framework which offers
solutions to mitigate identified risks and harms that arise as a result
of AI technologies’ outputs/results. We recommend reading Building
Responsible AI Algorithms first before delving into the principles of
this book, as it sets the foundation and cornerstone for Responsible AI
principles and guidelines and provides some background on the risk
management framework and measurement techniques outlined in this book.

To relay a few very recent examples where AI has produced harmful output
to users, let’s take a look at a couple of examples below.

The LAION-5B dataset, which stands for Large-Scale Artificial
Intelligence Open Network, was introduced in March 2022, just before
generative AI took the world by storm, by a German nonprofit
organization – LAION. LAION develops datasets, tools, and models for
machine learning (ML) research. Sourced from the Common Crawl web index,
LAION-5B is a popular open source training dataset containing over 5.8
billion images used for image generation. It was used to train Stable
Diffusion, an image generator introduced by Stability AI (a UK-based
start-up), and other AI image models. LAION has been riddled with all
sorts of risks ranging from copyright, privacy, and safety which has
been covered by several media outlets.⁴

In April 2023, a German stock photographer discovered that his photos
had been used to train the LAION-5B dataset and requested for the photos
to be removed as they’d been used without his consent, knowledge, and
any form of compensation, infringing on copyright laws (copyright is
still a gray and debatable area with respect to AI and dataset
training). On his request to the company to delete his pictures from the
dataset, he was met with a $979 fine for making an “unjustified
copyright claim” according to the organization’s lawyers. The
photographer has filed a lawsuit against LAION at a court in Germany.⁵

In September 2022, a San Francisco–based artist noticed her photos from
her private medical record taken in 2013 were on the LAION 5B dataset.
These discoveries were made through a website called “Have I been
Trained,” which allows people to search for images on publicly scraped
datasets. This is not akin to this artist, and there are several patient
medical record photos existent in the LAION dataset, which is a huge
infringement on privacy.⁶

Lastly, in December 2023, over 1000 child sexual abuse material (CSAM)
in the form of images were found in the LAION-5B dataset discovered by a
team of researchers from Stanford University. The study highlighted the
possibility that these images were used to train AI image generators to
re-create photorealistic images of child exploitation and abuse.

There are also countless examples of AI and generative AI–related harms
on individuals. For example, an AI “companion” known as Replika, over
time, started making Reddit users depressed based on their reports after
several interactions with the chatbot. Replika also encouraged a
21-year-old man in England to kill the Queen of England in 2021 (before
she passed away), and he attempted to do so and got arrested. He’s
currently serving time in jail with a nine-year sentence. The young man
named Chail was reported by his psychiatrist as lonely, depressed, and
suicidal. Clearly, Replika preyed on his vulnerability.

These issues are very grave, concerning, and have to be addressed. With
examples like these, the need for wider adoption of Responsible AI
practices is of utmost importance. As a result, there are several AI
policies and regulations that have been introduced by various
governments in 2023 to reduce the harms resulting from AI systems. Let’s
take a look at some of the existing policies and governance structures
in the next section.

AI Governance

AI Regulation and Policies

The United Nations have been working on ethical principles for AI since
2018, after publishing a report titled “Towards an Ethics of Artificial
Intelligence,” which emphasizes the ubiquitous rise of technology,
including AI, and the importance of developing AI with a human-centric
approach, based on human values and human rights. The report highlighted
the opportunity AI lends to sustainable development and mentions a few
challenges associated with the technology with the need for global
dialogue on the Ethics of AI from UNESCO.⁷ Based on this recommendation,
UNESCO published the first global standard on AI Ethics titled
“Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence,” which was
adopted by all member states in 2021. Its emphasis is on the protection
of human rights and dignity “based on the advancement of fundamental
principles such as transparency and fairness, remembering the importance
of human oversight of AI systems.” It also proposes several policy areas
equipping policymakers with the right values to translate to principles
across several areas, including data governance, environment, health,
and social well-being, among others.⁸

In 2023, the Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Technology set
up a high-level multinational advisory body to undertake analysis and
advance recommendations for the international governance of AI. The
report⁹ has several guiding principles positing AI governance and how it
should be carried. These are as follows:

1.  1.

    AI should be governed inclusively, by and for the benefit of all:
    This principle encourages the inclusion of all members of society
    and underrepresented groups, including those from the Global South,
    giving them the opportunity to access, shape, and leverage on the
    benefits of AI.

     

2.  2.

    AI must be governed in the public interest: As AI is developed by a
    small subset of technology companies, there is a need for
    accountability of companies and organizations that develop, deploy,
    and manage AI, including downstream users across the various sectors
    of the economy and society throughout the AI life cycle. Work on
    governance must consider “public policy goals related to diversity,
    equity, inclusion, sustainability, societal and individual
    well-being, competitive markets, and healthy innovation ecosystems.”

     

3.  3.

    AI governance should be built in step with data governance and the
    promotion of data commons, as data is the bedrock for AI systems.
    Data commons, hosted by Google, refers to a distributed network of
    sites that publish data and provides a unified view across multiple
    public datasets using a governance framework where people can
    manage, analyze, and share its data. Public data commons is highly
    encouraged, especially data that could help solve societal problems,
    such as climate change, public health, economic development, etc.

     

4.  4.

    AI governance must incorporate stakeholder management and
    collaboration: All AI governance efforts must pursue stakeholder
    collaboration and buy-in from different member states of the UN. It
    should also anchor on inclusivity, lowering barriers to entry from
    previously excluded communities, such as those from the Global
    South. A good and effective AI governance framework should reflect
    views, best practices, and expertise from across the world,
    including the private, academic, government sectors, and civil
    society, with the aim to understand and adopt different cultural
    ideologies that influence AI development, deployment, and use.

     

5.  5.

    AI governance should reflect the UN’s charter, International Human
    Rights Law and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): It’s crucial
    that AI governance is grounded on the UN’s foundational values which
    is the UN’s charter and its commitment to peace, security, human
    rights, and sustainable development. The consideration of AI’s
    impact on a variety of “global economic, social, health, security,
    and cultural conditions, all grounded in the need to maintain
    universal respect for, and enforcement of human rights and the rule
    of law” should be conducted by the UN and its agencies.

     

The focus and emphasis from the UN is on AI governance which is a
bedrock and key component of AI regulation and policy and Responsible AI
as a whole. The UN’s report has been positively received by the ML
communities as it’s considered the first global guideline on AI, marking
a significant step and milestone toward international AI governance and
cooperation. Its emphasis on ethics and human rights, legal frameworks,
sustainable development, social good, data protection, and privacy makes
it a very useful resource for all organizations wanting to get started
on AI governance and AI governing principles.

In this perspective, it’s important to take a look at the United States’
position on regulation.

In October 2023, the President of the United States, Joe Biden, released
an executive order directing the “safe, secure, and trustworthy
development and use of AI” split across several sections from the
purpose of the technology to its policy and principles and its
development and use by American citizens. The US government clearly
recognizes the promises and dangers of AI and understands the importance
of Responsible AI to solve top challenges while at the same time
providing the benefits it brings to economic empowerment, productivity,
innovation, and security. The results of the irresponsible use of AI
accentuate societal harms from “fraud, discrimination, bias, and
disinformation.” It also has the potential to “displace and disempower
workers, stifle competition, and pose risks to national security.”

AI governance and policy in the development and use of AI across eight
guiding principles is outlined in the executive order. These principles
encompass the views of several disciplines from the private sector,
academia, civil society, and other organizations. The principles¹⁰ are
the following:

1.  1.

    AI must be safe and secure, which means it has to meet the
    requirements of being “robust, reliable, repeatable, and follow
    standardized evaluations of AI systems.” Policies and methodologies
    for the testing, understanding, and mitigations of AI risks before
    deployment are also required. Most pressing security risks such as
    biotechnology, cybersecurity, and other national security concerns
    need to be addressed in AI systems. The opacity and complexity of AI
    technologies must not be ignored, and testing, evaluations, and
    post-deployment performance monitoring must be carried out. Guiding
    users on effective labeling so they are aware when content is
    developed by AI vs. when it’s not will also be the responsibility of
    the US administration.

     

2.  2.

    AI must promote responsible innovation, competition, and
    collaboration, granting the US leadership the opportunity to harness
    the power of AI technologies to solve society’s pressing challenges.
    This will be carried out through investments in AI literacy,
    training, development, and research while promoting a fair and
    competitive landscape and marketplace for AI and other technologies
    to ensure the continuation of innovation by start-ups and
    developers, reducing the monopoly and dominance of compute power,
    cloud storage, and semiconductors by big players in the field. The
    marketplace will leverage the benefits of AI and provide new
    opportunities for small businesses and entrepreneurs.

     

3.  3.

    AI must be developed responsibly and used responsibly, supporting
    workers and ensuring all workers have a seat at the table, while
    delivering on the job training and education, enabling a diverse
    workforce and access to opportunities that AI creates across all
    American citizens. Next steps in AI development should have
    diversity of thought and views from workers, trade unions,
    educators, employers, and civil society, making sure everyone enjoys
    the benefits and opportunities from technological innovation.

     

4.  4.

    AI policies must not cause harm through discrimination, bias, and
    online or physical harms, amplifying existing inequities, and must
    not be a disadvantage to people from underrepresented groups who are
    quite often denied equal opportunity and justice. The administration
    of the United States would work with all existing federal laws, such
    as the Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights and the AI Risk Management
    Framework (more on this in the following sections of this chapter),
    to ensure thorough “robust technical evaluations, careful oversight,
    engagement with affected communities, and rigorous regulation” while
    holding those in charge of AI development responsible and
    accountable to existing standards and laws that protect US citizens
    against unlawful discrimination and abuse.

     

5.  5.

    Consumers must be protected and the responsible use of AI promoted.
    Consumer protection laws and principles would be enforced, and
    safeguards against “fraud, unintended bias, discrimination,
    infringements on privacy, and other harms from AI” will be enacted.
    Protections such as these are quite critical in sensitive fields
    such as healthcare, financial services, education, housing, law, and
    transportation and all other related fields where the misuse or
    incorrect output of AI could harm patients or jeopardize human
    rights/safety.

     

6.  6.

    The protection of privacy and human rights where people’s sensitive
    data containing their personal identifiable information (PII),
    interests, location, habits, and plans/desires are not exploited or
    exposed through AI systems. By law, all collection, use, and
    retention of data must be secure and uphold privacy and
    confidentiality, combatting the broader legal and societal risks
    associated with AI technologies.

     

7.  7.

    The federal government will support the responsible use of AI
    through the development and investment in human resources, promoting
    public service AI professionals, including those from
    underrepresented communities across several fields from technology,
    policy, management, procurement, ethics, governance, legal, and so
    on, while ensuring the workforce receives adequate AI training to
    help harness and govern AI. The federal government’s information
    technology infrastructure will also be updated to ensure the
    adoption, deployment, and use of AI is safe and respects the human
    rights of American citizens.

     

8.  8.

    Leading Responsible AI through collaboration with international
    allies. Partnering with international partners and allies, the
    federal government of the United States would pave the way for
    global, societal, economic, and technological progress, ensuring AI
    systems have appropriate safeguards and are deployed responsibly by
    developing a risk management framework which would unlock AI’s
    potential for societal good and promote similar approaches to its
    challenges, ensuring safe and secure AI.

     

The executive order by the United States was introduced at an
interesting time, just a few days before the UK held its AI Safety
Summit in November 2023. This clearly states the United States’ position
on AI implementation, deployment, and its focus on safe and trustworthy
AI. While it’s a much necessary step in the right direction and has been
applauded and widely accepted by most, some experts and people from the
general public have remained a bit skeptical. American citizens have
opined that the government will need to “walk the walk” while bearing in
mind that these laws and regulations could be revoked by a future
administration if not recognized and accepted across all political
parties in the United States. A few have also pointed out that if the
order is not passed as laws within the congress, it has limited power
and will rather introduce regulatory burdens and slow down AI
development – highlighting the gap between new government programs and
adequate funding, a key issue that challenges new reforms in the United
States. It’s worth noting that the executive order is not mandatory but
it is a guidance on AI development for the US government, agencies, and
businesses.

In a similar vein, the European Union’s (EU) AI Act,¹¹ first introduced
in April 2021, recognized as the first global AI law, is aimed at
promoting human-centric and trustworthy AI while ensuring health,
safety, fundamental rights, democracy, and environmental protection are
upheld with a high support for innovation and regulation of the internal
market within the EU. It proposes very similar principles as those of
the UN and the United States, with a clear distinction on high-risk AI
systems, risk management, and foundation or frontier models. An AI
system is considered at high risk if it:

1.  1)

    Poses significant risks to the health, safety, and fundamental
    rights of humans

     

2.  2)

    Is an application that would need to undergo a third-party
    conformity assessment, in other words, placed in the market as an
    application or product

     

3.  3)

    Performs profiling of people, for example, through CCTV/camera
    surveillance. 

     

An AI system is considered “non-high risk” if on the flip side it
doesn’t pose any risk or harm to the health, safety, and fundamental
rights of people and does not influence the outcome of decision-making.
This is the case if one of the following requirements is met:

1.  (a)

    The AI system is intended to perform a narrow procedural task.

     

2.  (b)

    The AI system is intended to improve the result of a previously
    completed human activity.

     

3.  (c)

    The AI system is intended to detect decision-making patterns or
    deviations from prior decision-making patterns and is not meant to
    replace or influence the previously completed human assessment,
    without proper human review.

     

4.  (d)

    The AI system is intended to perform a preparatory task to an
    assessment.

     

Similar to the US administration’s executive order on AI, the EU AI Act
has been received with some skepticism and nervousness on its potential
to stifle innovation and further impact the European economy negatively,
where the concentration of AI power and companies is in the United
States vs. Europe. The act went into a “deadlock” toward the end of 2023
and was at risk of being deprecated due to the mentioned reasons. It
eventually got passed and is now in motion with the Act gradually coming
into force since August 1, 2024, for a transition period of two
years. Further criticism has been made from experts within the ethical
AI fields. Some have noticed a reduced emphasis on the responsibilities
AI companies have towards democratic interference with general-purpose
AI systems, posing a risk to democracy. There’s also dissatisfaction on
accountability where emphasis is being made on the public sector to
safeguard AI practices and less on the private sector. For example, the
act proposes the use of a fundamental rights impact assessment which
places more responsibility on the public sector and less on the private
sector. While the act has been applauded as the right step to take,
there’s still skepticism on its efficacy and focus.

The UK also introduced an AI bill in November 2023,¹² shortly after its
UK AI Safety Summit, with the aim to achieve the following (summarized):

1.  (a)

    Assess and monitor AI risks across the UK economy.

     

2.  (b)

    Work with the AI principles addressing
    1.  (i)

        Safety, security, and robustness

         

    2.  (ii)

        Transparency and explainability

         

    3.  (iii)

        Fairness

         

    4.  (iv)

        Accountability and governance

         

    5.  (v)

        Contestability and redress

         

     

The bill stipulates that any business which develops, deploys, or uses
AI should be transparent about the technology, conduct accurate and
thorough tests with transparency, and comply with all applicable laws on
data protection, privacy, and intellectual property. All AI models and
applications should comply with legislation on equality; be inclusive by
design; not discriminate unlawfully against individuals; meet the needs
of people from lower socioeconomic groups, including elderly and
disabled people; and generate data that is accessible, interoperable,
and reusable.

We also have AI regulations across several other countries, such as
China, Japan, Canada, Australia, Korea and Singapore, with a focus on
synthetic data regulation, privacy laws, and AI safety.

Observably, it’s impressive and heartening to see an introduction and
widespread increase of AI regulation globally with common themes across
privacy, fairness, transparency, robustness, and safety. These are the
associated risk categories in AI technologies, which, when addressed,
lead to safe, human-centric, and trustworthy AI. The importance of
implementing safe, technical measures and guardrails to ensure AI
systems are developed, deployed, and used responsibly cannot be
overstated – not only is it critical to the human race and the users of
these systems, failure to do so can lead to legal implications,
including hefty fines from several policy-makers and governments. Most
of these regulations have been received differently and at the same time
with a common theme. We have one camp of individuals who are genuinely
gratified that there is some form of regulation and policy for AI across
various countries, with a focus on safe and Responsible AI, while the
other camp is genuinely concerned about actual implementation, guidance,
and standards for AI, with concerns on how governments will coordinate
and assist with the implementation of these policies. The skeptical camp
also raises very important questions on the speed of creating new
laws/regulation vs. the pace at which AI is being developed, especially
in recent times. Can regulation catch up? Would it be comprehensive
enough to address systemic risks that are still yet to be identified in
the rapidly evolving generative AI? How about AI standards and guidance
on building safe and Responsible AI? How will businesses and
organizations be supported in acquiring these requirements? Is the
workforce even prepared for these changes, especially when most are
scared of losing their jobs to AI? Are there adequate AI literacy
programs to educate members of the workforce and the general public on
AI and its impact on their lives? These are the general concerns of most
people that are aware of the recent AI developments, and while these
regulations and policies are quite succinct and very much needed,
there’s still much more that needs to be done.

It’s quite clear that AI is such an important and life-changing
technology, which has to be developed and deployed safely and
responsibly to benefit humankind. To achieve this, adopting a
Responsible AI framework is crucial. Introducing the SAFE-HAI (Secure,
Accurate, Fair, and Explainable Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence)
framework to support AI practitioners and anyone working on AI
development on the implementation, measurement, and deployment of ML
models/applications in a safe, trustworthy, transparent, and responsible
manner.

The SAFE-HAI Framework

We propose an integrated framework to measure the risk of compliance of
AI systems with existing global regulations, directives, and standards.
The model expands what was proposed in Giudici and Raffinetti (2023) for
the financial sector¹³ and builds on the Responsible AI principles
proposed by Duke.

[]

Diagram illustrating key aspects of AI governance, centered around a
cube icon. Eight categories are connected: AI Principles, Data,
Fairness, Safety, Explainability, Human-in-the-Loop, Privacy &
Robustness, and AI Ethics. Each category includes specific
considerations, such as data ethics, algorithmic bias, risk assessments,
transparency, human feedback, bias mitigation, and energy consumption.

To continue with this line of work,SAFE-HAI consists of a set of
interrelated statistical measures which are summarized with the acronym
SAFE, derived from four core compliance principles. These are outlined
below:

- Security: Refers to the robustness of the AI output to data
  perturbations, generated intentionally (e.g., cyber attacks) or
  unintentionally (in the case of extreme events).

- Accuracy: Refers to the consistency of the AI output in accordance
  with the ground truth (whether objective or subjective). Ground truth
  is information existent in training data or in the real world which is
  used as a benchmark to test the AI output

- Fairness: Refers to the absence of bias and discrimination in the AI
  output toward population groups.

- Explainability: Refers to the capability of the AI output to be
  understood for human oversight and understanding, particularly in its
  driving causes.

While the former two requirements are more technical and “internal” to
the AI process, the latter two are more ethical and “external” to the AI
process, involving the stakeholders of the AI system.

The above SAFE compliance risk principles are necessary, but
insufficient for the requirements of Responsible AI. Other important
principles that an AI system must comply with are qualitative rather
than quantitative and, therefore, more difficult to embed in a risk
management process, for example, privacy protection, environmental
sustainability, and human-in-the-loop (HITL).

To ensure we have a comprehensive framework to conduct the necessary
tests, measurements, and implementation of risk mitigation for AI
systems – which includes AI models and applications – we have expanded
the SAFE framework to include more qualitative Responsible AI
principles.

We’ve developed a framework titled “SAFE-HAI” which stands for Secure,
Accurate, Fair, and Explainable Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
While the SAFE section of the framework will consist of a set of
integrated risk metrics, the “H” section will consist of a set of more
qualitative compliance indicators.

The initial four proposed SAFE risk metrics provide an opportunity for
the development of an integrated measure of trustworthiness (compliance
risk) for any AI application that is developed to monitor, guide, and
assist with regulating the applications of AI models. These risk metrics
mirror risk measurement from the financial sector which have been used
over the past 20 years to address financial risk management in an
attempt to monitor and regulate the financial industry, following the
Basel regulations (a set of standards on Banking Supervision developed
by the Basel Committee).¹⁴

The proposed metrics are “agnostic” statistical tools that are able to
assess and evaluate the output of a machine learning (ML) model,
independent of the underlying data structure and statistical learning
models. They could consequently be used by any stakeholder in a
relatively simple way, without the need to understand the training data
or the ML models and software codes employed by the AI system under
investigation. This enables human oversight (the monitoring and
intervention by humans), giving rise to a fully transparent SAFE and
Human-Centered AI compliance system.

The SAFE metrics have two main applications:

1.  1.

    The metrics are applicable to policy-makers, auditors, and
    supervisors to assess the compliance of AI applications to
    regulations and code of conducts, such as the US NIST and the
    European AI Act, which require AI systems to be trustworthy and
    safe.

     

2.  2.

    They are also applicable to the developers and users of AI
    applications within a risk management framework providing the
    ability to measure areas of noncompliance with regulatory standards
    in the AI models and applications on a continuous basis, thereby
    prioritizing mitigation measures addressed at reducing compliance
    risks.

     

From a methodological viewpoint, the statistical metrics that are
proposed in the SAFE-HAI framework consist of a set of four integrated
statistical measures of trustworthiness, all based on the extension of
the Lorenz curve.¹⁵

The Lorenz curve was introduced by the American economist Max Lorenz in
1905 to measure the contribution to wealth and income of a nation from
each individual, or each group of individuals, to assess economic
inequalities in a nation’s population and to measure the distance of the
actual income distribution from an “ideal” one. The main mathematical
tool behind the Lorenz curve is the cumulative distribution function
which, by ordering individuals from the poorest to the richest and
calculating their cumulative percentages, can determine where the
accumulation of wealth lies across the social classes of society. For
example, “the richest 1% of the people own 50% of the world’s total
income.”¹⁶ The Lorenz curve was further summarized by the Italian
statistician Corrado Gini with the Gini index,¹⁷ well known for its
applications in the measurement of economic inequalities across the
world.

We propose to extend the methodology behind the Lorenz curve and the
Gini index, which has worked quite well for more than 100 years in the
measurement of concentration and inequality in income and wealth, to the
measurement of concentration and inequality of the AI output.

The Lorenz curve is an appropriate tool to measure the contribution of
each individual data point in the training data to the output of an ML
model, in order to assess the inequalities of single data points or
groups of points, and to measure the distance of the output from the
ground truth. The same concept can be adopted to measure the
contribution to the output of each explanatory variable. In other words,
in applying the Lorenz curve, we could measure inequalities in single
data points, such as “security,” or of groups of data points, such as
“fairness,” or “accuracy,” which measures the distance from the AI
model’s/application’s output to the ground truth.

As for income and wealth, a specific Lorenz curve and Gini index value
does not necessarily imply a positive or a negative statement on the AI
output. This is dependent on the comparison between the obtained values
and some reference benchmarks and threshold which can be set by
regulators and policy makers or by AI developers themselves, or
calculated statistically.

[]

Diagram illustrating seven key aspects of a system, centered around a
network icon. The aspects are: 1. Accuracy, 2. Security, 3.
Explainability, 4. Fairness, 5. Privacy, 6. Environmental
Sustainability, and 7. Human-in-the-Loop. Each aspect is connected to
the central icon, highlighting their importance in the system's design
and functionality.

Following this rationale, we’ll adopt the Lorenz curve and Gini
coefficient methodologies across the several Responsible AI principles
outlined in the SAFE-HAI framework across the chapters of the book:

1.  1.

    Accuracy will be measured by comparing the Lorenz curve of the true
    response with a similar curve obtained using the ranks of the
    predictions provided by the model, leading to the Rank Graduation
    Accuracy (RGA) measure.

     

2.  2.

    Security will be measured by comparing the Lorenz curve of the
    predictions with a similar curve obtained using the ranks of the
    predictions obtained with the perturbed data, leading to the Rank
    Graduation Robustness (RGR) measure.

     

3.  3.

    Explainability of an input variable will be measured by comparing
    the Lorenz curve of the predictions with a similar curve obtained
    using all input variables except the one under examination, leading
    to the Rank Graduation Explainability (RGE) measure.

     

4.  4.

    Fairness of a (protected) input variable will be measured in a
    similar way as explainability, by comparing the Lorenz curve of the
    predictions for each population group contained in the protected
    variable, leading to a Rank Graduation Fairness (RGF) measure.

     

5.  5.

    Privacy will measure how the Lorenz curve of the predictions varies
    when it “forgets” (eliminates) one or more records, leading to a
    Rank Graduation Privacy (RGP) measure.

     

6.  6.

    Environmental sustainability will measure the explainability of
    specific environmental (but also social and governance) factors,
    leading to a Rank Graduation Sustainability (RGS) measure.

     

7.  7.

    Human-in-the-loop will measure the impact of human actions and
    interventions on the AI output, leading to a Rank Graduation Human
    Oversight (RGH) measure.

     

We believe that the application of the Lorenz curve methodology to the
AI output, which will be described in depth in the following chapters
(along with its Python code to guide implementation, illustrated in the
case study chapter), can lead to a set of SAFE-HAI metrics which fits
well within the requirements of the recently proposed recommendations
and regulations, such as the US AI Risk Management Framework and the EU
AI Act mentioned earlier in this chapter. The Lorenz curve methodology
can also be employed to derive further compliance metrics and evaluate
the qualitative aspects of the AI output, such as privacy preservation,
environmental sustainability, and the impact of HITL.

In summary, the extension of the Lorenz curve to the AI output can
provide a user-friendly tool designed to assess AI systems across
different dimensions in an agnostic and transparent way. Following these
risk management measurements, we’ll also provide details on mitigation
measures to address identified harmful outputs using the NIST risk
management framework requirements.

While we’ve looked at a brief history of Responsible AI, its importance
with a couple of real-life examples emphasizing the need for this body
of work, AI governance, and different AI policies across the world and
introduced the SAFE-HAI framework, it’s essential we delve more into
this important topic and see how we can work with AI using Responsible
AI principles. In the next chapter, we’ll look at “accuracy” as one of
SAFE-HAI’s principles.

Part IITechnical Risks (Internal to an Organization)

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_2

2. Accuracy

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

In the previous chapter, we looked at AI governance, a few AI
regulations and policies such as the EU AI Act, Joe Biden’s US executive
order, and a couple of reports from the UN and UNESCO. We also
introduced the SAFE-HAI framework which is critical to achieving
responsibly built AI algorithms that adheres to the newly introduced AI
policies. In this chapter, we’ll review “accuracy,” a key part of the
SAFE-HAI framework and a crucial Responsible AI principle. We’ll briefly
discuss its definition, key questions to consider regarding accuracy and
performance, ways to measure accuracy, a scoring rubric for accuracy, a
few benchmarks from the research community, and ways to resolve poor
accuracy of ML models and applications.

Accuracy is a key metric and principle in AI development, in which the
performance of a model is tested and measured before its release. In
most cases, when incorrect and inaccurate outputs of an AI application
have been observed, including those from large language models (LLMs)
and generative AI, the performance of these models/applications would
have undergone several performance tests. Running performance tests
through accuracy metrics and measurements is part of AI development.
It’s always recommended to measure the accuracy of any given AI
model/application to ensure the outputs are fair and accurate. In this
chapter, we’ll look at a few examples for measuring accuracy in ML
applications, and its importance in lieu of existing regulations,
including how to fix issues with accuracy once identified.

In order to understand the importance of accuracy, let’s look at a
standard definition from the ISO/IEC (a joint technical committee which
stands for the International Organization for Standardization and
International Electrotechnical Commission). According to ISO/IEC TS
5723:2022, accuracy is defined as “closeness of results of observations,
computations, or estimates to the true values or the values accepted as
being true.” To measure accuracy, “computational-centric” measures such
as false positives and negatives should be considered, and measurements
should be carried out with realistic tests, stimulating real-life
scenarios/expected use, and appropriate documentation should be
included.

Accuracy or model accuracy is an important metric in ML as it evaluates
classification tasks, determining if the classifiers are correct. It
evaluates the percentage of correct classifications from a trained model
by looking at the number of correct predictions divided by the total
number of predictions across all classes, also known as the ACC. ACC
values can range from [0,1] to [0,100] depending on the selected scale.
If you have an accuracy of 0, it means the classifier always predicts
the wrong label, while an accuracy of 1 or 100 means the opposite; ACC
is directly related to the confusion matrix – a performance measurement
for ML classification.

When looking at ML performance evaluation, we evaluate this in terms of
true positives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives.
The accuracy of a model’s output is the measure of the number of correct
predictions over all predictions, where correct predictions refer to
true positives (TP) and true negatives (TN).

While measuring model accuracy is super important, it’s crucial to note
that good accuracy in ML is subjective depending on the use case, and
achieving 100% accuracy typically means there is an error. Examples of
these errors are overfitting, for example, where the model is unable to
generalize to unseen data and learns the training set very closely; in
other words, its responses and results “fit” too closely to the training
dataset. Data leakage could also be another sign of 100% accuracy where
the model contains information about the label that should not be
present in its prediction. Aiming to achieve accuracy greater than 70%
is usually recommended for good model performance.

When evaluating accuracy, it’s important to think about it through a
risk management/assessment viewpoint, which we cover in the next
section.

Risk Management Framework

While evaluating the accuracy of a model, it is important to anchor this
principle on a risk management framework. We’ll hone in on NIST’s risk
management framework (RMF) and the first AI regulation, the EU AI Act,
throughout this book. Both risk management frameworks have requirements
for accuracy – which falls under the category of “trustworthiness.”

Let’s start off with the EU AI Act, which we’ll also refer to as the AI
Act (AIA). The AIA’s requirements for high-risk systems, described in
Chapter 1, stipulate that all high-risk AI systems need to have an
appropriate level of accuracy in their design and development, with a
consistent performance throughout the model(s) life cycle. The
development of benchmarks and measurement methodologies are required in
order to measure the appropriate levels of accuracy. As part of the AIA,
the levels of accuracy and relevant accuracy metrics need to be declared
in the manual/instructions of use.

According to the NIST risk management framework, accuracy is one of the
trustworthy AI characteristics that AI systems are required to have,
where AI should be valid and reliable. Validation here refers to the
“confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence, that the
requirements for a specific intended use or application have been
fulfilled.” A valid AI application must be accurate, whereas a reliable
AI application must be robust. In this chapter, we will focus on
accuracy, and in the next chapter, we’ll discuss robustness.

There are a few questions the NIST recommends to consider when measuring
the accuracy of an ML model:

1.  1.

    How will you assess model accuracy?

     

2.  2.

    What benchmarks will you use?

     

3.  3.

    How will you communicate this as needed?

     

Addressing these questions is fundamental to the success of good
accuracy and performance of your ML model(s). Breaking it down further,
we can categorize accuracy as an organizational risk as opposed to a
human risk, where it affects the performance of the model, subsequently
affecting the organization that owns, builds, and develops the model
before the end user.

Let’s review these questions more closely.

How Will You Assess Model Accuracy?

The course of this chapter will address this question. We will consider
several cases, which correspond to different predicted target variables.
We will first consider the case of quantitative responses (accuracy of
predictions), then the case of binary or ordinal responses (accuracy of
classifications), and, then, provide a unified measure: the Rank
Graduation Accuracy, independent of the nature of the response variable.
Next, we will consider how the accuracy measurement changes when more
complex responses are predicted, such as multidimensional responses or
textual responses.

Accuracy of Predictions

The measurement of predictive accuracy draws on the comparison between
the predicted and the observed evidence. Typically, simpler models
(e.g., regression models) are less accurate than more complex models
(e.g., neural network models). To measure accuracy, we should
distinguish the case of numerical response variables (prediction
problems) from that of categorical response variables (classification
problems). We should also distinguish the case of machine learning
models based on structured data from the case of large language models
based on unstructured data.

In this chapter, we’ll describe two main benchmark metrics from a
statistical point of view: the Rank Graduation Accuracy (RGA)
metrics,^(18, 19) which measures the “distance” between the predicted
output and the true (or expected) output, for models based on structured
data, and the TrustGPT benchmark,²⁰ which measures a similar distance,
for large language models based on unstructured data.

When the target response variable is numerical, accuracy measures rely
on the distance between the predictions and the ground truth values; the
most common are based on the mean squared error (MSE).

Mathematically, the mean squared error is defined as follows:

mean(ypredicted -ytrue)^2,

The arithmetic mean of the squared differences between each predicted
value and the corresponding true (or expected) value.

Table 2-1 exemplifies how the mean squared error is calculated for a
financial investment problem in which a machine learning model was asked
to predict the Return on Average of five listed companies for the year
2023. The predictive accuracy of the model can be assessed by comparing
the predictions (AI output) with the values of Return on Equity (ROE)
for the same companies, which were the actual results gained actually
realized in 2023 (ground truth).

Table 2-1

An example of a calculation for mean squared error from a finance
perspective

  Actual ROE (%)   Predicted ROE (%)   Error    Squared Error
  ---------------- ------------------- -------- ---------------
  3.912            3.679               –0.233   0.054289
  2.171            –0.327              –2.498   6.240004
  –16.649          –0.293              16.356   267.518736
  10.705           10.325              –0.38    0.1444
  1.302            2.047               0.745    0.555025
  MEAN             MEAN                MEAN     MEAN (MSE)
  0.2882           3.0862              2.798    54.9024908

In Table 2-1, we have also calculated the errors of the predictions, and
their mean, that is, the mean of the differences between the predicted
and the observed value. The mean error can be, however, misleading, as
negative errors may compensate for positive errors, and vice versa. For
this reason, we calculate the mean of the squared errors, leading to the
mean squared error which, in the example, turns out to be equal to about
54.90.

From an interpretational viewpoint, the mean squared error may not be
appropriate, as it squares the original scale of the ROE. For this
reason, it is customary to consider RMSE (root mean squared error),
which is the square root of the mean square error, which brings back the
accuracy metrics to the scale of the considered values (percentages in
the example, rather than squared percentages).

For the considered example, RMSE is equal to about 7.41 – a very large
value compared to the mean of the actual ROE. This indicates that, for
this simple example, the AI output is not very accurate.

From a more mathematical viewpoint, the RMSE corresponds to the
Euclidean distance of the vector of predicted values from the ground
truth. Euclidean distance refers to the classic standard geometric
distance, such as the distance between two cities.

From the Responsible AI viewpoint, once the RMSE of a machine learning
model is calculated, we need to understand whether the specific
measurement indicates that the AI application is accurate or not. In
other words, a decision must be taken, based on the value of the metric.

To proceed with this aim, the RMSE presents a problem which needs to be
solved: How do we compare two different AI applications, in which the
unit of measurement is different? It seems that we can only interpret
the RMSE in a relative and not in an absolute sense. That is, we can use
it for a specific response to be predicted and compare the values of the
RMSE, obtained with different models and/or across different time and
space units. This is what many scholars do, and it is fine in a
continuous monitoring (quality control) perspective.

To solve the problem, a decision rule for the RMSE can be provided by
resorting to the statistical theory of hypothesis testing, as proposed
by Diebold and Mariano.²¹ Diebold and Mariano propose to test, for a
given response variable, whether the predictions from two competing
models are equal (H0), y(M1)=y(M2), against the alternative hypotheses
that they are different. The test can be conducted comparing the RMSE of
the two models and will lead to a small p-value when the two RMSE are
statistically different. The result will depend not only on the actual
difference between the RMSE (the higher, the lower the p-value) but also
on the sample size considered (the higher, the smaller the p-value) and
on the complexity of the models being compared (the higher, the larger
the p-value). We recall that the p-value is the probability of obtaining
a value of a statistic (the RMSE) larger than the observed one, so a
small p-value (e.g., lower than 5%) indicates that the difference
between the RMSE is so large that it can be exceeded with a small
probability. On the other hand, a large p-value (e.g., higher than 5%)
indicates that the difference between the RMSE is so small that it can
be exceeded with a large probability.

Thus, the RMSE, with the associated p-value, can provide a decision rule
to check the accuracy of an AI application: the lower the RMSE, the
better the accuracy. If we require that the accuracy is higher than a
given bound (corresponding to a risk appetite threshold or to the
accuracy of an existing benchmark model), we can compare the obtained
accuracy with the bound by means of Diebold and Mariano’s test: if the
p-value is lower than a set threshold (such as 5%), the model
significantly improves the accuracy.

The p-value of the statistical test implicitly provides a normalization
of the RMSE, allowing to compare different situations with a common
metric. This is, however, under the specific assumptions of the test,
for example, that the response to be predicted by the compared models is
the same.

This limitation does not allow us to compare the performance of a model
for two different responses, such as the performance in predicting the
ROE vs. the performance in predicting the ROI, for example. This may be
an interesting problem too, which can be solved by generalizing the RMSE
into a different, more universal measure, as the RGA that will be
proposed later in this chapter.

Before moving to the RGA, let’s focus on the case in which the variable
to be predicted is categorical.

Accuracy of Classifications

When the target response is categorical, we cannot use the Euclidean
distance as previously done to evaluate accuracy. We can however count
the number of times in which the output classifies an observation with
the label it has in reality (correct classifications) and the number of
times in which the output classifies an observation with the wrong
label, different from the real one (wrong classifications). In the
binary case, the wrong classifications can be false positive (FP,
predicting an observation to be a positive event, when it is not) and
false negative (FN, predicting an observation to be a negative event,
when it is not). An AI model would then be accurate when the percentage
of FP and FN is low.

To exemplify the calculation of FP and FN, consider Table 2-2, which
considers a classification problem in which, for a set of companies, we
need to predict whether they will default (TRUE=1) or not (FALSE=0),
based on their available balance sheet ratios. The response variable (Y)
is a binary variable, taking 0 and 1 as possible values. Table 2-2
reports the credit scores (estimated probabilities of default) for five
companies, obtained from a machine learning model aimed at predicting Y,
using the available balance sheet data. It also shows how the false
positives and the false negatives are calculated. The predictive
accuracy of the model can be assessed by comparing the credit scores (AI
output) with the default status of the same companies at the end of the
year (ground truth).

Table 2-2

An example of FPs and FNs for a balance sheet

  Actual Label   Predicted Score   Predicted Label   Error
  -------------- ----------------- ----------------- -------
  0              0.52              1                 FP
  1              0.85              1                 TP
  1              0.71              1                 TP
  0              0.10              0                 TN
  1              0.46              0                 FN

The first column of Table 2-2 contains the response to be predicted, the
actual label: either 0 (non-default) or 1 (default). The second column
contains the credit score: the predicted probability that the
corresponding company will default or not. To classify such companies as
default or not, a machine learning model needs to compare the predicted
score with a threshold. If the score is higher, we predict with 1; if it
is lower, we predict with 0. In Table 2-2, we have adopted a majority
rule, that is, a threshold equal to 0.5. This leads to the predictions
in column 3. Comparing column 3 with column 2, we obtain two errors. In
the first row, a company is predicted to default, but it is not in
reality: a false positive. In the fifth row, a company is predicted not
to default, but it is actually defaulted: a false negative. The other
rows are correct: either true positive or true negatives.

If we change the threshold and set it, for example, to the observed
percentage of defaults (0.6), we will obtain the results in Table 2-3.

Table 2-3

An example of the predicted score and labels in relation to their
results

  Actual Label   Predicted Score   Predicted Label   Error
  -------------- ----------------- ----------------- -------
  0              0.52              0                 TN
  1              0.85              1                 TP
  1              0.71              1                 TP
  0              0.10              0                 TN
  1              0.46              0                 FN

From Table 2-3, note that, by changing the threshold, we obtain no false
positives but one false negative.

A problem with the FP and FN statistics, and with related measures in
general, such as the total misclassification error (FP+FN), is that they
depend not only on the AI model, which produces a score, but also on the
decision threshold that is employed to turn the score into a predictive
class. To avoid this dependence, researchers have developed the concept
of the Receiving Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC joins a
set of points whose coordinates are the true positive rate (TPR) and the
false positive rate (FPR), obtained in correspondence of different
thresholds. To exemplify, from Table 2-2, we would get a true positive
rate equal to 2/3: out of three companies predicted as positive
(default) where two are actually positive. From the same Table 2-2, we
would get a false positive rate equal to 1/3: out of three companies
predicted as positive, where one is negative. From Table 2-3 instead we
obtain 1 and 0. We can repeat the procedure changing the threshold, each
time we would obtain a point in the [0,1] X [0,1] with coordinates (TPR,
FPR). For example, if we repeat the calculation for 100 thresholds,
obtaining repeating increments of 1%, starting from 0%, we would get a
figure like Figure 2-1.

In Figure 2-1, two models (Model 1 and Model 2) are compared in terms of
their ROC curve, previously described. An ideal model would have a curve
that coincides with the Y-axis: TP always equal to 1 and FP always equal
to 0. The bisector line corresponds with a random model: FP is always
equal to FN. In general, the higher the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC or
AUROC), the better the AI model.

[]

A Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve comparing two models.
The x-axis represents the false positive rate, and the y-axis represents
the true positive rate. Model 1 is shown in red with an Area Under the
ROC Curve (AUROC) of 0.621, and Model 2 is in blue with an AUROC of
0.799. Model 2 demonstrates better performance with a higher true
positive rate across various false positive rates.

Thus, the AUC provides a metric to assess the accuracy of binary
classifications: between 0 and 1 and the higher, the better. This
metric, different from the RMSE, is normalized and, therefore, valid to
compare different models and models applied to various response
variables.

A decision rule for the AUROC can be provided, similar to what is seen
for the RMSE, to evaluate whether a given value indicates a
statistically significant accuracy. This is possible, thanks to the test
proposed by DeLong et al.²² The authors obtain a statistical test to
compare the AUROC of two alternative models to test for a given binary
response variable, whether the predictions from two competing models are
equal (H0), y(M1)=y(M2), against the alternative hypotheses that they
are different. The test can be conducted comparing the AUROC of the two
models and will lead to a small p-value when the two AUROC are
statistically different. The result will depend not only on the actual
difference between the AUROC (the higher, the lower the p-value) but
also on the sample size considered (the higher, the smaller the p-value)
and on the complexity of the models being compared (the higher, the
larger the p-value). A small p-value (e.g., lower than 5%) indicates
that the difference between the AUROC is so large that it can be
exceeded with a small probability. On the other hand, a large p-value
(e.g., higher than 5%) indicates that the difference between the AUROC
is so small that it can be exceeded with a large probability.

Thus, the AUROC, with the associated p-value, can provide a decision
rule to check the accuracy of an AI application: the higher the AUROC,
the better the accuracy. If we require that the accuracy is higher than
a given bound (corresponding to a risk appetite threshold or to the
accuracy of an existing benchmark model), we can compare the obtained
accuracy with the bound by means of DeLong’s test: if the p-value is
lower than a set threshold (such as 5%), the model significantly
improves the accuracy.

In this case, the p-value of the statistical test provides a further
normalization of the AUROC that can be used to assess the accuracy of
the predictions of a machine learning model for a response variable
which is either numeric or binary.

When the response variable is categorical, but with multiple responses
(ordinal), the above derivation can still be used in a recursive way:
each time comparing one response class against all others. For example,
if we have 10 class labels, we can first compare class 0 against 1–9,
then class 1 against 2–8, and so on. To avoid these cumbersome
calculations, we need to resort to a different measure.

RGA: A Unified Measure of Accuracy

In this section, we present a general measure of accuracy that can be
employed to treat the binary, ordinal, and continuous response case in a
unified manner. This is the Rank Graduation Accuracy measure, proposed
by Giudici and Raffinetti.

The authors propose a framework that leads to a very general and
normalized accuracy measure, valid for all ordered variable scales:
continuous, ordinal, and binary.

The framework is based on the notion of concentration curve, introduced
by the American economist Max Lorenz in 1905 to study the inequality in
the distribution of incomes in a population. To illustrate this concept,
consider a stylized population composed of five individuals with their
annual incomes (in thousand dollars, ordered from the lowest to the
highest) described in Table 2-4.

Table 2-4

An example of the concentration curve (Qi) and the frequency curve (Fi)
framework looking at various incomes in a population

  Individuals   Income   Fi: Cumulative % of Individuals   Qi: Cumulative % of Income (Lorenz Curve)   Fi-Qi
  ------------- -------- --------------------------------- ------------------------------------------- -------
  1             50       0.20                              0.10                                        0.1
  2             80       0.40                              0.26                                        0.14
  3             100      0.60                              0.46                                        0.14
  4             120      0.80                              0.7                                         0.1
  5             150      1                                 1                                           0

Table 2-4 can be employed to understand how unequal the distribution of
incomes is by comparing the actual distribution (described by the
percentage in the fourth column) with the theoretical distribution
corresponding to the case of equal incomes (described by the percentages
in the third column).

We can calculate the distance between the cumulative distributions Qi
(the concentration curve, or Lorenz curve) and Fi (the frequency curve),
summing the first four differences (Fi-Qi) in column 5. The calculation
gives a value of 0.48. The larger the inequality, the larger the sum of
the differences. We can normalize the sum dividing it by the maximum
value it can assume: the case in which all Qi are zero and the fifth
individual has all the income, corresponding to maximum concentration.
This maxima can be calculated summing the first four Fi values in column
3, and it is equal to 2.0. If we divide 0.48 by 2.0, we obtain the
concentration ratio, or Gini index: 0.24. The Gini index was introduced
by the Italian statistician Corrado Gini in 1921, and it has always been
employed as a benchmark metric to measure inequality in the distribution
of income, wealth, or other transferable characters. As in our example,
the Gini index is a number between 0 and 1, and the higher it is, the
higher the inequality.

Mathematically, the Gini index can be calculated as follows:

2*sum(Fi-Qi)/sum(Fi).

The Gini index coincides with the area between the Qi Lorenz curve and
its dual, Qi’, obtained cumulating the incomes in reverse order (the
dual Lorenz curve, Qi’): this area is known as the Lorenz Zonoid. It can
also be shown that the Gini index is equivalent to the mean of the
differences between all pairs of individuals, divided by the mean
income: this indicates that the Gini index measures the statistical
dispersion in terms of the mutual variability among the observations,
rather than as a variability from the mean (as it occurs for the mean
squared error).

The reader may have noted the similarities between the construction of
the Gini index and that of the AUROC. It can indeed be shown that, when
income, which is a quantitative variable, is replaced with a binary
variable, Gini = 2 * AUROC – 1.

This relationship suggests further exploitation of the connection
between predictive accuracy and the Gini concentration. This is what
Giudici and Raffinetti discussed, providing a methodology to measure the
concentration of the response value in a machine learning problem
similar to the income in the study of inequality.

Given the actual values to be predicted, Y (they could be continuous
values: ROE of companies; ordinal values: rating of companies; binary
variables: default of companies), their Lorenz and dual Lorenz curves
can be built, respectively, using the pairs (Fi,Qi) and (Fi, Q’i) as
coordinates, as we have already seen. We can also build a third curve
that will be named concordance curve, with coordinates (Fi, Ci). The
coordinates Ci are obtained cumulating the Y values ordered not
according to their ranks (as in the Lorenz curve) but according to the
ranks of the corresponding predictions. To better understand the notion,
Figure 2-2 represents, in the same graph, the Lorenz curve, the dual
Lorenz curve, and the concentration curve for a given set of machine
learning outputs Y.

[]

A graph displaying three curves labeled \(L'_Y\), \(C\), and \(L_Y\)
plotted against the axes \(f(p)\) and \(p\). The green curve \(L'_Y\) is
above the red curve \(C\), which is above the blue curve \(L_Y\). The
black diagonal line represents a baseline for comparison. The x-axis
ranges from 0.0 to 1.0, and the y-axis ranges from 0.0 to 1.0,
indicating a probability distribution.

From Figure 2-2, note that the Lorenz curve, Ly, and its dual, L’y, are
symmetric around the 45-degree line and that the concordance curve C
lies between them. When the ranks of the predictions are the same as
those of the response to be predicted, we have a perfect concordance:
the concordance curve is equal to the Lorenz curve. When the ranks of
the predictions are the same as the inverse ranks of the response, we
have a perfect discordance: the concordance curve is equal to the dual
Lorenz curve. In general, for any given point, the distance between the
concordance curve and the Lorenz curve reveals how the ranks of the
predicted value differ from that of the best case, which is equal to the
ranks of the observed value. And, for any given point, the distance
between the concordance curve and the dual Lorenz curve reveals how the
ranks of the predicted value differ from that of the worst case, which
is equal to the rank of the inversely ordered value.

This suggests that a summary accuracy metrics for a model can be
obtained by considering the area between the dual Lorenz curve and the
concordance curve and dividing it by its maximum possible value: the
area between the dual Lorenz curve and the Lorenz curve. This is the
Rank Graduation Accuracy (RGA) measure.

Mathematically, the Rank Graduation Accuracy measure (RGA) is defined by

sum(Q’i-Ci)/sum(Q’i-Qi).

The RGA measure has some important properties, and in particular

1.  1)

    It is normalized: RGA=0 in the worst case of a perfectly discordant
    model; RGA=1 for the best case of a perfectly concordant model;
    otherwise, 0<RGA<1, with RGA=0.5$ in the case of random predictions.

     

2.  2)

    In the binary case, RGA=AUROC. However, RGA can be calculated, in
    the same way, also for categorical ordinal and continuous variables,
    providing a very general measure of accuracy.

     

3.  3)

    To assess whether the RGA metric passes a set threshold, indicating
    a minimum level of accuracy, a statistical test for RGA is
    available. When the response Y is binary, the test coincides with
    DeLong’s test. In the general case, a statistical test based on
    U-statistics can be derived. In all cases, the higher the RGA, the
    higher the predictive accuracy, and the smaller the p-value, the
    more significant is the found RGA with respect to a given lower
    bound.

     

We now exemplify the calculation of the concordance curve and of the RGA
with a numerical example. Suppose we have five predictions for a
response variable as discussed in Table 2-3, described by the columns
“predicted response”, “predicted ranks”, and “QPi: cumulative % of
predictive response”, using the predicted ranks, as described in Table
2-4. We also add the calculation of the differences of Q’i-Qi (Dual –
Lorenz) and Q’i-QPi (Dual – Concordance).

Table 2-5

An example of the calculated differences of Q’i-Qi (Dual – Lorenz) and
Q’i-QPi (Dual – Concordance)

  Individual   Observed Response   Qi: Lorenz Curve   Q’i: Dual Lorenz Curve   Predicted Response   Predicted Ranks   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------ ------------------- ------------------ ------------------------ -------------------- ----------------- ------ -------- ---------
  1            50                  0.10               0.3                      70                   1                 0.10   0.2      0.2
  2            80                  0.26               0.54                     100                  3                 0.30   0.28     0.24
  3            100                 0.46               0.80                     80                   2                 0.46   0.34     0.34
  4            120                 0.7                0.90                     130                  5                 0.76   0.20     0.14
  5            150                 1                  1                        120                  4                                  

Taking the sum of the differences of Q’i-Qi in Table 2-5, we obtain
1.02, whereas the sum of the differences of QP’i-Qi gives 0.92. Thus,
the RGA metrics becomes 0.92/1.02 = 0.90 indicating an accuracy that is
high, much higher than that of a random model (which has RGA = 0.5). In
fact, the predictions only swap two consecutive ranks, with respect to
the actual data.

Note that the value of RGA depends only on the actual values of the
response (which are a given and are constant for all possible predictive
models) and on the concordance between the observed and the predicted
ranks, but not on the values of the predictions. If the prediction of
the income of the fourth individual had been 121 or 200, the result
would not have changed. Differently, had the same prediction been 119,
the predicted rank would have become 4, and the RGA would become
0.98/1.02 = 0.961, better.

Consider now the case of a model with low accuracy, as shown in Table
2-6.

Table 2-6

An example of the calculated differences of Q’i-Qi (Dual – Lorenz) and
Q’i-QPi (Dual – Concordance)

  Individuals   Observed Response   Qi: Lorenz Curve   Q’i: Dual Lorenz Curve   Predicted Income   Predicted Ranks   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------- ------------------- ------------------ ------------------------ ------------------ ----------------- ------ -------- ---------
  1             50                  0.10               0.3                      120                5                 0.3    0.2      0
  2             80                  0.26               0.54                     100                4                 0.54   0.28     0
  3             100                 0.46               0.80                     90                 3                 0.80   0.34     0
  4             120                 0.7                0.90                     70                 1                 0.84   0.20     0.06
  5             150                 1                  1                        80                 2                                  

For the predictions in Table 2-6, we obtain that the sum of the
differences of Q’i-Qi is again 1.02, whereas the sum of the differences
of QP’i-Qi gives 0.06. Thus, the RGA metrics becomes 0.06/1.02 = 0.06,
indicating an accuracy that is very low, much lower than that of a
random model. In fact, in this case, the ranks of the predictions are
very close to those of the dual Lorenz.

As already discussed, the RGA measure depends on the concordance between
the observed and the predicted ranks: this explains the name “Rank
Graduation Accuracy.” The higher the concordance, the higher the RGA.
The concordance is, however, “weighted” by the value of the response:
the higher it is, the higher the weight of a discordance.

The advantage of using a rank-based measure of accuracy becomes evident
considering that the same measure can be used for ordinal and binary
variables and that, in the latter case, it coincides with the AUROC.
Table 2-7 exemplifies the calculation of the RGA for the binary case,
with a numerical example that employs the data in Table 2-3.

Table 2-7

An example of RGA calculation

  Individuals   Observed Response   Qi: Lorenz Curve   Q’i: Dual Lorenz Curve   Predicted Response   Predicted Ranks   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------- ------------------- ------------------ ------------------------ -------------------- ----------------- ------ -------- ---------
  1             0                   0                  0.33                     0.52                 3                 0      0.33     0.33
  2             0                   0                  0.66                     0.10                 1                 0.33   0.66     0.33
  3             1                   0.33               1                        0.85                 5                 0.33   0.66     0.66
  4             1                   0.66               1                        0.71                 4                 0.66   0.33     0.33
  5             1                   1                  1                        0.46                 2                 1                

From Table 2-7, we can easily calculate RGA, in the same way as for a
continuous response, and it is equal to 0.83. Note that, in the binary
case, RGA does not change if ranks change but only within the same Y
response label. For example, if the fourth individual receives a score
larger than the third, nothing changes.

We conclude with the Python code required to calculate the RGA for any
given machine learning application.

The function is called

- check_accuracy

It provides the RGA function which can calculate the Rank Graduation
Accuracy (RGA) of a model, for classification (categorical response) or
for prediction (continuous response):

- rga(y, yhat)

The inputs of the function are

- y: The actual values of the target variable which can be categorical
  or continuous based on the problem, classification, or prediction,
  respectively

- yhat: The predicted values estimated by the model, for which we wish
  to find the RGA metric

More details on the Python implementation, including a statistical test
for RGA, which provides a corresponding p-value, as for AUROC and RMSE,
are provided in the appendix.

Accuracy of Multidimensional Predictions

Sometimes, the response to be predicted is not a simple variable,
numerical or categorical, but, rather, a multidimensional response. The
most relevant examples are that of images, in which the response to be
predicted can be represented in terms of a set of variables related to
the different pixels in which an image can be subdivided, or that of
documents, in which the response to be predicted can be represented in
terms of a set of variables, related to different keywords or sentences.

In both cases, predictive accuracy can be measured in terms of the
distance or of the similarity between two multidimensional vectors of
variables: the vector of the predictions and the observed (true) vector.

Let’s consider the case of document predictions. Assuming that a
document can be structured in terms of measures defined by a collection
of words, or of groups of words (tokens), we can compare a prediction
with the true outcome measuring the similarity between the two. There
are different metrics to measure such similarity. The most popular ones
are the cosine similarity.

The cosine similarity between two text documents is the cosine of the
angle between their word vectors. The word vectors are typically
represented in terms of Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequencies
(TF-IDF), representing the importance of each word in a document. When
the cosine of the angle takes values close to 1, the two documents are
very similar. When the cosine takes values close to 0, the two documents
are orthogonal: have unrelated contexts. Finally, when the cosine takes
values close to –1, the two documents have an opposite context. Cosine
similarity is much used in natural language processing and particularly
in document classification, document search, and recommendation systems.

The Levenshtein distance, or edit distance, measures how many edits must
be made to transform one text into another. It is applied in situations
where the documents are to be matched, such as translations and
spell-checking.

The Jaccard distance is the proportion of common elements (words or
tokens) between two documents: the ratio between the number of common
elements (intersection between two sets) and the number of total
elements (union between the two sets). The Jaccard distance is useful
when two documents are compared with respect to whether they contain
certain words, rather than in their actual content.

The Euclidean distance can be used to measure the distance between two
documents, when they are expressed in terms of the frequency of
occurrence of a given set of keywords.

This type of distance can also be used for word embeddings, which
represent each word or token as a vector of real numbers, with each
dimension reflecting a different semantic feature. Word embeddings are
much used in text classification and information retrieval and are
typically learned from large corpora of data using neural network models
such as the well-known Word2Vec and GloVe. With this representation,
semantically similar words are close in the space described by their
distance. Large language models (LLMs) utilize advanced models of word
embedding, such as BERT and its variants.

All the above distances (and, more generally, all distances between text
documents) can lead to single summary measures of similarity between the
predicted and the observed vector: the cosine of the angle, the number
of edits, the proportion of common elements, the Euclidean distance
between word frequencies or word embeddings. We can thus apply the
proposed RGA measure to such a summary, for a series of text documents
to be predicted as if they were the predictions (and observed values) of
a continuous variable.

For images, we can follow a similar strategy. Images are easier to
represent, as they are made up of pixels and, for each pixel, several
measurements are available, such as the intensity of the three base
colors – red, blue, and green – or the gray level. Then, the distance
between the observed (true) image and the predicted one can be
calculated using the Euclidean distance, the cosine of the angle between
the two vectors, or the Euclidean distance between a lower dimensional
representation, similar to word embeddings. In any case, the RGA measure
can be applied to the summary distance or similarity, similarly as for
text documents.

Accuracy of Textual Predictions

When the output is a textual response, as in large language models, we
do not always have a ground truth as a benchmark against which to
measure the accuracy of the output. In this case, accuracy metrics still
exist, although they are more subjective and require a higher degree of
human intervention. A notable example is provided in the work of Huang
et al. The authors propose to measure three negative characteristics for
the output of large language models: their toxicity, their bias, and
their value alignment. Toxicity is defined as the generation of rude,
disrespectful, or unreasonable text and is measured by calculating the
percentage of toxic outputs among a given list of social norms which are
prompted to the model, asking to say something bad about them. Bias is
the difference in toxicity when the same previous questions are asked to
different population groups; a large variation in toxicity indicates
bias. Finally, value alignment is measured by asking the model to
evaluate a positive or negative description of a social norm and
measuring the percentage of times in which the answer is discordant
(i.e., negative when the description is positive and vice versa). Huang
et al., suggest to use the Mann-Whitney statistics to evaluate the
significance of a bias that is a significant difference in the results
about toxicity in different population groups. The same test statistics
can be used to compare value alignment.

It’s important to note the Mann-Whitney statistics is equivalent to the
AUROC and, more generally, to the RGA metrics that we have proposed
before. Thus, the proposed RGA statistics can be employed to measure the
accuracy of AI models, in all situations.

The example just discussed can be generalized to many other tools that
evaluate large language models, which typically do not have a “true”
benchmark. For example, it can be applied to the evaluation of
“hallucination,” that is, the generation of text that is incorrect, that
is, does not align with the given context. A popular evaluation tool for
this example is the Hallucination index, which calculates the mean AUROC
in different triples of questions-evidence-answers.

What Benchmarks Will You Use?

In addition to measurement and metrics, benchmarks are the bread and
butter of AI development where they’re used by ML developers on a
regular basis to assess the performance of ML models against others
using various datasets, with the ultimate goal to ensure a model that’s
quite good, state of the art, and ultimately the “best.” To follow on
from the sections above, let’s take a look at the SuperGLUE benchmark²³
as an example, a popular benchmark used to evaluate the performance of
NLP (natural language processing) models/LLMs.

Before delving into the SuperGLUE’s tasks, let’s state some of the
prevailing issues with LLMs today where developing accurate performance
metrics could help resolve some of these issues:

- LLMs are quite infactual and produce incorrect information, known as
  hallucinations.

- LLMs are known to produce gibberish output when given some certain
  prompts, otherwise known as “jailbreaks” or “jailbreaking prompts.”

- LLMs can produce unsafe, discriminatory, and biased outputs when left
  unchecked.²⁴

To address some of these prevailing issues identified with LLMs,
benchmarks are usually the best evaluation method. SuperGLUE is an
improved version of GLUE which stands for General Language Understanding
Evaluation. SuperGLUE was introduced about a year after GLUE was
launched in 2019 as the new introduction of large language models (LLMs)
surpassed the level of non-expert human annotators, making the benchmark
a bit redundant, with little room for further research. Researchers from
New York University, DeepMind, Facebook AI Research, and the University
of Washington launched “SuperGLUE: A Stickier Benchmark for
General-Purpose Language Understanding Systems.” The benchmark was
introduced with more difficult language understanding tasks, a software
toolkit, and a public leaderboard. Each English language task evaluates
the accuracy of the NLP model.

According to Wang et al., SuperGLUE is built on eight language
understanding tasks, which are more challenging and diverse and include
comprehensive human baselines compared to GLUE. The eight tasks include
the following:

1.  1.

    Boolean Questions: A question-answering (QA) task working with a
    Wikipedia article and a yes/no question about the model.

     

2.  2.

    CommitmentBank (CB): Consists of short texts containing a clause
    obtained from various sources such as The Wall Street Journal,
    Switchboard, the British National Corpus, and so on.

     

3.  3.

    Choice of Plausible Alternatives (COPA): A causal reasoning task
    where the model is tasked to discern the cause or effect within a
    sentence.

     

4.  4.

    Multi-Sentence Reading Comprehension (MultiRC): A QA task with true
    or false classification involving a context paragraph, related
    question, and multiple potential answers.

     

5.  5.

    Reading Comprehension with Commonsense Reasoning Dataset (ReCoRD): A
    multi-choice QA task where the system is meant to predict the masked
    out entity from provided options. This task involves a news article
    and a question with a masked out entity.

     

6.  6.

    Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE): These datasets are from a
    series of annual competitions on textual entailment. Evaluating for
    accuracy, the data is merged and combined to a two-class
    classification: entailment and not_entailment.

     

7.  7.

    Word-in-Context (WIC): A binary classification of sentence pairs,
    where the model’s task is to determine whether a word is used with
    the same intent in both sentences, when given two text snippets and
    a polysemous word that appears in both sentences.

     

8.  8.

    Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC): Consists of a coreference
    resolution task with examples that have a sentence with a pronoun
    and a list of noun phrases from the sentence. The system is tasked
    to select the correct referent of the pronoun from the provided
    multiple choices.

     

There are so many other benchmarks and research frameworks available for
LLMs, such as the HELM (Holistic Evaluation of Language Models) by
Stanford University, LM Evaluation Harness by Eleuther AI, PromptBench
by Microsoft, Chatbot Arena by LMSys.org, SQuAD for question-answering
tasks, and IMDB for sentiment analysis. Depending on the use case and
version of AI you’re working with, it’s important to identify and run a
couple of benchmarks to test the accuracy of your model(s). It is
important to underline that, while very useful to check the compliance
of AI applications, benchmarks cannot be simply used in a risk
management model. To do so, statistical metrics such as RGA are
necessary.

However, ensuring the use of a benchmark or multiple benchmarks to test
the compliance for various Responsible AI principles is best practice
and highly recommended.

How Will You Communicate This As Needed?

Communicating the performance and accuracy of an ML model could be
carried out in various ways, ranging from a research paper uploaded to
arXiv or a similar platform and presenting at a leading ML conference.
Also, ensuring performance is communicated in a clear, concise, and
simple manner on the website/application where applicable. This is
important as it addresses “transparency” which is an important
Responsible AI principle and could help improve the trust index of
consumers and users.

Scoring Rubric

A scoring rubric assists with performance assessment against a standard
set of criteria. It acts as a tool to guide ML practitioners on the
performance of their ML model(s) in relation to a particular ML metric.
In this case, we’ll apply a scoring to the various Responsible AI
principles outlined in this book. Let’s look at a very simple rubric for
accuracy.

                                            Excellent   Good      Fair      Borderline   Poor
  ----------------------------------------- ----------- --------- --------- ------------ --------
  Are the outputs of your model accurate?   75%–90%     70%–75%   60%–70%   40%–60%      0%–40%

Mitigation

Now that you have a thorough understanding of the importance of accuracy
as a Responsible AI principle and how it could affect the performance of
your ML model(s), and ultimately the success of your business, it’s
important to understand various mitigation and improvement measures to
improve the performance of your ML model(s).

The accuracy of your model could potentially make or break your
business, for example, if you have an ML model that identifies
fraudulent claims and the accuracy of your model is poor, it means that
you could be falsely accusing innocent people of fraudulent claims. This
could not only damage the reputation of your business and
potential/existing customers, it could also lead to reputational damage,
lawsuits, and consequently regulatory fines.

Depending on if you have a poor accuracy score from the above rubric,
the next step is to optimize performance by carrying out the following:

1.  1.

    Increase the number of data in your training set. The more examples,
    the more accurate the model’s performance will be. The only caveat
    to note is increased data equals increased cost, unless using
    synthetic data.

     

2.  2.

    Increase the number of variables which improves feature processing.
    Feature processing refers to the selection, manipulation, and
    transformation of raw data into features used in supervised
    learning.

     

3.  3.

    Tune your model parameters while considering alternate values for
    the training parameters used in your learning algorithm.

     

There are a few additional things to consider such as the model fit. Is
it underfitting or overfitting? Your model is “underfitting” when it
performs poorly on the training data, and it’s “overfitting” when on the
flip side, it performs well on the training data, but poorly on the
evaluation data. When this happens, it’s usually due to memorization of
the data it’s been trained on, and the model is unable to generalize
unseen examples.

Underfitting can be resolved by increasing the model flexibility and
reduction of the amount of regularization used. Regularization refers to
a set of techniques used to reduce model complexity and increase
generalization which improves model accuracy. To solve overfitting,
reduce the model flexibility through less feature combinations, n-grams
size, or increase the amount of regularization used.²⁵

To summarize, in this chapter we looked at “accuracy,” a few key
questions from NIST’s risk management framework to consider when testing
for accuracy, RGA which is a unified measurement for accuracy using the
“Rank Graduation” measure, ways to evaluate the performance of your ML
algorithms and models, a couple of benchmarks, and mitigation
recommendations. In the next chapter, we’ll look at robustness and how
to ensure you have secure and robust ML models.

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_3

3. Robustness

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

In this chapter, we’ll look at “robustness,” another important
Responsible AI principle and one of the principles in the SAFE-HAI
framework. We will look at a brief definition of robustness and how it
relates to the reliability of ML models, with specific reference to
NIST’s risk management framework. We will also discuss the metrics for
measuring robustness, with an introduction to the Rank Graduation
“Robustness” score (RGR). We’ll conclude this chapter with a brief
analysis of an adversarial benchmark for robustness, recommendations for
mitigation, and a scoring rubric that could be adopted to analyze the
robustness scores of your ML models/applications.

Robustness is another fundamental and important principle of Responsible
AI and AI performance in general. Robustness refers to the sturdiness of
an ML model to withstand uncertainties (perturbations or adversarial
conditions) such as cyber attacks, and the ability to perform accurately
in different contexts. Given the current concerns and unending systemic
risks identified in AI systems, particularly generative AI, building
robust ML models is not only advised but critical.

According to NIST’s RMF, an AI system has to be trustworthy. To achieve
trustworthiness, one of the important characteristics is to have “valid
and reliable” AI systems. These are reliable systems that have the
ability to perform as intended without potential failure over a given
period of time, under specific conditions. Another important component
of trustworthy AI is the reliability of an AI system to be correct and
work as intended during its entire life cycle/lifetime. As such,
accuracy (covered in the previous chapter) and robustness are basic
components to ensure the validity and reliability of AI systems.

Let’s take a look at the NIST’s definition of robustness – the ISO/IEC
TS 5723:2022 defines robustness or generalizability as the “ability of a
system to maintain its level of performance under a variety of
circumstances.”

In NIST’s risk management framework, robustness, along with accuracy, is
a key characteristic an AI application/system should have to be
considered trustworthy and, specifically, reliable. Reliability is
defined as the “ability of an item to perform as required, without
failure, for a given time interval, under given conditions.” While a
valid AI application should be accurate, a reliable AI application must
be robust.

Robustness is not only the key principle behind reliability but is also
pivotal for other two trustworthy characteristics in the NIST risk
management framework, namely, that an application should be secure and
resilient, as well as safe. The two aspects are distinct, but closely
related. Safety aims to avoid harms that affect the health of people,
property, and the environment. Security, on the other hand, aims to
avoid unauthorized access of data such as adversarial attacks and data
poisoning. Security is directly related to the notion of robustness and
specifies its consequences in terms of reliability of an AI application,
that is, the expectation that it works as expected, whereas safety can
be seen as an indirect consequence of lack of robustness, which leads to
unexpected harms on people and the environment. In this chapter, we will
focus on the measurement of robustness and the “technical” notion that
underpins reliability, security, resilience, and safety.

The EU AI Act also refers to robustness and the requirement to ensure
that high-risk AI systems have an appropriate level of robustness and
cybersecurity in order to perform consistently throughout the life cycle
of an AI system. It’s required that AI systems are resilient against
errors, faults, and inconsistencies that could occur in the
model/application, and appropriate technical measures and solutions are
included to backup or “fail-safe” plans especially against malicious
attacks against the training dataset, for example, data poisoning, or
pretrained models, for example, model poisoning, or adversarial attacks
aimed at manipulating the results/output of a model which could include
data leakages and confidentiality attacks.

NIST’s RMF addresses the following question which also aligns with the
EU AI Act:

- How will we protect the AI system against cyber attacks, adversarial
  attacks, data poisoning, model leakage, evasion, inversion, etc., and
  ensure ongoing performance? How will we ensure the system is robust to
  optimizers that aim to induce specific system responses?

The following sections in this chapter will address this critical
question.

Measuring Robustness

The measurement of robustness draws on the variation of the output of a
machine learning model caused by data perturbations, generated
intentionally (as in cyber attacks) or unintentionally (as in extreme
rare events). A model is robust when the variation of its output under a
data perturbation is limited, and it’s not robust otherwise. A more
precise definition of robustness can be stated for classification
problems: a classifier is robust if it correctly classifies a large
proportion of cases, under all possible variations of the input
variables (within a certain distance, see, e.g., Croce et al., 2023).²⁶

Typically, simpler models with fewer explanatory variables are more
robust than more complex models, with more feature variables, as the
sources of anomalous variation are less in the former case. This aspect
is also known as the bias-variance trade-off (see, e.g., Hastie et al.,
2023),²⁷ where simple models have more bias than complex models, but
lower variance. In the measurement of robustness, we will thus consider
two apparently distinct but related aspects: a direct measurement of
robustness (ex post), in terms of output variability under data
perturbations, and an indirect measurement of robustness (ex ante, by
design), in terms of model comparison and regularization, which leads to
the selection of a model with an appropriate bias-variance trade-off.

The development of this chapter is based on two main benchmark metrics:
the RGR metrics, introduced by Giudici and Raffinetti (2024),²⁸ which
measures the “distance” between the predicted output and the predicted
output under perturbations, for models based on structured data, and the
RobustBench metrics, developed by Croce et al. (2023), which measures a
similar distance, for large language models based on unstructured data.

Model Robustness

In this section, we consider how to measure the robustness of a model
under perturbations, regardless of their source, that is, whether they
are intentional or not. These measurements are also applicable to
cybersecurity, security, and safety (indirectly).

The simplest way to measure robustness is to consider the variability of
the predictions. For a continuous response, we can resample the
train-test partition and obtain repeated predictions, one for each
sample. We can then calculate the mean of the predictions, as well as
their variance, which measures how robust the predictions are by
changing the underlying samples. We can also calculate percentiles of
the predictions, which can be used to support decisions.

We recall that the p-th percentile of a statistical distribution X,
indicated with xp, can be obtained from the following equation, in which
“Freq” indicates the frequency (whose limit is the probability):

Freq (X<-xp) = p

Or equivalently

Freq(X > xp) = 1-p

For instance, the 5th percentile, x0.05, is obtained setting

Freq (X<-x0.05) = 0.05

Or equivalently

Freq(X > x0.05) = 0.95

The obtained 5th percentile x0.05 can then be used as a threshold. For
example, if we repeat machine learning on different samples, to predict
the value of a specific observation, the prediction will be
significantly higher than zero if the 5th percentile is greater than
zero, which means that at least 95% of the predicted values are above
zero.

For a binary or ordinal response, we can use the entropy or the Gini
index, instead of the variance, which are both measures of variability
for categorical variables.

We can exemplify the point with an example, taken from a paper written
by Babaei and Giudici (2024).²⁹ The authors consider a situation in
which a platform (Lending Club) assesses, based on a machine learning
model, whether a set of individuals should be given credit or not –
considered a binary classification problem. They compare a “classic”
machine learning model, based on a logistic credit scoring model, with
the predictions obtained using the Generative Pretrained Transformer
model (GPT) 3.5, both without training and with 80 examples (against
30,000 employed by the logistic regression model).

Table 3-1 shows the results of the comparison, comparing the AUROC
obtained from five different training samples, in which the
classifications to be predicted are the same (170 individuals).

Table 3-1

Comparison of performance of three models using different training
samples

                  Min AUC   Max AUC   Mean AUC
  --------------- --------- --------- ----------
  Classic model   0.70      0.79      0.75
  GPT             0.59      0.65      0.61
  Informed GPT    0.63      0.70      0.67

Table 3-1 shows a GPT model without training examples, outperforming a
random model, with a mean AUROC of 0.61. When informed with a minimum
set of examples (80), it already reaches a mean of 0.67. On the other
hand, a classic model has an accuracy of 0.75, but obtained with 30,000
examples! It’s important to note that the range of all three models
(max-min) is quite large, especially when examples are being considered
(e.g., for the classic model and for the informed GPT).

This indicates that machine learning models, and particularly generative
AI models, which are based on large training samples, may have a high
variability (a low robustness) and may therefore be extremely sensitive
to extreme and/or cyber manipulated data.

However, the method described above is based on the available data and
may not be able to provide a measure of robustness of the predictions
under perturbations in the data, especially when extreme perturbations
lead to data that have not been observed in the available sample. To
this aim, we propose to extend the Rank Graduation Accuracy (RGA)
measurement to a Rank Graduation Robustness (RGR) measurement, comparing
the predictions obtained with the model with those that would be
obtained under data perturbations. While the RGA is based on the
difference between the observed cumulative response values calculated
respectively using the observed and the predicted ranks, the RGR is
based on the difference between the observed cumulative predicted values
calculated, respectively, using the available data and the perturbed
data.

More precisely, the summary of robustness metrics for a model can be
obtained by considering the area between the dual Lorenz curve and the
concordance curve, derived using the ranks of the predictions obtained
with perturbed data, and dividing it by its maximum possible value – the
area between the dual Lorenz curve and the concordance curve. This is
considered the Rank Robustness (RGR) measure.

Mathematically, the Rank Graduation Robustness measure (RGR) is defined
by

sum(Q’i-QPi)/sum(Q’i-Qi),

where Q’i is the dual Lorenz curve, Qi is the concordance curve obtained
using the ranks of the predictions, and QPi is the concordance curve
obtained using the ranks of the perturbed predictions.

The RGR measure has some important properties, in particular:

1.  1)

    It is normalized: RGR=0 in the worst case of a nonrobust model;
    RGA=1 for the best case of a perfectly robust model; otherwise,
    0<RGA<1.

     

2.  2)

    To assess whether the RGR metric passes a set threshold indicating a
    minimum level of accuracy, a statistical test for RGR has to be
    made. When the response Y is binary, the test coincides with
    DeLong’s test. In general, a statistical test based on U-statistics
    can be derived. In all cases, the higher the RGR, the higher the
    predictive accuracy, and the smaller the p-value, the more
    significant is the found RGA with respect to a given lower bound.

     

Let’s exemplify the calculation with a numerical example. Consider the
predictions obtained in Table 2-3 of Chapter 2, and suppose a cyber
attack that poisons the input data of the input (explanatory) variables
occurs, resulting in the perturbed predictions in the third column of
Table 3-2.

Table 3-2

Calculation of the RGR measure for a predictive problem

  Individual   Observed Response   Predicted Response   Qi     Qi’    Predicted Perturbed   Perturbed Ranks   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------ ------------------- -------------------- ------ ------ --------------------- ----------------- ------ -------- ---------
  1            50                  70                   0.14   0.26   110                   4                 0.20   0.12     0.06
  3            100                 80                   0.3    0.5    80                    1                 0.44   0.2      0.06
  2            80                  100                  0.5    0.7    100                   3                 0.60   0.2      0.10
  5            150                 120                  0.74   0.86   120                   5                 0.70   0.12     0.16
  4            120                 130                                90                    2                                  

From Table 3-2, it shows that the sum of the differences of Q’i-QPi is
equal to 0.48, whereas the sum of Q’i-Qi is equal to 0.64, from which
the value of RGR is 0.48/0.64=0.75, indicating a reasonable level of
robustness of the predictions against this perturbation. Looking at the
data, this is due to the fact that the main changes in the predicted
ranks occur for individuals 1 and 4 whose ranks become fourth and second
vs. first and fifth according to the predicted model.

The exercise can be repeated many times, possibly considering a set of
sample perturbations of the input variables and the mean RGR calculated.
An AI application will be deemed robust if the average RGR is
significantly higher than a given bound (determined by a set risk
appetite). We can also evaluate whether the perturbation significantly
deteriorates the prediction obtained with the original data, with a
similar resampling test, which is implemented in the Python code
referenced in the case study and provided in the appendix of the book.

Let’s now consider, as a further example, a classification problem. This
allows us to provide an intuitive explanation for the very important
case of classifier robustness to cyber attacks, much considered in the
literature on adversarial robustness (see, e.g., Croce et al., 2023, for
a review). This widely debated stream of research considers both the
case of white-box attacks (for which the machine learning model is
known) and that of black-box attacks (in which the machine learning
model is not known). In both cases, the aim of the attack is to alter
the model classification based on the predicted values without
perturbations. The literature also considers the case of generic attacks
aimed, for example, at corrupting the available input images or texts.
This situation can be analyzed as previously described for predictive
problems, with continuous response variables.

Similar to accuracy, we suggest using the same metrics as for the
continuous case: the RGR measure. The advantage of using a unified
measure is evident also in this case – the robustness of the model to
different cyber attacks can be measured in the same fashion regardless
of the aim of the attack by altering the classifications or more simply
corrupting the predictions.

Here’s a numerical example for this. Consider the classifications
obtained in Table 2-6 in Chapter 2, and suppose a cyber attack that
poisons the input data of the input (explanatory) variables occurs,
resulting in the altered classifications in the third column below.
Specifically, we suppose that the cyber attack alters only the
prediction for the individual n.2, with the aim of altering its
classification (e.g., bringing it closer to a “1” classification, rather
than a “0”).

From Table 3-3, we obtain that the sum of Q’i-Qi (maximum possible
perturbation) is equal to 1.31, whereas the sum of Q’i-QPi (actual
perturbation effect) is equal to 0.89, leading to an RGR equal to 68%, a
value which indicates limited robustness, which requires attention.

Table 3-3

Calculation of the RGR measure for a classification problem

  Individuals   Observed Response   Predicted Response   Qi     Qi’    Predicted Perturbed   Perturbed Ranks   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------- ------------------- -------------------- ------ ------ --------------------- ----------------- ------ -------- ---------
  2             0                   0.10                 0.04   0.32   0.60                  3                 0.19   0.28     0.13
  5             1                   0.46                 0.21   0.58   0.46                  1                 0.34   0.37     0.24
  1             0                   0.52                 0.41   0.79   0.52                  2                 0.50   0.38     0.29
  4             1                   0.71                 0.68   0.96   0.71                  4                 0.73   0.28     0.23
  3             1                   0.85                               0.85                  5                 1                

We conclude this section with the Python code required to calculate the
RGR, for any given machine learning application.

The function is called

- check_robustness

It provides different functions related to the calculation of the Rank
Graduation Robustness measure (RGR).

The RGR function can calculate the Rank Graduation Robustness (RGR) of a
model, for classification (categorical response) or for prediction
(continuous response). It requires a preliminary setup of the type of
data perturbation that will be applied to the model. For example, we can
consider extracting from the available highest values (e.g., higher than
the 95th percentile) of an explanatory variable and replace them with
the lowest values (e.g., lower than the 5th percentiles) and vice versa.

Then, the function rgr.single (variable, perturbation.percentage=0.05)
perturbs the training values of a (single) selected explanatory variable
swapping the values in the 5% lower tail of the corresponding
distribution with the values in the 5% upper tail. The default value of
5% can be changed.

Alternatively, the user can use the function
rgr.all(perturbation.percentage=0.05) which perturbs in a similar
fashion all explanatory variables.

More details on the Python implementation, including a statistical test
for RGR, which provides a corresponding p-value are provided in the
appendix.

Model Comparison

To improve the robustness and cybersecurity of AI applications (their
sustainability), we can also work on the structure (the architecture) of
a machine learning model, reducing the number of predictors and/or of
their functions involved in the model. It is well known that a complex
model may improve the accuracy of a model (its bias) but at the expense
of a higher variance of the results, leading to possible overfitting. To
solve this problem, which helps with the selection of a model with the
appropriate bias-variance trade-off, several approaches have been
proposed for model comparison. The most important of them can be
classified as dimensionality reduction methods, stepwise selection
methods, and regularization methods.

Dimensionality reduction methods aim at summarizing the available input
variables in a smaller set of variables, which are functions of the
original variables. The most known method is based on the principal
components, which replaces k variables with p linear combinations of
them, where p is much lower than k. In the principal component method,
the p linear combinations are chosen to minimize the loss in variability
or, equivalently, the loss in statistical information which derives from
reducing the number of variables from k to p.

The obtained transformed variables have the advantage of being
uncorrelated with each other so that, for example, the explained
variance of the response attributed to a model with all components will
be the sum of the explained variances of the single components. A second
advantage, already mentioned, is the gain in dimensionality reduction,
which means a much lower cost in computations and a consequent lower
consumption of energy. A disadvantage of this methodology is that the
components are combinations of many variables, and it is often not clear
how to interpret them especially when they do not have a common physical
meaning. It is also important to standardize or normalize the original
variables before performing a principal component analysis; otherwise,
the variables expressed in a lower scale (higher magnitude) will
dominate the others in terms of variability and, consequently, will have
a much higher weight in the linear combinations.

When the available variables are not numerical, it is not possible to
run principal component analysis. However, a similar technique, named
correspondence analysis, can be run on the frequencies of the available
categories, and linear combinations can be obtained minimizing the
reduction in the appropriate distance metric (such as the chi-square
distance).

Model selection and regularization methods maintain all original
variables and compare all model combinations that can be obtained, which
is quite different from principal component analysis. It is important to
note that the number of possible models grows exponentially with the
number of variables. For example, with three explanatory variables, the
number of possible models is 2^(3*2)/2 = 8; with four variables,
2^(4*3)/2= 64; and with five variables, 2^(5*4)/2 = 1024. In general,
with p variables, it is 2^(p*p-1)/2.

The two most important strategies for model selection are stepwise model
selection and regularization methods.

Stepwise methods can be either forward or backward.

In a forward model selection procedure, models are compared in
increasing complexity. That is, we first compare the model with no
explanatory variables vs. the best model with one variable; then, if the
best model with one variable wins, we compare it with the best model
with two variables. If the best model with two variables loses, we stop
and finally choose the best model with one variable. Otherwise, we
proceed and compare the best model with two variables against the best
model with three variables and so on until we stop. Note that the
decision of who wins and also the decision of when to stop are
determined by the choice of appropriate accuracy metrics. Typically,
researchers and practitioners use AUROC for binary classifications and
RMSE for predictive problems, with the related statistical tests, such
as DeLong and Diebold and Mariano tests, mentioned in Chapter 2, which
opt to reject the simpler model when the p-value is small.

In a backward model selection procedure, models are compared in
decreasing complexity. We first compare the most complex model with all
variables (the full model) with a model that has all variables but one.
If the latter wins, we compare it with a model that has all variables
but two. If the latter loses, we stop. If the model without two
variables wins, we compare it with a model with all variables but three,
and so on, until we stop. As in the forward procedure, the decision of
who wins and the decision of when to stop are determined by the choice
of accuracy metrics, such as AUROC and RMSE, and of the related tests.
Backward model selection is computationally more costly (as it starts
the comparison from the most complex model), but it has the advantage of
taking into account all variables and their interactions.

In stepwise selection models, the best model is chosen a posteriori,
after a collection of models have been fit and compared (how many depend
on when the sequence is stopped), while in regularization methods, the
choice is done a priori, on the basis of an optimization method. The
main idea is to fit a full model, with all variables, but estimate its
parameters (coefficients) taking into account model complexity. More
precisely, when regularization is not applied, a full model is estimated
by choosing the parameters that minimize an appropriate distance between
the observed and the estimated values, such as the mean squared error.

Mathematically, the parameters are chosen minimizing

sum(y_i-ypred_i)^2,

which is the distance between the vector containing the true values, y,
and the vector containing the predicted values, ypred.

When ridge regularization is applied, the function to be minimized is
the same distance plus a penalization term that is an increasing
function of the sum of the squares parameter values. Doing so, we reduce
the space of solutions to those that have a sum of parameters smaller
than a set value. This implies that some coefficients will have
parameter estimates very close to zero.

Mathematically, with ridge regularization, the parameters are chosen
minimizing

sum(y_i-ypred_i)^2+penalty*sum(beta)^2,

which is the distance between the vector containing the true values, y,
and the vector containing the predicted values, ypred, plus a penalty
term which multiplies the sum of the squares of the parameters of the
model.

When lasso regularization is applied, the penalization term is instead
an increasing function of the sum of the absolute values of the
parameter values. This implies that some coefficients may actually
become zero, thereby reducing ex ante the number of explanatory
variables.

Mathematically, with lasso regularization, the parameters are chosen
minimizing

sum(y_i-ypred_i)^2+penalty*sum(|beta|),

which is the distance between the vector containing the true values, y,
and the vector containing the predicted values, ypred, plus a penalty
term which multiplies the sum of the absolute values of the parameters
of the model.

Using either stepwise or regularization, the result of model comparison
will be a selected model which will be more parsimonious and, therefore,
more stable against extreme variations (or cyber attacks) in the data –
a model that will not significantly lose predictive accuracy with
respect to a full model.

We now go back to the choice of metrics that can be used to compare
models in a stepwise procedure. When we can assume an underlying
probabilistic structure, the difference in likelihood between two nested
models can be calculated, and a statistical test, such as the F-test for
a continuous response or the chi-square test for a binary response, can
be implemented to assess whether the difference is significant. For
example, if models are compared in a backward perspective, removing one
variable at a time, starting from the fully parameterized model (with
the highest likelihood), the test can provide a stopping rule, based on
the p-values of the test. This procedure could lead to a model that,
while still accurate, is more parsimonious and, therefore, more
sustainable than the full model.

When a probabilistic model cannot be assumed, as in many realistic
machine learning models, a stepwise procedure can also be undertaken by
ordering variables with an explainability criterion, such as their
Shapley values. You could then employ a stopping rule based on the
comparison of predictive accuracy, either in terms of Diebold and
Mariano’s test (when the response variable is continuous) or in terms of
DeLong’s test (when the response variable is binary).

The stopping rule will add variables as long as predictions are
different, that is, until the difference in predictive accuracy between
two consecutive models is large and the p-value smaller than a set
threshold.

Instead of using separate metrics and tests for the binary and
continuous case, we can also use the RGA metrics proposed in the last
chapter and the related test, as in the Python code that is provided in
the appendix.

We now exemplify the application of RGR for model comparison. Suppose we
need to compare three alternative models – a linear regression model, a
regression tree model, and a random forest model – on a set of simulated
data, to which we apply random perturbations characterized by the 15% of
lower and the 15% of upper outliers. While the linear regression model
is explainable by design and the regression tree can be explained by
visualizing the tree, the random forest is a black-box machine learning
model.

We aim to assess whether the degree of robustness associated with each
model when they are contaminated with the same anomalous observations
produces significantly different results. The obtained findings are
displayed in Table 3-4.

Table 3-4

Model comparison based on the RGR measure

        Model Comparison                       
  ----- ------------------- ----------------- ---------------
        Linear regression   Regression tree   Random forest
  RGR   0.7976              0.8137            0.9683

From Table 3-4, note that the random forest model appears more robust
than both the linear regression model and the regression tree model,
with the RGR measure achieving a value which is close to one. We further
investigate this conclusion by checking whether the robustness degree
associated with the random forest model is significantly different with
respect to that related to the linear regression model and the
regression tree model. The RGR-based statistical test provides a p-value
smaller than 0.001 when comparing the linear regression model with the
random forest model and also when comparing the regression tree model
with the random forest model. This implies that the random forest model
is actually more robust than the other two competitors. Based on these
findings, it seems that, despite their black-box nature, random forest
models provide more stable outcomes than white-box models.

With the purpose of further investigating the efficiency of our
proposal, we increase the number of predictors from one to four in order
to evaluate if increasing the complexity may affect the models’
performance in terms of robustness.

To do so, we generate data from a five-dimensional Gaussian distribution
with a prespecified variance-covariance matrix and vector of mean
values. More precisely, we suppose that the variable which is selected
as a target variable, Y, is associated with the remaining variables
according to a common correlation coefficient, which can take four
possible values: rho=(0.6,0.4,0.3,0.1). Based on these settings, we
simulate the data and fit three alternative machine learning models –
linear regression, regression trees, and random forests – and we compute
the corresponding predicted values.

Similarly to what we previously described, we apply the scenario
characterized by a perturbation of 15% of lower outliers and of 15% of
upper outliers, this time to all four predictors.

The findings provided by the application of the linear regression model,
the regression tree, and the random forest model to the new simulated
data are displayed in Table 3-5.

Table 3-5

Model comparison based on the RGR measure for a higher dimensional
problem

        Model Comparison                       
  ----- ------------------- ----------------- ---------------
        Linear regression   Regression tree   Random forest
  RGR   0.7449              0.9395            0.9782

Table 3-5 confirms the previous findings: linear regression is the least
robust model, and the random forest is the most robust. Note also that
while the robustness of linear regression and random forest does not
change sensibly increasing model complexity, that of the tree models
gets much worse. This is likely due to the “local” behavior of tree
models, which rapidly increase complexity when even a small number of
observations behave differently from the others.

The findings provided by the application of the linear regression model,
the regression tree, and the random forest models show that the linear
regression model improves its robustness when model complexity
increases, whereas the regression tree considerably worsens its
performance. Finally, the random forest model presents only a slight
worsening, preserving its robustness to the presence of outlying
observations. To sum up, the application shows that random forest models
are more robust than the other two models and are thus recommended for
the considered problem.

More generally, random forests, and similar ensemble models, such as
gradient boosting, can provide a good trade-off between accuracy and
robustness, which are often at odds, especially for highly complex
neural network models: very accurate, but with a limited robustness.

Adversarial Robustness Benchmark

As with any ML model launch or application, the use of benchmarks is
always highly recommended and is applicable to robustness. Adversarial
robustness refers to the model’s ability to resist being fooled by
malicious actors. Croce et al. introduced “RobustBench: a standardized
adversarial robustness benchmark” (cited above) which evaluates
adversarial robustness using AutoAttack, a combination of white- and
black-box attacks. The benchmark consists of the following:

- An open source website with a leaderboard on GitHub which contains
  over 120 evaluations of models, aimed at reflecting the current state
  of the art (SOTA) in image classification models on a set of
  well-defined tasks, among others. Users are able to track the progress
  of the evaluations and the current SOTA based on a standardized
  evaluation using AutoAttack.

- The library also provides access to over 80 models (model zoo) to
  facilitate downstream applications, which facilitates the development
  of improved adversarial attacks as ML engineers can perform
  evaluations on a large set of over 80 models.

- RobustBench also analyzes the “impact of robustness on the performance
  on distribution shifts, calibration, out-of-distribution detection,
  fairness, privacy leakage, smoothness, and transferability,” based on
  the collection of models from the model zoo.

While performing robustness evaluations is highly recommended and
crucial to the success of an ML model/application, it’s important to
note that there are trade-offs with accuracy, where adoption of
adversarial robustness could affect performance, leading to severe
accuracy penalties. In early 2023, Bai et al. introduced a way to
alleviate these trade-offs through “adaptive smoothing.”³⁰ Adaptive
smoothing mixes the output probabilities of a standard classifier and a
robust classifier while optimizing for clean accuracy. The method
includes adapting an adversarial input detector into a mixing network
which adjusts the mixture of the two base models – the robust base
classifier and the standard classifier. This flexible mixture-of-experts
(MoE) framework has proven to reduce the accuracy penalty of achieving
robustness, further leading to clean accuracy, robustness, and adversary
detection. Adaptive smoothing also uses AutoAttack to evaluate
robustness. As discussed for accuracy in the previous chapter,
benchmarks are important to assess compliance, but they cannot be simply
adoped in a risk management model; for that purpose, a statistical
metric, such as RGR, is necessary.

Scoring Rubric

Once the outlined measurement metrics for RGR have been completed, it’s
important to score the robustness of your model(s). Here’s a simple
scoring rubric for robustness.

Table 3-6

A scoring rubric for robustness

                                                   Excellent   Good      Fair      Borderline   Poor
  ------------------------------------------------ ----------- --------- --------- ------------ --------
  What is the robustness score of your model(s)?   75%–90%     70%–75%   60%–70%   40%–60%      0%–40%

Mitigation

Now that you have a thorough understanding of how to measure the
robustness of your model(s), including a component analysis, and you’re
able to run several benchmarks to test the robustness of your model,
it’s important you work on improving the robustness of your model if it
comes up with a low score.

Depending on the issue, there are various ways to improve the robustness
of your ML model. A few recommendations have been mentioned such as a
model selection and evaluation. Here are some additional
recommendations:

1.  1.

    Have a thorough understanding of the data: Conduct exploratory data
    analysis, identify potential outliers, understand the relationships
    between the various variables in the dataset(s), and gain some
    overall understanding of the structure of the data use.

     

2.  2.

    Conduct data preprocessing: This is an important step in the ML
    pipeline and includes tasks such as normalizing numerical variables
    or dealing with class imbalance in the target variable. Data
    preprocessing makes the data compatible with your selected ML
    algorithm and helps to improve the algorithm’s ability to uncover
    meaningful patterns.

     

3.  3.

    Adopt feature engineering: This creates new features from existing
    ones and has a significant impact on the performance of an ML model,
    helping to capture important aspects of the data that the model may
    not have identified, further improving the model’s predictive power.

     

4.  4.

    Perform cross-validation: Cross-validation is an important technique
    that helps to prevent overfitting, where the model memorizes data
    and performs poorly on unseen data (also explained in Chapter 2). To
    avoid overfitting, divide the data into training and validation sets
    several times, which helps to ensure the model generalizes well on
    unseen data. As accuracy and robustness go hand in hand, this
    technique will also invariably improve the robustness of a model.

     

5.  5.

    Keep up to date with the latest research developments: Keeping up to
    date with the latest research in the ever-evolving field of ML will
    help you learn the newest research methods to adopt, ensuring more
    robust models – including the robustness of generative AI models,
    which have much more amounts of data and have been “jailbreaked”
    quite often.³¹

     

In this chapter, we covered the meaning of robustness and its importance
and how to measure the robustness of ML models using the RGR value with
comparisons between a random forest model and a linear regression model.
We also discussed benchmarks for robustness and ways to improve the
robustness of your models if they have a poor robustness score. In the
following chapter, we’ll look at “explainability” and the importance of
developing explainable and transparent ML models.

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_4

4. Explainability

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

Let’s look at the next Responsible AI principle and SAFE-HAI component
we propose in this book – explainability.

While the principles of accuracy and robustness have been present for a
relatively long time span, the notion of explainability is more recent.
Its importance has grown in parallel with the development of “black-box”
learning models that may be very accurate, although very difficult, or
impossible, to interpret, especially in terms of their driving
mechanisms. While a precise mathematical definition of explainability is
not available due to its somehow subjective interpretation, the extant
literature relies on regulatory definitions, such as that reported in
Bracke et al. (2019),³² where explainability requires an explicit
understanding of the factors which determine a given machine learning
output.

According to NIST’s RMF, an AI system has to be explainable and
interpretable. Explainable and interpretable artificial intelligence
systems offer information that can help users understand the purposes
and impact of AI systems, while interpretability refers to the meaning
of AI output in the context of its designed purpose. Explainability
refers to the mechanisms which underlay AI systems. The underlying
assumption is that a risk of explainability or interpretability stems
from a lack of ability to make sense of a system’s output.

To achieve trustworthiness, AI systems must be explainable and
interpretable. As the two terms are closely related, in this chapter we
will use the term “explainability” to mean both.

The EU AI Act also refers to explainability, which also embodies
transparency. The act states that “High risk AI systems should be
designed and developed in a way to ensure their operation is
sufficiently transparent to enable deployers to interpret the system’s
output and use it appropriately.” The notion of transparency adopted by
the AI Act is clearly related to the notions of explainability and
interpretability as previously defined. Another reference of the AI Act
to explainability can be found in the requirement of “human oversight.”
“AI systems must be designed and developed in such a way that they can
be effectively overseen by natural persons during the period in which
the system is in use.” We will refer back to this in Chapter 8.

In the machine learning research community, the growing importance of
the explainability requirement has led to an increase in publications
and workshops, including conferences dedicated to explainable artificial
intelligence (XAI), among which is the World Conference on Explainable
AI.³³ The conference solicits papers on the topic of explainable AI and
has so far selected an average of 30% submitted papers: a high
selectivity which indicates, along with the large number of submissions,
that the conference has become the reference forum for researchers that
work on the topic of explainable AI and want to learn new methods and
new applications, leading to cross-fertilization and improvement of the
research.

Indeed, some machine learning models are explainable by design and don’t
need further refinements to be explainable. For example, linear and
logistic regression have made recent advances thanks to feature
selection optimization methods such as Lasso and Ridge. Other models
such as tree models, random forests, bagging, and boosting models are
much less explainable. However, these models have a built-in mechanism
referred to as the feature importance plot that calculates the
importance of each variable in terms of the splits (or average splits)
it generates on the tree (or forest) model. We also have more complex
models such as neural networks and support vector machines that are
typically unexplainable. This problem, however, can be solved with some
computational efforts, by permuting and/or reshuffling the values of any
given explanatory variable.

Further research development has been motivated by the need to compare
the explainability of different machine learning models, such as
regressions, tree model, and neural networks, in terms of an independent
model-agnostic measure run in a post-processing step. The most important
of such measures are Shapley values (see, e.g., Shapley, 1953,³⁴
Lundberg, 2017³⁵) and their normalized variant, the Shapley Lorenz
values (Giudici and Raffinetti, 2021³⁶).

Shapley values were introduced in game theory with the aim of dividing
the value of a game equally between the various participants. The goal
was to extend the technique to machine learning models. In this context,
Shapley values allow for the equitable distribution of a model’s
prediction among the regressors that constitute it.

Let’s take a look at a quick game analogy to understand the Shapley game
theory. Assuming there is a game for each observation you plan to
predict. For each game, the players are the model predictors, and the
total gain is equal to the sum of each predictor’s contribution. For any
given observation, the (local) effect of each variable k can be
calculated as follows:

Shapley_i= Sum_c (ypred(Xc) - ypred(Xc\k)),

where the Sum is taken over all c = 1,…, C possible combinations of the
available explanatory variables and where ypred(Xc) and ypred(Xc\k),
respectively, indicate a prediction obtained using the variables in a
specific combination and the predictions obtained using the same
variables (minus variable k).

In other words, Shapley value measures the added value of a variable, k,
to the prediction of each observation.

Once Shapley values are calculated, the global contribution of each
explanatory variable to the predictions is obtained by summing or
averaging them over all observations.

Shapley values help developers understand the impact of the various
explanatory variables in a model’s output. In other words, they help you
understand which explanatory variable drives the model’s predictions.

Unlike various regularization techniques, such as Lasso and Ridge, which
are applied in model building (ex ante), Shapley values are applied once
a model is selected (ex post). While Lasso and Ridge are mainly used for
model selection, Shapley values are employed for model interpretation.

However, it may be worth examining how much variability of the response
is explained by a given set of predictors. If a smaller set of
predictors is sufficient, we can choose that, making the model more
robust to input variations.

To this aim, Giudici and Raffinetti (2021) introduced Shapley Lorenz
values, which replace the payoff for Shapley values with a payoff based
on the difference between Gini coefficients (Lorenz Zonoids), normalized
by definition.

Shapley values and Shapley Lorenz values are examples of post-processing
techniques that can be employed to understand whether a machine learning
model is explainable and, if so, what are the variables that mostly
explain the variability of the response to be predicted. While
appealing, these measures, and similar post-processing techniques, may
be computationally complex, especially when many variables are being
considered. This is because the large number of possible combinations C
becomes rapidly very large, as the number of variables increases.

To improve the assessment of explainability, in the next section we will
propose a measure based on the Lorenz curve notion, similar to the
accuracy and robustness metrics discussed in the previous chapters. This
will allow us to answer the following question:

- How will we ensure that an AI system is explainable? How can we
  measure when an AI system is not explainable?

The following sections in this chapter will address this critical
question by means of the Rank Graduation Explainability measure (RGE).

Measuring Explainability

In this section, we consider how to measure the explainability of a
model or, more precisely, to understand which explanatory variables
drive the response variable predictions, if any. For further review of
explainability and interpretability methods, refer to the paper by
Saranya and Subhashini (2023).³⁷

For illustrative purposes, let’s look at the assessment of credit scores
for a credit lending platform which analyzes more than 100,000 European
companies. The data is described in Figure 4-1.

[]

Bar chart showing default and non-default percentages across various
sectors. Each sector is represented by a bar, with green indicating
non-default and red indicating default. The sectors include Consumer
Services, Diversified Financials, Media & Entertainment, and others.
Retailing has the highest non-default rate at 10.8%, while Energy has
the lowest at 6.6%. Default percentages are noted above each bar, with
Real Estate having the highest default rate at 17.0%.

Figure 4-2 exemplifies the application of one of the most known methods
to obtain variable explanations for the family of ensemble tree models,
which contains random forest and gradient boosting, for example, the
variable importance plot described below.

[]

A horizontal bar chart displays the relative importance of various
financial metrics. The metrics are ranked from highest to lowest
importance: ROE, PLTax, Leverage, EBIT, TAsset, Turnover, Country, and
Industry. ROE has the highest importance, while Industry has the lowest.
The x-axis represents relative importance, ranging from 0.00 to 0.25.

Figure 4-2 is a variable importance plot for the explanatory variables
that predict the corporate default in Figure 4-1. They all describe the
contribution of a set of financial and demographic characteristics which
determine the credit score of a company – an estimate of its probability
of default. For each variable, the plot represents its importance, that
is, the average reduction in variability obtained using that variable in
a random forest of tree models, each time sampling different
training/test sets.

Figure 4-2 shows reports for each of the eight variables which describe
different characteristics of a company, their importance, as measured by
the reduction in heterogeneity of the predictive classifications
achieved by the model. The heterogeneity is minimum when all predictions
in the same class have the same response values and maximum when they
are all different. Some variables, such as ROE, are very important as
they can contribute substantially in the reduction of the heterogeneity,
when employed to segment the observations into distinct group classes.

The next figure exemplifies the application of Shapley values which,
similar to importance plots, are obtained in a preprocessing step, but
are agnostic as they can be calculated for all models, not only for
ensemble tree models. In Figure 4-3, we present the result of the
application of Shapley values to a logistic regression model.

[]

Bar chart displaying Global Shapley values for various financial
metrics. PLTax and EBIT have the highest values, both exceeding 40,000.
Industry follows with a value around 15,000. Turnover, Country, TAsset,
ROE, and Leverage have progressively smaller values, all below 10,000.
The chart highlights the relative importance of these metrics.

Figure 4-3 represents the global Shapley values, the sum of all Shapley
values for the explanatory variables that potentially predict a binary
response, the credit default of a company, using a logistic regression
model.

Figure 4-3 shows that the variable “PLTax” – which describes the level
of profit or losses of a company before taxes – is the variable that
most contributes to reducing the heterogeneity of the predicted classes,
in terms of defaults/not defaults contained in them. PLTax is followed
by EBIT, a variable similar to PLTax, which describes “operating”
profits before taxes, but also before financial interests and
depreciation of holdings.

Referring back to the previous chapter on accuracy, we saw that the
AUROC of the random forest model is higher than that of the logistic
regression, which is more accurate. However, the explanations of the
logistic regression are “more concentrated,” that is, fewer variables
matter. Also, recall that the logistic regression model is “explainable
by design,” so we do not need to calculate Shapley values in a
post-processing step as logistic regression already produces estimates
for the coefficients of the explanatory variables. This shows a
trade-off between accuracy and explainability: in terms of the first
principle, random forest wins; but, in terms of the second principle,
logistic regression wins.

We can consider the third principle: robustness or sustainability. For
instance, we can try to simplify the full model with all variables, for
both models, to check if we can obtain a simpler and more robust model.
We did model comparison by means of a model comparison procedure based
on DeLong’s test. The results, reported in Babaei et al. (2023),³⁸
indicate that, while the random forest model can be simplified removing
the variables “industry” and “country,” the logistic regression model
cannot. The random forest model is thus superior also in terms of
robustness. Before drawing to a final conclusion, we will compare the
two types of models in terms of fairness in the next chapter.

Model Explainability

As previously discussed, the methods described above may be too
computationally complex, especially when many explanatory variables are
present in the data. Furthermore, it is necessary to embed them in a
statistical testing procedure, in order to understand when a certain
variable significantly explains the response (or, in other words, is as
a significant explanation). To this aim, let’s extend the Rank
Graduation Accuracy (RGA) measurement to a Rank Graduation
Explainability (RGE) measurement, comparing the predictions obtained
with a model based on all explanatory variables with those that would be
obtained with a model that excludes the variable of which we would like
to measure its explainability. While the RGA is based on the difference
between the observed cumulative response values calculated respectively
using the observed and the predicted ranks, the RGE is based on the
difference between the observed cumulative predicted values calculated,
respectively, using all the variables and all without the considered
one.

More precisely, a summary explainability metrics for each variable in a
model can be obtained by considering the area between the dual Lorenz
curve and the concordance curve, derived from the ranks of the
predictions obtained from the simpler model (with one less variable),
and dividing it by its maximum possible value – the area between the
dual Lorenz curve and the Lorenz curve, obtained using the predictions
obtained from the full model (with all variables). This is the Rank
Graduation Explainability (RGE) measure.

Mathematically, the Rank Graduation Explainability measure (RGE) is
defined by

sum(Q’i-QPi)/sum(Q’i-QFi),

where Q’i is the dual Lorenz curve, QFi is the Lorenz curve obtained
using the ranks of the predictions obtained with a full model, and QPi
is the concordance curve obtained using the ranks of the predictions
obtained excluding the variable under measurement.

The RGE measure has some important properties, in particular:

1.  1)

    It is normalized: RGE=1 in the case of an irrelevant variable, which
    provides no explanation of the variability of the response; RGA=0
    for the case of a variable that explains all the variability of the
    response; otherwise, 0<RGE<1.

     

2.  2)

    To assess whether the sum of the RGE metrics, for the variables in
    the model, passes a set threshold indicating a minimum level of
    explainability, a statistical test for RGE has to be made. A
    statistical test based on U-statistics can be derived taking the
    complement to one of the sum of the RGE values. Thus, the lower the
    sum of the RGE, the higher the explainability, and the smaller the
    p-value, the more significant is the found RGE with respect to a
    given lower bound.

     

Let’s exemplify the calculation with a numerical example. Consider the
predictions obtained in Table 2-3 of Chapter 2, and suppose one of the
variables is removed from the model, resulting in the predictions in the
sixth column in Table 4-1.

Table 4-1

Calculation of the RGE measure for a predictive problem

  Individual   Observed Response   Predicted Response   QFi    Qi’    QPi   Ranks from QP   QPi    Q’i-QPi   Q’i-QFi
  ------------ ------------------- -------------------- ------ ------ ----- --------------- ------ --------- ---------
  1            50                  70                   0.14   0.26   112   4               0.20   0.12      0.06
  3            100                 80                   0.3    0.5    90    1               0.44   0.2       0.06
  2            80                  100                  0.5    0.7    100   3               0.60   0.2       0.10
  5            150                 120                  0.74   0.86   115   5               0.70   0.12      0.16
  4            120                 130                                95    2                                 

From Table 4-1, it shows that the sum of the differences of Q’i-QPi is
equal to 0.48, whereas the sum of Q’i-Qi is equal to 0.64, from which
the value of RGE is 0.48/0.64=0.75, indicating a moderate level of
explanation of the considered variable.

This exercise can be repeated for all the variables in the model, and
the sum of the RGE can be calculated. An AI application will be deemed
explainable if the complement to one of the sum of the RGE is
significantly higher than a given bound (determined subjectively). The
test can be carried out by means of the Python code referenced in the
final chapter of the book and the appendix.

We remark that a similar exercise can be carried out for a
classification, rather than a regression problem.

We conclude this section with the Python code required to calculate the
RGE, for any given machine learning application.

The function is called

- check_explainability

It provides different functions related to the calculation of the Rank
Graduation Explainability measure (RGE).

The RGE function can calculate the Rank Graduation Explainability (RGE)
of each variable in the model, for classification (categorical response)
or for prediction (continuous response). It can then conduct a
statistical test to assess whether the overall explanation is
significantly higher than a set threshold or to that of another model.

More details on the Python implementation, including a statistical test
for RGE, which provides a corresponding p-value, are provided in the
appendix.

Scoring Rubric

Once the outlined measurement metrics for RGE have been completed, it’s
important to score the explainability measure of your model(s). Here’s a
simple scoring rubric for explainability.

Table 4-2

A scoring rubric for explainability

                                                       Excellent   Good      Fair      Borderline   Poor
  ---------------------------------------------------- ----------- --------- --------- ------------ --------
  What is the explainability score of your model(s)?   75%–90%     70%–75%   60%–70%   40%–60%      0%–40%

Mitigation

We’ll use RGE values to provide mitigation measures for explainability.
Unlike RGA or RGR, RGE is not a single statistics but rather a
collection of statistics, one for each feature in the model. Therefore,
before making mitigation actions on RGE, it is necessary to aggregate
the corresponding values. This can be done by examining the distribution
of RGE values among the different features. For example, we can make a
plot in which the feature variables are ordered in terms of their RGE
values, from the highest to the lowest. Then check how many features are
needed to reach a total RGE of 50%. If the 50% is reached with a small
number of features, the model is explainable. If 50% is not reached
after adding the RGE of all features, or if it is reached, but with a
very large number of features, the model is not explainable.

The threshold of 50% is purely indicative; a user can set a higher or a
lower threshold, depending on the desired level of explainability. In
terms of the number of explainable features, the definition of a “small
number” again is subjective and context specific. If the context is that
of continuous monitoring, “small” may mean three or four features; if
the context is more descriptive, “small” may mean ten or twelve
features.

If a machine learning model is evaluated as not being explainable, there
are a number of actions which can be taken:

1.  1.

    Make changes to the model: The machine learning model can be
    improved by means of model selection, which means trying to simplify
    the model by removing the features which are correlated with the
    others, without a significant reduction in the overall accuracy.

     

2.  2.

    Make changes to the datasets: Data quality can be improved by
    removing outlier data, or data that are not representative.
    Additionally, you can adjust the training data to better represent
    certain features (by means of oversampling or undersampling). This
    may lead to improved balance between the features.

     

3.  3.

    Increasing the amount of data: Explanations can also be improved by
    increasing the available data in the dataset(s) and augmenting the
    available data with data from similar problems (meta analysis) or
    generating synthetic data.

     

It’s important to note that the advantage of our proposed metrics, RGE,
with respect to standard measures such as Shapley values, is that it is
normalized and interpretable as the percentage of model accuracy due to
a feature. This allows us to evaluate the results of mitigation actions
directly, in terms of the added accuracy/explainability brought to the
model by the proposed changes. This is currently not possible with
Shapley values as the differential measurement is not normalized and not
connected to predictive accuracy.

In this chapter, we’ve looked at explainability, a core SAFE-HAI
principle, and discussed its recency in relation to accuracy and
robustness. We also honed in on its emphasis in NIST’s RMF and its
importance. We reviewed Shapley values and the game theory with respect
to explainability. To measure explainability values in an ML model, we
introduced RGE, the Rank Graduation Explainability measure, an important
metric which not only helps to measure explainability scores but can be
applied in mitigating and fixing poor explainability measures in ML
models. In the next chapter, we’ll look at “fairness” and “human rights”
as the fifth Responsible AI principles in the SAFE-HAI framework.

Part IIIEthical Risks (External)

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_5

5. Fairness and Human Rights

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

In the previous chapter, we looked at explainability and its importance
as a key Responsible AI principle/attribute. We also discussed ways to
measure explainability using the RGE metric and reviewed a few
adversarial benchmarks for robustness, including ways to improve the
robustness of your models, if they score poorly on the robustness
scoring rubric. The next Responsible AI principle we’ll discuss is
“fairness” and how it relates to human rights. These principles will be
covered in this chapter.

The motivation to develop Responsible AI technologies aims at mitigating
the risks that AI systems could cause harms on individuals,
organizations, and the environment. Such harms may be physical or
psychological – which are usually associated and addressed under “AI
safety.” We also have concerns about the violation of human rights, such
as the right of not being discriminated against and the right to
privacy, among others. In this chapter, we will focus on the risk of
discrimination and how to develop fairness.

The concept of fairness in machine learning has attracted a lot of
interest in recent years. Despite the vast number of studies on
fairness, there are no universal measures to calculate it, and several
notions of fairness have been considered in various literature.

For example, Teodorescu (2021)³⁹ follows a group-based approach to
fairness. The paper uses statistical fairness measures and relates the
fairness of machine learning models with computational complexity
employing an imbalanced large credit scoring data. They show that when
more than one protected variable is considered in a classification
problem, the typical ML models do not satisfy more than one fairness
criterion. This shows the difficulty of calculating fairness in
decision-making processes using large databases such as credit scoring.
The paper also discusses the problem of selecting suitable algorithms
that satisfy specific ethical criteria to classify real data. In
particular, they focus on the statistical fairness measures which show
that typical classification algorithms are not always fair toward
different protected attributes. The results found by analyzing a huge
credit scoring dataset prove the need for human input in fairness
decisions, especially when deciding trade-offs between fairness
criteria.

A second paper by Horesh et al. (2020)⁴⁰ considers individual measures
of fairness. In this case, there is no explicit protected variable but
other correlated demographic features that lead to discrimination and
bias in the model predictions. The proposed approach in this paper has
the following two general aspects: despite most fairness methods which
rely on the presence of at least a protected variable, this proposed
approach evaluates individual-based fairness using an implicit idea of a
potentially discriminatory variable that does not have to be directly
measurable. Secondly, it is applicable to a wide range of ML models. In
particular, they define a paired consistency score, which measures the
similarity of a model’s predictions, both for regression and
classification, for paired members.

Other papers focus on an experimental or “counterfactual” design
setting. For example, Karimi et al. (2022)⁴¹ propose the “FairMatch”
algorithm which introduces a new approach to pairing similar and
dissimilar individuals using a propensity score (PSM) matching method.
They focus on individual fairness and propose a novel metric to evaluate
individual fairness that captures the notion of similar treatment in
probabilistic classifiers in a better way. Using four real-world
datasets, they show the superiority of FairMatch to the existing
approaches. They also use the PSM method not only for matching the
similar individuals but also to improve the group-based fairness.

It’s important to note that the requirement of fairness is related to
the requirement of explainability. A recent paper by Grabowicz et al.
(2022)⁴² combines the two requirements of fairness and explainability to
obtain models which are both fair and interpretable. We follow a similar
approach in this chapter. By doing so, we also comply with the line of
research that not only measures but also suggests how to remove bias, as
discussed in Jiang and Nachum (2024).⁴³

Measuring Fairness for Organizations

To better understand how fairness can be operationally assessed, we will
discuss the measurement of fairness and explainability using the case
study on credit scoring for corporate organizations that we introduced
in Chapter 4. In the next section, we will consider a real-life case
study that relates to consumer credit for individuals.

Figure 5-1 represents the data we are considering from a different
perspective with respect to explainability, discussed in Chapter 4.

[]

A 3D scatter plot visualizes financial data for companies from Italy,
France, Spain, and Germany, represented by squares, circles, triangles,
and crosses, respectively. The axes are labeled "Leverage," "EBIT," and
"P/L after tax," all in logarithmic scale. Data points are color-coded
by ratings: green for strong, black for normal, and red for vulnerable.
The plot shows a concentration of normal and vulnerable ratings, with
strong ratings scattered above.

Figure 5-1 represents a set of more than 100,000 small and medium
enterprise organizations requesting credit, which are evaluated in terms
of their balance sheet results and, particularly, in terms of leverage,
profit, and losses – EBIT. The question we address is whether the credit
scores are assigned fairly and conditionally on their financial
performance – in other words, whether companies with similar financial
performances receive similar credit scores.

A natural framework to assess this type of fairness is by means of a
Lorenz curve which represents the cumulative distribution of the Shapley
values of a variable (such as leverage) for the different considered
countries. In Figure 5-2, we depict this curve using Shapley Lorenz
values instead of Shapley values.

[]

Graph titled "Lorenz Curve for Fairness" showing three lines: a red line
labeled "Maximum Fairness" representing perfect equality, a blue line
labeled "Intermediate Fairness" indicating moderate inequality, and
another blue line labeled "Maximum UnFairness" depicting high
inequality. The x-axis represents the proportion of population, and the
y-axis shows cumulative Shapley-Lorenz value shares.

Figure 5-2 depicts two stylized situations of minimum and maximum
fairness. Among them, the blue curve indicates the real considered case,
which indicates a high degree of fairness, being close to the red curve
rather than the purple one. Using a notion of conditional fairness where
a machine learning model is considered “fair” when a given explanatory
variable, such as “leverage,” has the same effect on the output. This is
different from marginal (unconditional) fairness, which indicates that
the output and not the explanation is the same for different population
groups. Conditional fairness can be associated with “individual”
fairness, whereas marginal fairness can be associated with group-based
fairness.

An example of group-based fairness is indicated in Figure 5-3 where we
show a machine learning output – the predictive accuracy, for different
countries and years.

[]

Line graph showing trends from 2015 to 2020 for five countries: Italy,
France, Spain, Germany, and a total average. Italy's line is green,
France's is blue, Spain's is yellow, Germany's is black, and the total
is red. Italy and Spain show fluctuations with peaks in 2019, while
France and Germany have a more stable trend. The total average remains
relatively consistent with slight variations.

Figure 5-3 indicates a high degree of fairness, as predictive accuracies
are similar and vary across the different years.

This analogy poses the question: Which notion of fairness to employ?
Marginal fairness is easier to understand. On the other hand,
conditional fairness is more useful when there are structural
characteristics, corresponding to explanatory variables that make
certain biases. For example, in the considered case, German companies
are not required to deposit balance sheets, different from the others,
and, therefore, the companies in the sample are much fewer. We thus
expect a lower accuracy which, however, does not necessarily mean a
bias. The Shapley values for leverage in the different countries are
reported in Figure 5-2, and they indeed reveal a small bias. The same
can be shown for the other variables. Thus, the model is conditionally
fair. In the next section, we will see how to assess fairness precisely,
using the Rank Graduation Fairness (RGF) metric.

Measuring Fairness for Individuals

In measuring fairness for individuals vs. organizations, which was
discussed in the previous section, let’s consider consumer lending, a
high-risk application. Consumer lending is considered high risk as it
could imply unfair allocation of credit to certain individuals.

To discuss Responsible AI methods in this context, we consider a
publicly available database, made up of 157,269 loan applications made
in 2017 in New York, taken from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
data repository. The dependent target variable, “declined loan,” takes
the value of “1” if a loan application initially satisfies the approval
requirements of Government-Sponsored Enterprises or of Federal Housing
Administrations (GSEs/FHA); it takes the value 0 if the lender approves
the loan. Since the Global Financial Crisis in 2008, many lenders have
enforced stringent approval requirements besides those of GSEs and FHA.
This means that despite satisfying the requirements of GSEs/FHA, an
applicant’s loan request may still be rejected by the lenders. In
detailing GSEs/FHA’s initial acceptance of the borrower’s application
and its subsequent rejection by the bank, the HMDA dataset, which
includes information on the applicant’s race, eminently qualifies for
this example.

Let’s review a key independent variable of interest (the protected
variable): the information on the applicant’s race. It takes the value 1
if the applicant is African American and 0 if it is White American.
Further, independent variables are used as controls, including gender,
whose variable takes the value 1 if the applicant is male and 0 if
female; the applicant’s gross annual income; the amount of loan applied
for; the purpose of the loan (e.g., 1 for refinancing the mortgage and 0
for purchasing a home); lien status, which takes the value 1 if the loan
application is secured by “first lien” and 0 for a subordinate lien; and
type of loan, whose variable takes the value 1 if the loan was insured
by the FHA and if insured by a GSE.

A preliminary data analysis shows there is a high imbalance in the
sample with only roughly 8% African Americans represented. On the other
hand, the applicant’s race is highly correlated with many other
independent variables, and, in particular, it is highly and positively
correlated with the “loan amount.” The combined effect of such
dependencies suggests a possible paradox: credit decisions may be unfair
conditionally on some explanatory variables (and, particularly, on loan
amount), but fair when not considering them.

In other words, fairness in loan acceptance should be evaluated not only
by looking at whether the probability of accepting a loan depends on
race (direct bias) but also by looking at whether the same probability
changes conditionally on a control variable that is highly correlated to
race (indirect bias), such as the “loan amount.”

This type of statistical paradox is known as “Simpson’s paradox.” It is
a phenomenon in which a statistical dependence appears in different
groups of data but disappears or reverses when these groups are
combined. Typically, the paradox arises when there are confounding
variables that are not taken into account during the analysis. The
observed association or trend in the aggregated data can be misleading
because the true relationship is hidden, and it is revealed when the
data is disaggregated by relevant factors.

For the data at hand, Agarwal et al. (2023)⁴⁴ have shown, using the
Shapley Lorenz values of Giudici and Raffinetti (2021), that loan
acceptance decisions are more fair when a random forest machine learning
model rather than a traditional logistic regression model is employed.
Their analysis, however, is marginal and not conditional on the
available control variables.

To assess whether loan acceptance decisions are fair, we can compare the
Shapley Lorenz values of the explanatory variables, focusing on the
applicant’s race. This is a conditional approach, similar to that
followed in Chen et al.⁴⁵

The authors compare a logistic regression model with a random forest
model on 70% of the data and apply the global Shapley method to examine
whether there is evidence of racial discrimination dividing the dataset
with respect to loan amount: one if higher than the mean amount
requested and zero if lower.

The authors found that, in line with the expectations, the random forest
model is more accurate than logistic regression. In terms of fairness,
when applying a random forest for the high loan amount sample, the
applicant’s race is the most important explanatory variable. It is
ranked first out of our six explanatory variables, and it explains 91%
of the declined loans. In contrast, the applicant’s race is only the
fifth most important variable (loan type is the most important), and it
explains only 1% of the variability of declined loans. When the two
samples are combined, as in Agarwal et al. (2023), the applicant’s race
explains only 3% of the response.

This shows clear evidence of a Simpson’s paradox: the random forest
model appears (marginally) as an ethically accountable model,
differently from the logistic regression model. However, when we
consider separately the loan amount requested, the model becomes unfair,
in particular when a high amount is requested.

In the next section, we present the RGF metric, which is conditional
and, therefore, avoids these types of paradoxes, and at the same time,
it is easier to compute.

Model Fairness

The methods previously described may be too computationally complex,
especially when many explanatory variables are present in the data. To
this aim, we will extend the Rank Graduation Accuracy (RGA) measurement
to a Rank Graduation Fairness (RGF) measurement, comparing the
predictions obtained with a model based on all explanatory variables
with those that would be obtained with a model that excludes the
protected variable. While the RGA is based on the difference between the
observed cumulative response values calculated, respectively, using the
observed and the predicted ranks, the RGF is based on the difference
between the observed cumulative predicted values calculated,
respectively, using all the variables – but the considered protected
variable.

More precisely, the fairness metrics for a model can be obtained by
considering the area between the dual Lorenz curve and the concordance
curve, derived from the ranks of the predictions obtained without the
protected variable, and dividing it by its maximum possible value – the
area between the dual Lorenz curve and the Lorenz curve. The Lorenz
curve is derived using the ranks of the predictions obtained from all
variables in the model. This is considered the Rank Graduation Fairness
(RGF) measure.

Mathematically, the Rank Graduation Fairness measure (RGF) is defined by

sum(Q’i-QPi)/sum(Q’i-QFi),

where Q’i is the dual Lorenz curve, QFi is the Lorenz curve derived
using the ranks of the predictions obtained from the full model, and QPi
is the concordance curve obtained using the ranks of the predictions
derived by excluding the protected variable under measurement.

The RGF measure has some important properties, in particular:

1.  1)

    It is normalized: RGF=0 in the case of unfairness – the protected
    variable reverses the ranks; RGF=1 for the case of fairness – the
    protected variable does not change the ranks; otherwise, 0<RGF<1.

     

2.  2)

    To assess whether the RGF metric passes a set threshold indicating a
    minimum level of accuracy, a statistical test for RGF has to be
    made. When the response Y is binary, the test coincides with
    DeLong’s test. In general, a statistical test based on U-statistics
    can be derived. In all cases, the higher the RGF, the higher the
    predictive accuracy, and the smaller the p-value, the more
    significant is the found RGF with respect to a given lower bound.

     

Let’s exemplify the calculation with a numerical example that concerns a
classification problem.

Consider the classifications obtained in Table 2-6 in Chapter 2, and
suppose we remove a protected variable from the model, such as gender,
race, or nationality.

From Table 5-1, the sum of Q’i-Qi (maximum possible perturbation) is
equal to 1.31, whereas the sum of Q’i-QPi (actual perturbation effect)
is equal to 0.89, leading to an RGF equal to 68%, a value of fairness
that indicates attention.

Table 5-1

Calculation of the RGF measure for a classification problem (change
values)

  Individuals   Observed Response   Predicted Response   QFi    QFi’   Predicted Without Protected Variable   Ranks Without the Protected Variable   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------- ------------------- -------------------- ------ ------ -------------------------------------- -------------------------------------- ------ -------- ---------
  2             0                   0.10                 0.04   0.32   0.60                                   3                                      0.19   0.28     0.13
  5             1                   0.46                 0.21   0.58   0.46                                   1                                      0.34   0.37     0.24
  1             0                   0.52                 0.41   0.79   0.52                                   2                                      0.50   0.38     0.29
  4             1                   0.71                 0.68   0.96   0.71                                   4                                      0.73   0.28     0.23
  3             1                   0.85                               0.85                                   5                                      1                

We conclude this section with the Python code required to calculate the
RGF, for any given machine learning application.

The function is called

- check_fairness

It provides different functions related to the calculation of the Rank
Graduation Fairness measure (RGF).

The RGF function can calculate the Rank Graduation Fairness (RGF) of a
model, for classification (categorical response) or for prediction
(continuous response).

More details on the Python implementation, including a statistical test
for RGF, which provides a corresponding p-value, are provided in the
appendix. What is presented for tabular data can be extended to all
types of data, and it can cover generative AI as well. To this end, it
is necessary to identify words or sentences that can be associated with
a protected variable.

Scoring Rubric

Once the outlined measurement metrics for RGF have been completed, it’s
important to score the robustness of your model(s). Here’s a simple
scoring rubric for fairness.

Table 5-2

A scoring rubric for fairness

                                                 Excellent   Good      Fair      Borderline   Poor
  ---------------------------------------------- ----------- --------- --------- ------------ --------
  What is the fairness score of your model(s)?   75%–90%     70%–75%   60%–70%   40%–60%      0%–40%

Mitigation

Once you’ve determined the fairness scores of your models and
applications, it’s time to fix and reduce the biases and unfair results
you detected.

Here are a few ways to resolve any fairness issues identified in your AI
systems:

1.  1.

    Apply explainability methods: Using the RGE metrics discussed in the
    previous chapter to fix a poor explainable score in an AI model is
    one sure way to resolve fairness issues as a more explainable model
    pinpoints areas where the model could be defaulting on fairness.

     

2.  2.

    Make changes to the datasets: By resampling the dataset and
    adjusting the training data to represent more samples (oversampling)
    from underrepresented groups, fairness issues can be resolved as
    there’ll be adequate representation of all groups in the dataset,
    which will balance it out.

     

3.  3.

    Leverage on synthetic data: You can also improve the diversity of
    the dataset by creating synthetic data for the underrepresented
    groups in the dataset, based on the fairness results when tested.

     

In this chapter, we looked at fairness and its importance and how to
measure fairness using the Rank Graduation Fairness (RGF) score. We
looked at examples where the global Shapley method was applied to a
logistic regression model and a random forest model to investigate
racial discrimination in a loan dataset. We concluded this chapter with
a few mitigation measures for poor fairness scores. In the following
chapter, we’ll look at privacy.

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_6

6. Privacy

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

When working with AI applications and models, the privacy of individuals
is of utmost importance. Privacy in machine learning aims to preserve
the privacy of individuals represented in the datasets. It tends to
employ and use different techniques to safeguard sensitive data during
ML development and deployment. In this chapter, we’ll look at privacy
and how to measure privacy in ML models and algorithms.

To preserve privacy, the NIST AI RMF recommends an AI application should
be as independent as possible from individual observations. In other
words, omitting information about a single individual or about a given
set of individuals should not have a relevant impact on the output. If
this is the case, such observations can be removed without altering the
AI output substantially. These considerations allow us to measure the
degree of privacy and the degree of compliance with the privacy
requirement, examining the dependence on the output on a given set of
observations.^(46, 47) This can be achieved with the SAFE-HAI framework
proposed in this book.

The Rank Graduation Accuracy (RGA) measurement can be extended to a Rank
Graduation Privacy (RGP) measurement, comparing the predictions obtained
with a model based on all data with those obtained from a model that
excludes one or more data points which needs to be “forgotten” – an
important principle in machine learning where personal data should be
erased based on different circumstances, such as when personal data is
no longer needed, or individuals have requested for the removal of their
personal data. The RGP is based on the difference between the observed
cumulative predicted values calculated using all data minus the
considered one.

The RGP metrics can be obtained by considering the area between the dual
Lorenz curve and the concordance curve, derived from the ranks of the
predictions obtained without the data to be forgotten, and dividing it
by its maximum possible value – the area between the dual Lorenz curve
and the Lorenz curve.

To derive RGP, consider a set of N individuals corresponding to the
observations in the rows of the training set. Let m be the set of
individuals whose information is removed from the training set, for
privacy purposes. Let us then denote the individuals corresponding to
the observations in the rows of the test set with n.

To introduce a metric that can assess the compliance to privacy, we can
follow four main steps, as follows:

- Step 1: A machine learning model is fitted on the whole training set,
  including all n observations.

- Step 2: The model fitted in step 1 is employed to obtain predicted
  values for the n observations in the test set.

- Step 3: m observations (with m < N) are removed from the training set,
  and the model is trained on the remaining N-m observations.

- Step 4: The model fitted at step 3 is employed to obtain predicted
  values for the n observations in the test set.

After these steps are taken, a new metric called Rank Graduation Privacy
and denoted with RGP can be derived comparing the predicted values
provided by the model fitted on the whole training set and computed on
the test set, indicated with Yhat, and the predicted values provided by
the model fitted on the training set without the m observations and
computed on the test set, indicated with Yhat(-m). The Yhat values are
reordered with respect to the non-decreasing ranks of the Yhat(-m)
values, indicated with r^{-m}.

The Lorenz and dual Lorenz curves are built using the Yhat predicted
values provided by the model fitted on the whole dataset (composed of n
rows). The Lorenz curve is obtained cumulating such values in their
ordered ranks, r. The dual Lorenz curve is derived cumulating the same
values, but in reverse order. The concordance curve C is instead
calculated using the Yhat predicted values reordered according to the
ranks r^{-m} of the predicted values fitting the model on the reduced
dataset, which does not contain the forgotten data (composed of N=n-m
observations).

The Rank Graduation Privacy measure (RGP) can then be defined by

sum(Q’i-QPi)/sum(Q’i-Qi),

where Q’i is the dual Lorenz curve, Qi is the Lorenz curve obtained
using the ranks r of the predictions obtained with all training data,
and QPi is the concordance curve obtained using r^{-m}, the ranks of the
predictions obtained excluding the data to be forgotten.

The RGP measure has some important properties, in particular:

1.  1)

    It is normalized: RGP=0 in the case of irrelevant data; RGP=1 for
    the case of data with absolute importance; in general, 0<RGP<1.

     

2.  2)

    To assess whether the RGP metric passes a set threshold indicating a
    minimum level of privacy, a statistical test for RGP can be derived,
    similar to the mentioned metrics in the previous chapters. The
    higher the RGP, the higher the value of the data, and the smaller
    the p-value, the more significant the found RGP is with respect to a
    given lower bound.

     

Let’s exemplify the calculation with a numerical example. Consider the
predictions obtained in Table 2-3 of Chapter 2, and suppose some data is
removed from the model, resulting in the predictions in the sixth column
in Table 6-1.

Table 6-1

Calculation of the RGP measure for a predictive problem

  Individual   Observed Response   Predicted Response   Qi     Qi’    Predicted with Less Data   Predicted with Less Data Ranks   QPi    Q’i-Qi   Q’i-QPi
  ------------ ------------------- -------------------- ------ ------ -------------------------- -------------------------------- ------ -------- ---------
  1            50                  70                   0.14   0.26   105                        4                                0.20   0.12     0.06
  3            100                 80                   0.3    0.5    75                         1                                0.44   0.2      0.06
  2            80                  100                  0.5    0.7    95                         3                                0.60   0.2      0.10
  5            150                 120                  0.74   0.86   120                        5                                0.70   0.12     0.16
  4            120                 130                                85                         2                                                 

From Table 6-1, it shows that the sum of the differences of Q’i-QPi is
equal to 0.48, whereas the sum of Q’i-Qi is equal to 0.64. From this,
the value of RGP is 0.48/0.64=0.75, indicating a reasonable level of
privacy. Removing the data in the training sample for privacy purposes
leads to a reduction in the model accuracy of about 25%.

This exercise can be repeated many times while considering different
sets of training data to be forgotten, which can be specified by the
user. An AI application will be deemed privacy preserving if the average
RGP is significantly higher than a given value, determined subjectively
by the AI developer. We can also evaluate whether the perturbation
significantly deteriorates the prediction obtained with the original
data with a statistical test, which is implemented in the Python code
provided in the appendix of the book and described in Babei et al.
(2024).⁴⁸

More precisely, the function in the Python code is called

- check_privacy

The function provides different functions related to the calculation of
the RGP.

Let’s illustrate its application in a real-life example based on a
dataset that contains the salaries of the employees of a company. We
will consider the assessment of privacy for both a classification and a
prediction problem.

More precisely, we’ll utilize the publicly available “Employee” dataset,
well known to the statistical community, contained in the “stima” R
package. The data derives from a study carried out on 473 employees of a
bank and includes information on their gender, age, educational degree
(in terms of years of education), employment category (custodial,
clerical, or manager), job time in months since hire, total work
experience (total job time in months since hire and from previous
experiences), minority classification (i.e., whether of an ethnic
minority), starting salary (in dollars), and current salary (in
dollars).

A descriptive analysis of the data shows that most of the employees are
less than 30 years old and that the majority of the employees have had
12 years of education, with a high degree of heterogeneity. The
distribution of the number of months since the hiring date is also
variable. The variable “previous experience” expressed in months shows a
much higher variability than the previous variables, possibly because
this variable is expressed in months.

For the data, we will consider both classification and prediction
models. In the prediction model, the response variable is the value of
the salary. In the classification model, the response variable is
binary. It is “doubling the salary” obtained by assigning level 1 to the
employees that achieve a salary growth rate (ratio of the current salary
to the starting salary) greater or equal to two and a level 0 otherwise.

For more details, and to access the data and the Python code, please
refer to the notebooks available on the GitHub repository indicated and
described in Babei et al. (2024).

For the classification model, let’s aim to predict whether an employee
in the available bank data doubles the salary or not. The model could be
employed to automatize (or semi-automatize) employee payroll
progression, so it can be considered a “high-risk” application of AI, in
the terminology of the EU AI Act.

Without loss of generality, we can model the classification problem with
a random forest, RandomForestClassifier, as implemented in the
sklearn.ensemble module of Python. More specifically, using the
considered explanatory variables and the binary target variable,
“doubling_salary” (y), the predicted values (yhat) are estimated for the
test data (corresponding to the 30% of the whole dataset), employing the
model fitted on the train dataset.

The RGP metric of the model can be calculated using the Privacy function
in the Python check_privacy module.

To evaluate the privacy of a model considering the observations in the
training data, it is necessary to evaluate the model while the
observations of interest are removed from the model. For example, if
individuals 10 and 12 ask to remove their data, RGP is equal to,
respectively, 0.943662 (when we remove observation 10) and 0.929577
(when we remove observation 12).

The above model indicates that removing the 10th observation leads to an
RGP equal to 0.94, higher than that obtained by removing the 12th
observation. We can therefore conclude that the 12th observation is more
valuable for the model.

To assess the compliance of the model with the privacy requirement, we
can compare the values against a set threshold, when available. As for
explainability and fairness, we can also assess whether the removal of
one or more observations significantly changes the model.

For example, the RGP-based test for the tenth observation leads to a
p-value equal to 0.003418. The p-value of the test is small, which means
we’ll reject the null hypothesis. Rejecting the null hypothesis means
the output of the model significantly changes. This signifies that the
model does not preserve privacy, according to the RGP metric. This
result is expected, as the number of available observations in this
database is relatively small (473 in total).

We can now consider the same data, viewing it as a response variable and
considering the salary growth of the employees rather than its binary
version (doubling of the salary). Our aim is to predict “salary growth,”
which represents the difference between two variables, “salary” and
“starting salary.” The resulting variable, the salary growth, is a
continuous variable, and to predict it, we will consider a random forest
model using the RandomForestRegressor function in the sklearn.ensemble
package of Python. It’s important to note that the choice of a random
forest model is just one possibility that eases the interpretation of
the results, as we use the same type of models for both classification
and prediction.

We calculate, similar to the calculation in the classification problem,
the RGP values when we remove the 10th and the 12th training
observations. To this end, each observation is removed from the training
data, and then the ranks of the predicted values estimated by the model
including all the observations are compared with the ranks of the
predictions estimated by the model excluding the selected observation,
as previously described.

We obtain that RGP is equal to 0.995943 (removing the 10th observation)
and to 0.996644 (removing the 12th observation).

Thus, removing the 10th observation leads to a high RGP, close to one,
meaning that removing this observation from the model does not affect
the predictions. A similar result also holds for the 12th observation.
To confirm the results, we can apply the RGP-based statistical test for
the 12th observation. The resulting p-value is equal to 1.65*10-08,
which is a very small value. This leads us to reject the null
hypothesis, which means that the ranks of the predictions by the reduced
model are significantly different from those of the complete model, and
the prediction model is not compliant to the privacy criterion, as it
occurred for the classification model. Both models use very little data,
making it difficult to be compliant with the privacy requirements.

Scoring Rubric

Once the outlined measurement metrics for RGP have been completed, it’s
important to score the privacy of your model(s). Here’s a simple scoring
rubric for privacy.

Table 6-2

A scoring rubric for privacy

                                                Excellent   Good      Fair      Borderline   Poor
  --------------------------------------------- ----------- --------- --------- ------------ --------
  What is the privacy score of your model(s)?   95%–100%    90%–95%   80%–90%   70%–80%      0%–70%

Mitigation

To ensure high levels of privacy of user data in your ML models,
algorithms, and applications, you can adopt several ML
privacy-preserving techniques, such as differential privacy, federated
learning, homomorphic encryption, adversarial training, and secure
multi-party computation (MPC).⁴⁹ Let’s take a quick look at these
techniques in more detail:

1.  1.

    Differential privacy: This introduces a mechanism of introducing
    “noise” or perturbations to the training datasets, making it
    difficult for any attacker to identify personal identifiable
    information or any individual record. This enables the release of
    aggregate statistics in ML models without compromising or revealing
    the privacy of the underlying data.

     

2.  2.

    Federated learning: Federated learning is a decentralized approach
    that enables multiple devices to collaborate on training a shared
    model without directly accessing their data. Each participant trains
    the model using their local data, and the model updates are combined
    to create a global model, without access to the personal data of
    each local dataset.

     

3.  3.

    Homomorphic encryption: This employs a cryptographic encryption
    which doesn’t require decryption of encrypted data before use and
    permits computation with encrypted data. This means that ML
    practitioners can build ML models trained and applied on encrypted
    data, which protects sensitive user data and information, ensuring
    they remain protected throughout the computation process.

     

4.  4.

    Adversarial training: Adversarial training is an important ML
    privacy-preserving technique that is also used during ML safety
    tests. It involves training ML models to be robust against
    adversarial attacks and malicious acts. This is carried out by
    including adversarial examples in the training process, enabling the
    models to be more resilient and less susceptible to privacy and
    security breaches.

     

5.  5.

    Secure multi-party computation (MPC): Secure MPC allows multiple
    parties to compute jointly over their inputs without revealing the
    individual inputs of the parties. This is a useful technique when
    you have several organizations or individuals working together on a
    particular ML task or project, but don’t want to provide broad
    access to their individual data or share their sensitive data
    directly.

     

These methods have been introduced and employed by major tech companies,
such as Apple, Google, and IBM.

To conclude on this chapter, we’ve looked at the importance of privacy,
how to measure privacy, a rubric score for scoring the levels of privacy
in your ML models, and different ML privacy-preserving techniques that
can be utilized. In the next chapter, we’ll look at sustainability.

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_7

7. Sustainability

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

In the previous chapter, we looked at privacy and different ways to
measure the levels of privacy in ML models and applications using the
RGP score (Rank Graduation Privacy). In this chapter, we’ll discuss
sustainability and the requirements for an AI system to be “sustainable”
in accordance with environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
standards.

ESG can be defined as a set of standards used to screen potential
investments in a company on the basis of how the company performs in
environment (E), social (S), and governance (G).

ESG scores are very important for artificial intelligence applications,
and this importance is reflected in the existing regulations. For
example, the EU AI Act, while acknowledging that AI contributes to a
wide range of environmental benefits “across the entire spectrum of
industries and social activities,” also states that “when a general
purpose AI model poses a systemic risk, supervisors may consider the
estimated energy consumption of training AI models.” At a higher level,
the United Nations AI Advisory Board states, at the beginning of its
interim report (article 4), that “a key measure of our success is the
extent to which AI technologies help achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).”⁵⁰ Environmental, social, and governance factors are
highly related to all 16 SDG goals so that, if AI applications take into
account ESG factors, they may help to achieve SDG goals as well.

Industrial sectors or verticals which have a high impact on the
environment, such as energy and fashion, to name a few, may strongly
benefit from the inclusion of ESG criteria in their key performance
indicators. Better ESG scores can make companies in these sectors more
attractive for investors and consumers, as they are perceived to be more
sustainable in the long run.

From a financial perspective, contrary to more traditional financial
indicators, the criteria for ESG aims at enhancing returns while
simultaneously promoting positive social and environmental outcomes.⁵¹
The incorporation of such standards in the investment decision-making
process is defined as “sustainable finance,” and it is meant to increase
long-term investments in sustainable economic activities and projects.⁵²

Despite the unstoppable growth ESG has experienced since the Great
Recession in 2008, authorities have come up with little or no regulation
on the matter, leaving rating agencies free to decide their own
methodology for the assessment of a corporate’s sustainability
performance. In a similar context, the interpretation of ESG scores as
provided by major financial platforms – such as Refinitiv or Bloomberg –
becomes challenging, as the reasons behind the scores may not be clearly
interpretable. Indeed, more and more firms engage in “greenwashing”
behaviors, ultimately misleading stakeholders about their sustainable
performance.^(53, 54)

Though there is no unique classification yet, the features included in
each of the three dimensions (E) (S) (G) could be described as follows:

- E, which stands for “environment,” typically refers to a company’s
  effort on climate change mitigation and adoption. It may account for a
  company’s limitation on the usage of harmful pollutants and chemicals
  or to a company’s active engagement in the reduction of greenhouse
  emission.⁵⁵ Among the three ESG items, environment (E) has always been
  the most popular one, both in terms of implementation on the firms’
  side and in terms of evaluation by rating agencies.

- S, which represents “social criteria,” usually refers to the policies
  promoted by a company on the matter of inequality, inclusiveness,
  labor relation, and human rights issues. A company’s business
  relationships alongside employees’ health and safety and working
  conditions may be evaluated as well.

- G, representing “governance,” may account for the presence of conflict
  of interest in the choice of board members, the percentage of female
  board members, or, in general, the percentage of gender diversity in a
  company.

In the next section, we will consider how to take into account ESG
goals, in machine learning models, so as to improve the sustainable
development not only of AI applications but also of our world at large.

Environmental Sustainability

Environmental sustainability is the first ESG factor and is related to
the requirement that AI applications should not create harm for the
environment.

The assessment of environmental sustainability is the most common ESG
assessment, which has the most reliable and most sources of data. We
explain how to measure environmental sustainability by means of a case
study described in Agosto et al. (2023),⁵⁶ which looks at the
relationship between ESG and the reputation of a company (rating). An
investor company may employ AI models and would need to measure the
environmental sustainability of AI systems by measuring the
environmental sustainability of the company that produces, deploys, or
uses an AI system.

Figure 7-1 describes the data we’ll review as an example. This data is a
sample of 1382 European companies and their financial reputation (credit
rating). The figure describes the distribution of the companies in terms
of credit ratings.

[]

Bar chart displaying the count of Bloomberg credit rating classes. IG1
has the highest count, exceeding 200, followed by a gradual decrease
through IG2 to IG10. HY1 to HY6 and DS1 to DS4 show significantly lower
counts, with DS4 being the lowest. The chart highlights the distribution
of credit ratings, emphasizing the predominance of IG1.

Our goal is to build a model aimed at predicting the financial
reputation of the company in question on the basis of the ESG score with
a focus on the environmental score. On completion of this type of model,
a powerful and useful tool could be utilized by the company to monitor
and improve its reputation by varying the levels of environmental
sustainability.

To explain the credit ratings, we consider using the overall ESG score
of a company, as measured by different data providers. ESG scores
produced by different providers are typically different, as they are
built using different background variables and attribute different
weights to the considered variables.

Agosto et al. (2023) introduced a Bayesian ensemble model which can
produce a combined ESG score, weighting each individual score by means
of a weight that is related to the predictive accuracy of the
corresponding credit rating. More precisely, the combined score is
obtained by attributing a weight to each available ESG score. This
weight is a function of the likelihood of the observed counts of
companies belonging to the different credit rating classes, under the
alternative partitions generated by the ESG scores. The likelihood
weights are expressed in-sample predictive performance and are obtained
through the application of Bayes’ theorem, as shown in Agosto et al.
(2023).

The model is based on the assumption that there is an effect of ESG
scores on credit rating. However, the aim is not to build a model that
employs ESG scores to improve credit rating predictive accuracy but
rather to investigate the relative importance of each ESG data score.

To this end, it is assumed that each ESG score generates a partition of
the companies in j clusters (such as the four quartiles of the ESG
distribution) and that the rating of a company is the same for the
companies belonging to the same cluster. By doing so, we have one
partition of companies for each given ESG score (each one supplied by a
different data provider).

More formally, assuming that the rating is obtained from the estimated
“probability of default” of each company (PD) and that each ESG is
associated with a partition that places each company in a cluster j, the
estimated PD is obtained as follows:

PD = PD(cluster j under partition P)*Probability(partition P).

This equation summarizes the essence of the model. It proves that it is
a safe and Responsible AI model as it’s composed of several Responsible
AI principles from sustainability, fairness, and explainability. It’s a
sustainable model, as it allows us to measure the impact of ESG factors
on credit ratings. It is a fair model, as it averages the contribution
of different ESG providers, compensating their differences, due to
different objectives. It is an explainable model, as it is a linear
combination of weights with posterior probabilities, which, although
calculated in a nonlinear way, have a clearly interpretable meaning.

For the purpose of measuring accuracy, let’s evaluate if the model is
accurate using the available data – in other words, whether ESG factors
have a predictive relevance for credit ratings, and if so, what are the
relative weights of each ESG factor in the model.

Specifically, we will apply the Bayesian ensemble model to a sample of
1382 European companies where we have retrieved the following
information:

- The Morgan Stanley Score Index (MSCI) ESG Score: A continuous variable
  ranging from 0 (lowest sustainability) to 10 (highest sustainability).

- The Refinitiv ESG Score: A continuous variable ranging from 0 to 100.
  As for the MSCI ESG score, higher values indicate better
  sustainability profiles.

- The Standard and Poor’s (S&P) Global ESG Rank: A discrete variable
  defined as the total sustainability percentile rank, ranging from 0
  (lowest sustainability) to 100 (highest sustainability).

- The rating class assigned to the company based on the Bloomberg Issuer
  Default Risk model generated probability of default over the next one
  year: An ordinal variable whose categories are in the sample range
  from IG1 (highest credit worthiness) to D4 (lowest credit worthiness).
  Specifically, classes from IG1 to IG10 identify investment grade bond
  issuers, while classes from HY to H6 and from D1 to D4 identify high
  yield and distressed bond issuers, respectively. Starting from the
  rating class information, we define a binary variable which is equal
  to 1 if the company belongs to a speculative (high yield or
  distressed) class, 0 if otherwise. This will be our target variable.

- A set of 13 financial ratios: Return on equity, return on asset,
  return on investment, short-term debt on one-year growth, total debt
  on one-year growth, free cash flow on one-year growth, free cash flow
  on five-year growth, EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes,
  depreciation, and amortization) to interest expenses, long-term debt
  to total equity, quick ratio, capital expenditure ratio, financial
  leverage, and asset turnover, which should reflect company
  profitability, growth, and liquidity, together with the value of
  market capitalization, which serves as a dimensional indicator.

The distribution of sample companies among the credit rating classes has
already been shown. It shows that, for the considered companies, the
distribution of ratings is quite skewed to the right and that there is a
large group of companies with very high ratings. Both aspects will make
it more challenging to attain a good level of predictive accuracy.

Figure 7-2 shows the distribution of the ESG scores for the same
companies.

[]

Three histograms comparing frequency distributions for S&P, Refinitiv,
and MSCI. Each histogram displays data on a scale from 0 to 100, with
frequency up to 150. The S&P and MSCI histograms show a peak around
60-80, while Refinitiv peaks slightly higher, around 70-90.

In Figure 7-2, we can see that the distribution of the three ESG scores
in the analyzed sample is left-skewed. In general, this shows that a
good number of companies have shown a much worse ESG evaluation.

Calculating the correlations for the data in Figure 7-2, using the
standard covariance/variance formula, shows that the correlation between
all three pairs of ESG scores is quite low: 0.372 (MSCI-S&P), 0.383
(MSCI-Refinitiv), 0.692 (Refinitiv-S&P).

The application of the model to the data leads to the following weights:
0.36 (MSCI), 0.37 (Refinitiv), 0.27 (S&P). This means that to predict
credit rating and the reputation of a firm, S&P ESG ratings are the
least important, while the other two are more important. The difference
between model weights decreases when we insert the balance sheet ratios
in the analysis, but maintains the described order of importance.

We can consequently use the weights associated with the ESG scores
estimated on the training sample (60% of the available observations) to
predict the credit rating in the validation sample (40% of the available
observations). The weights are then used to determine for each company
and for each provider domain (Refinitiv, Standard and Poors, MSCI) the
probability associated with each of the two considered rating
categories: investment grade or speculative (high yield or distressed)
class.

The results of the analysis show that the combined model has a
predictive accuracy of about 61%, compared to the 59%, 55%, and 51%
obtained by the single scores when examined separately. Therefore, we
can conclude that the combined model slightly improves the
predictions in a context in which predictive accuracy is difficult to
obtain. More importantly, the model explains why an ESG score is better
than another, by means of a set of explicit weights. For the considered
data, Refinitiv and MSCI are more important than S&P. It can also be
shown that the combined model is much superior than the others in the
extreme classes (low rating classes). Similar conclusions are obtained
when controlling for the financial variables.

Now we’ve discussed how to take environmental sustainability into
account when building a machine learning model, in the next section
we’ll provide an example of how to embed social (S) and governance (G)
sustainability factors in AI models. To this aim, we will consider
gender diversity, which refers to both S and G.

Social and Governance Sustainability

In this section, we’ll evaluate how to measure social and governance
sustainability through a case study described in Bosone et al. (2022),⁵⁷
which concerns the relationship between “female presence” in companies,
ESG, and financial performance.

The assessment of “female presence” by means of measurable indicators
such as the number of female directors and the percentage of women in
the Board could be categorized as measuring both social (S) and
governance (G) factors. Though the problem of gender equality has been
gaining considerable importance over the last decades, a number of
related benefits are still unknown to many.

Bosone et al. (2022) addresses the question of whether the increase of
female presence, which corresponds to an increase in the level of ESG
factors, can also increase the financial sustainability of a company, as
expressed by its rating, or probability of default. To this aim, and in
line with the long period of time needed for ESG factors to manifest its
effects, we decided to use as a response variable for the five-year
default probability of firms. It is a continuous variable with values
between zero and one. The choice of a five-year time period is in line
with the fact that environmental, social, and governance scores, which
include gender presence, are mostly used for investment decisions in
long-term horizons.

To measure the effect of female presence in a company, several
explanatory variables can be employed. The most widely used are the
number of female employees; the existence of policies favoring inclusion
or diversity; the existence of programs favoring work/life balance;
achievements in gender parity, including equal pay; and reports of
controversies related to sexual harassment and discrimination. Social
(S) and governance (G) scores are calculated taking into account all the
previous indicators and, therefore, can be used as proxy measurements of
gender equality.

Bosone et al. (2022) consider the S and G scores from the Bloomberg
database for a relatively large sample of companies, not only aggregate
ESG scores but also specific scores for each of the three dimensions E,
S, and G. Trying to balance informativeness with data quality, they
opted for the following measures of gender equality: the presence of
equal opportunity policies (binary variable), the presence of health
safety policies (binary variable), the percentage of women in the Board,
the number of female directors and the number of female executives, the
presence of female CEOs (binary variable), the existence of a gender pay
gap breakout (binary variable), the fairness of the remuneration
policies (binary variable).

To extend the width of the analysis, they also included the following:
the presence of a Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) sustainability
committee (binary variable), the average and the total board
compensation, and the aggregate ESG scores along with the specific
scores for the social (S) and governance (G) dimensions.

A further binary variable for female-dominated (Fem_Dominated) and
male-dominated (Male_Dominated) sectors was inserted, with the hope of
obtaining some significant insights on the matter of gender pay gap
across sectors.

Finally, the authors introduced some control variables at the firm
level, namely: (I) the market capitalization, calculated by multiplying
the total number of a company’s outstanding shares by the current market
price of a share; (II) the return on assets (ROA), a measure of how
efficiently a company’s management uses assets to generate earnings;
(III) the return on equity (ROE), calculated by dividing net income by
shareholders’ equity, a measure of financial performance; (IV) the
return on invested capital (ROIC), which expresses the capability of a
company to extract value from its investments; (V) the weighted average
cost of capital (WACC), in which each category of capital is
proportionately weighted; (VI) the financial leverage, given by the
ratio between total assets and total equity, which assesses the ability
of a company to meet its financial obligations; (VII) the ratio between
sales and revenues; (VIII) the ratio between return on capital (ROIC)
and WACC, which can help to assess the performance of the company; and,
finally, (IX) the credit rating, expressed by Bloomberg’s analyst rating
on a scale from 1 to 5 (1 represents the weakest value, a signal to sell
a firm’s shares; 5 represents the strongest value, a signal to buy a
firm’s shares).

The obtained database contains more than 15,000 cross-sectional data
points from 2020 for 12 European countries: Austria, Belgium, Finland,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, and Sweden. Companies from Austria, Belgium, Finland, Germany,
Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden have been grouped under the
label “North,” whereas those from Italy, France, Portugal, and Spain
have been grouped under “South.” The number of companies for each block
is comparable (329 Northern vs. 229 Southern companies), and the sample
is well balanced.

The summary statistics show that the five years PD (probability of
default) is on average slightly lower for Southern companies (7 basis
points of difference: 4.43% against 4.78%), while the ESG scores of
Northern companies are lower than the Southern ones (35 basis points of
difference). Consistently, environmental (E), social (S), and governance
(G) scores for Northern companies are on average lower than for Southern
companies. It was also observed that the overall credit rating, as
expressed by the probability of default, for Southern companies was
higher (3.83% vs. 3.63%). This usually reflects the ESG and financial
characteristics of a company.

Looking at the summary statistics for the gender equality–related
indicators, we can come to the following conclusions: the number of
female executives and the number of female directors are, on average,
higher in Southern companies than in Northern ones. The same holds for
the average percentage of women on Board (about 33% and 37%
respectively). However, both the average and the total Board
compensations are much higher in the North than in the South, in line
with the average higher income. Within this framework, a further
analysis of Bloomberg’s database reveals that a fair remuneration policy
is witnessed in 16 Northern companies out of 329, whereas only 7
Southern companies out of 228 are found to comply with it. Consistently,
a gender pay gap is found to exist in more than half of Southern
companies (128 over 228), whereas only 70 Northern companies out of 329
report it.

Since only 37% of women are currently employed in managerial positions
across Europe, focusing only on female representation at top-level
positions (e.g., number of women on Board, number of female executives)
may provide a partial and incorrect view on the matter of gender
equality. By contrast, the fairness of the remuneration policy and the
gender pay gap at the company level can produce significant information.

A fair remuneration policy is supposed to comply with four aspects:
minimum wage, fair wage, equal pay, and gender pay gap. In a company,
the less fair the remuneration policy, the larger the pay gap is between
top-level and low-level employees. As most women in the EU are typically
employed in part-time, low-level positions, low level of income equality
at the company level, this will inevitably cause the gender pay gap to
widen. In line with this, larger gender pay gaps are associated with
relatively unfair remuneration policies in Southern companies, while
narrower gender pay gaps correspond to fairer policies in Northern
companies. This is in line with common expectations, as Northern
companies are on average embedded in a more egalitarian environment than
Southern ones and are therefore more likely to implement policies
favoring gender income equality.

To establish the relationship between gender presence and financial
sustainability, Bosone et al. (2022) have implemented a logistic
regression model. In the selected model, Bloomberg’s five-year default
probability is used as a response variable, while the country
(North/South), the market capitalization (Mkt_Cap), ROE, ROIC, the ratio
between ROC and WACC (ROC/WACC), the financial leverage (Fin_Lvrg), the
analyst rating (Rating), the percentage of women on Board (Pct_Wom_BoD),
the presence of CSR Sustainability Committee (CSR_Sust_Commitee), the
total Board compensation (Tot_BoD_), the ESG scores, and individual
score for social (S) and governance (G) are all used as explanatory
variables.

They found a positive correlation between the five-year default
probability and the binary variable country (which assigns 1 to Northern
countries and 2 to Southern countries), in line with the summary
statistics. A weak positive correlation (with a significance level of
10%) is found between the total ESG scores and the five-year default
probability, whereas social (S) and governance (G) have a significant
impact on the five-year probability (with significant levels of 5% and
1%, respectively).

More precisely, an increase by 10% in either social (S) or governance
(G) scores leads to a decrease of the default probability by about 0.5
and 0.9%, respectively. These effects are counterbalanced by the
opposite effect of the total ESG score, whose 10% increase leads to an
increase of the default probability of about 0.7%. However, summing up
the three linear coefficients, we see that the overall effect is
negative, with a decrease in the default probability of about 0.7% when
all of E, S, and G increase by 10%. If we compare the decrease in PD
with the average PD of about 4.30, as seen in the previous section, we
roughly obtain a 16% decrease of the PD, implied by ESG factors. This
result demonstrates that by enhancing the share of ESG investment in
social (S) and governance(G), firms can reduce the probability of
default. Similar results are also evidenced by similar studies.^(58, 59)

The authors also show that the percentage of women on Board is
negatively correlated with the default probability; thus, the more women
there are on the Board, the lower the risk of default. More women in the
Board increase dialogue among board members, improve the quality of
decision-making process, and favor the implementation of innovative and
competitive business strategies, with a positive effect on corporate
outcomes.

The obtained empirical evidence supports the validity of the research
assumption: a higher presence of women in the Board and, more generally,
higher social and governance scores decrease the probability of default
of a firm, improving financial sustainability. This conclusion is
reinforced by a found positive and significant correlation between the
number of female directors and the presence of CSR committees, in line
with the extant literature. This favors sustainability, not only from a
financial viewpoint but also from a social and governance perspective.

We can thus conclude that a higher level of female presence is likely to
improve a firm’s performance both in financial and sustainable terms.
More generally, environment (E), social (S), and governance (G)
indicators can be used to assess the sustainability of a company and of
a company that produces, deploys, or uses artificial intelligence
applications.

Model Sustainability

The Rank Graduation Explainability (RGE) measure can be employed to
assess the relevance of ESG factors, thereby measuring model
sustainability. We can consider E, S, and G scores as explanatory
variables and calculate their explainability as we did in Chapter 4.

Mathematically, we will obtain a Rank Graduation Sustainability measure
(RGS), defined by

sum(Q’i-QPi)/sum(Q’i-QFi),

where Q’i is the dual Lorenz curve, QFi is the Lorenz curve obtained
using the ranks of the predictions obtained with a full model, and QPi
is the concordance curve obtained using the ranks of the predictions
obtained excluding the variable under measurement which, in our case, is
one of E, S, or G, or all together.

The RGS measure will have the same properties as RGE. We’ll therefore
forgo the example and the description of the Python code as it is the
same as for RGE, described in Chapter 4.

Scoring Rubric

Once the outlined measurement metrics for RGS have been completed, it’s
important to score the sustainability of your model(s). Here’s a simple
scoring rubric for sustainability.

Table 7-1

A scoring rubric for sustainability

                                                       Excellent   Good      Fair      Borderline   Poor
  ---------------------------------------------------- ----------- --------- --------- ------------ --------
  What is the sustainability score of your model(s)?   75%–90%     70%–75%   60%–70%   40%–60%      0%–40%

Mitigation

This chapter has shown the critical dependence to ensure ML systems are
sustainable using the ESG factors. If you discover your systems are
lacking in ESG factors and have a poor sustainability score, it’s
important you reduce the risks of your models. Reducing these risks will
still adhere to the ESG principles of environmental, social, and
governance.

Social and Governance

The sustainability of an ML model is highly dependent on its ability to
have a positive impact on society.⁶⁰ In some areas, such as healthcare,
AI is helping to provide more accurate medical diagnosis, driving drug
discovery, assisting with higher-precision surgeries, developing
personalized treatment plans, and so on. On the other hand however, AI
still challenges and negatively impacts social cohesion and society
through the various risks associated with it, such as bias and
discrimination, hallucinations, inaccurate and incorrect outputs,
stereotypes, representational harms, lack of transparency, privacy
violations, human rights violations, threats to democracy, energy
consumption, and security threats. To navigate these issues, aligning to
the various recommendations in this book will help to resolve most of
the challenges AI systems pose to society. Also, ensuring datasets are
diverse and inclusive, and ML development/design teams are made up of
diverse groups of people, will assist with this issue.

Economic and Environmental

Tackling the economic aspects of ML algorithms and systems, it’s
important that its benefits outweigh its cost. With the recent surge of
generative AI, experts and business executives are beginning to question
the value of generative AI as it demands high investment running into
millions of dollars, with very little turnover, profit, or return on
investment (ROI). While it might be early days to conclude on the
overall value of generative AI to businesses given it’s only been around
for roughly two years, a few businesses have turned off their generative
AI pilots and campaigns as they haven’t seen value for money. For AI
systems to be sustainable and economically viable, it’s crucial they
return value for money.

The second area for consideration is the impending job losses that AI
has introduced. While AI should create new job roles, it’s already
started replacing human jobs with its various capabilities. Although the
forecasted number of impacted jobs by AI might be quite speculative and
yet to be proven, it’s important efforts are made by organizations to
ensure new job opportunities are created and workers have the necessary
skills to navigate this disruptive technical revolution. To ensure AI
systems achieve economic sustainability, it’s important AI design
includes the augmentation of human capabilities and not the replacement
of them.

Finally, AI could play a major role in mitigating the impact of human
activities on the environment. This is currently being carried out by
many nonprofit and environmental organizations. However, the negative
impact AI systems have on the environment is too high to ignore, largely
due to the high amount of computing resources required to run these
machines. From very large data centers to large GPUs (Graphics
Processing Units) to support the billions of parameters needed for AI –
particularly large-scale or foundation models – the energy consumption
derived from these systems is quite high and concerning. While the
potential for AI to massively improve lives and drive business value for
organizations exists, we need to ensure environmental sustainability is
also achieved. Reducing the carbon footprint of AI machines will lead to
the promotion of more energy-efficient hardware and more greener
algorithms. Work is being done in this area by various AI start-ups
looking for alternative ways to develop AI chips and GPUs. Building
smaller and more efficient AI models could also help to combat this
issue.

To conclude, in this chapter we’ve looked at sustainability as a whole
and its relation to ML models and applications. We also discussed the
ESG factors and how to measure specific ESG values against countries and
organizations with a focus on European countries and the finance sector.
We introduced the RGS (Rank Graduation Sustainability) metric, which can
be computed with the same methodology as RGE (Rank Graduation
Explainability) score. We concluded the chapter with ways to reduce
sustainability risks identified in AI systems.

In the next chapter, we’ll discuss human-centered AI, which refers to
the “HAI” section of the SAFE-HAI framework discussed in this book.

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_8

8. Human-Centered AI

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

In the preceding chapter, we looked at an important and not very popular
Responsible AI component, sustainability, using the ESG factors. In this
chapter, we’ll discuss another important topic in Responsible AI, known
as human-centered AI or HCAI.

Artificial intelligence systems are tools that should be utilized by
humans and should be subject to monitoring, control, and intervention by
humans. This is where the term “human in the loop” or “human oversight”
comes into play.

The European AI Act postulates that “high-risk” AI systems should be
designed so that they can be effectively overseen by natural persons
during the period in which they are in use. Human oversight shall then
aim to prevent or minimize the risks to health, safety, and fundamental
rights that may emerge when a high-risk system is being utilized.

Human oversight is also at the core of the American NIST risk management
framework, where AI risk management is a key component for responsible
development and the use of AI systems. The framework postulates that “AI
risk management can drive responsible uses and practices by prompting
organizations and their internal teams who design, develop, and deploy
AI to think more critically about context and potential or unexpected
negative and positive impacts.” This establishes a direct correspondence
between human oversight and AI risk management.

In this chapter, we’ll show how an AI model can be evaluated, assessed,
and possibly modified to prevent and mitigate the risks associated with
its use drawing on the EU AI Act, the NIST risk management framework,
and other international frameworks aimed to promote safe and trustworthy
AI. The employment of the SAFE metrics, along with the human oversight
described in this chapter, leads to our proposed SAFE-HAI framework: a
framework for sustainable, accurate, fair, and explainable artificial
intelligence applications, controlled by humans.

To explain how to do human oversight in practice, we will utilize a real
use case that concerns financial predictions, taken from Giudici and
Raffinetti (2023).⁶¹ The case study will be described in three main
steps, which could be carried out without loss of generality, for any AI
system:

1.  1.

    The first step concerns adapting the SAFE-HAI model to the output
    from an AI system to derive compliance metrics.

     

2.  2.

    The second step relates to the assessment of the results obtained
    from the SAFE-HAI model in terms of risk management.

     

3.  3.

    The third step refers to the implementation of actions to improve
    the model output, including the construction of a new AI application
    which can improve the compliance of the available model.

     

A further use case of human oversight will be provided in Chapter 10, in
a case study.

Evaluating AI

We consider, without loss of generality, the data described in Giudici
and Abu-Hashish (2021),⁶² which concerns a form of personal investment
that is increasingly being used around the world due to its extensive
availability and ease of access – the bitcoin. The data will be used to
assess whether a machine learning model which is employed to predict
bitcoin prices and therefore suggest investments or disinvestments is
aligned with the SAFE-HAI model. To this aim, the main goal of our
analysis will be to assess if the considered machine learning model is
SAFE, according to our framework, so that it can be safely used by
consumers and investors to determine whether and how to invest or
disinvest in bitcoin.

Without loss of generality, we focus on the bitcoin prices from the
Coinbase exchange as the target variable to be predicted. The time
series for Oil, Gold, and SP500 prices are taken into account as
candidate financial explanatory variables. In line with Giudici and
Abu-Hashish (2021), the exchange rates USD/Yuan and USD/Eur are also
included as possible further explanatory variables. The time series
covers the time period between May 18, 2016, and April 30, 2018. Data
from 2018 will be used as a test set and the others as the training set.

We are going to assess an AI application that can predict whether
bitcoin prices go up or down the next day (a binary response) based on a
machine learning model that is a feed forward neural network with one
hidden layer and five hidden states. Before applying the neural network
model, we’ll transform all price series into their percentage returns.
This is because returns are scale free and the corresponding series are
stationary.

We will assess the machine learning model with the SAFE metrics proposed
in the previous chapters. The same metrics could be applied to any other
possible model, as the metrics are fully agnostic and require knowledge
of the model output, but not model-specific information.

In line with our proposed SAFE-HAI model, we will apply the RGA metric
to evaluate accuracy, the RGR metric to evaluate sustainability, the RGE
metric to evaluate explainability, and, finally, the RGF metric to
evaluate fairness.

The application of the RGA score to the output from the model gives a
value of 55%: a low performance, which is expected as it is difficult to
predict the price of bitcoin, a rather speculative asset, using
classical financial assets.

The application of the RGR score gives a value of 81%: a relatively high
value, indicating a relatively high robustness of the model.

The application of the RGE score indicates that the most important
explanatory variable is Gold, with an RGE of about 17%, followed by Oil
(6%), USD/Yuan (3%), S&P (3%), and USD/Eur (2%).

To assess fairness, we have introduced a “protected” variable which
indicates the trading volumes of a day, split into high trading (traded
quantities higher than the mean) and low trading (traded quantities
lower than the mean). The obtained value for RGF is equal to 71%,
indicating low fairness.

The application of the proposed statistical tests indicates that
accuracy is not significantly higher than that of a random model,
whereas robustness is; Gold is the only significant explanatory
variable; the model is not significantly fair.

Assessing AI

Let’s now assess the results – the application of the SAFE-HAI model
indicates that the built AI application aimed at predicting whether
bitcoin prices increase or decrease does not seem to be compliant with
the accuracy and to the fairness requirements (assuming trading volumes
as the protected variable). It is instead compliant in terms of
robustness and, to some extent, in terms of explainability. The latter
as one explanatory variable (gold) is significant, leading to an easy to
interpret model which relates bitcoin prices to the price of gold. In
fact, the assessment of the model seems to confirm the story of bitcoin
being “the digital gold.”

To entertain mitigation actions, the values of the compliance metrics
and the related results of the statistical tests must be translated into
risk management results.

The risk of harm caused by an AI application has two components: the
probability that a harm occurs and its severity, that is, the
quantification of the actual harm, when it occurs.

The probability component can be measured mapping the values of the
SAFE-HAI metrics to levels of probability that complement the metric
values. For example, an RGA of 55% can be mapped to a probability of
45%. An RGR of 81% can be mapped to a probability of 19%. An RGF of 71%
can be mapped to a probability of 29%. And, finally, the sum of the RGE
values equal to 31% can be mapped to a probability equal to 69%. These
are the main results of our assessment and are at the basis of our
proposed human oversight procedure. They indicate that the machine
learning model under evaluation has a very high probability of not being
explainable (=69%) and has a high probability of not being accurate
(=45%). But, on the other hand, it has a low probability of not being
fair (=29%) and of not being robust (=19%).

The severity component is more difficult to assess, and its mapping
requires the consideration of the possible harm types involved with that
incident and the stakeholders which may be impacted. Measuring the
severity requires an appropriate taxonomy of harm types and
stakeholders, as recently proposed by Abercrombie et al. (2024).⁶³

The task of assessing the severity can be simplified using ordinal
levels, such as “low,” “medium,” and “high.” In the context of the
machine learning model employed to fix bitcoin prices that we are
examining here, the impact of a low accuracy is certainly high, as bad
predictions may cause high financial losses to the investors, whereas
the impact of a low explainability is low, as bitcoin prices are known
to be not transparent. On the other hand, the impact of a low robustness
will be high, and the impact of low fairness will be limited, as bitcoin
is a technical tool, unlikely to be associated with specific population
groups. Putting together the assessed probability and severity, and
recalling that the risk of harm can be obtained as the product (or as
the convolution) between the probability and the severity, we can
conclude that the most important risk of the considered AI application
is that of accuracy: a classical “model” risk. The conclusion of the
oversight assessment of the considered model that predicts bitcoin
prices is that the model is not good, particularly in terms of accuracy,
and that it should, therefore, be replaced by a better model.

Improving AI

We have found that the model should be improved in terms of accuracy. To
this aim, we have implemented alternative neural network models that
take into account the time dependency present in time series, such as
the series of bitcoin prices analyzed in the case study of this chapter,
to predict future prices.

Bitcoin is a speculative asset, and, for that reason, buy/sell decisions
about bitcoin are usually based on past prices of the same, rather than
on the behavior of other assets, as different types of investments.

The model considered in the previous section is a feed forward neural
network that assumes that bitcoin prices of different days are
independent of each other. Given the weak performance of the model, in
terms of accuracy, we’ll now consider three different types of neural
networks that can take into account the time dependency embedded in the
time series data to generate forecasts and scenarios.

Specifically, we will consider the autoregressive neural network
autoregressive model (NNAR), long short-term memory (LSTM) networks, and
gated recurrent unit (GRU) networks.

The structure of a NNAR model is described in Figure 8-1.

[]

Diagram of a neural network with three layers: input, hidden, and
output. The input layer has nodes labeled Yt-1 to Yt-20, representing
sequential data inputs. These nodes connect to multiple nodes in the
hidden layer, which then connect to a single node in the output layer
labeled Yt. Arrows indicate the flow of information through the network.

From Figure 8-1, note that the NNAR neural network in the input layer
has p lagged values of the response variable, similarly as in the
classic autoregressive (AR) models used in financial econometrics.
Different from what occurs in the AR model, however, the input is not
connected directly with the response, but is processed by an
intermediate hidden layer, a computational unit which transforms the
signals from the input before employing them to determine the output
values.

It follows that a NNAR model is a network characterized by p input
nodes, the lags of the response variable y(t-1), y(t-2), … , y(t-p), and
the neurons in the hidden layer. Now let’s look at the next network we’d
like to consider, long short-term memory networks (LSTM). Long
short-term memory networks (LSTM) can be described by a sequence of
recursive steps, in which each input x_t is processed as in Figure 8-2.

[]

Diagram of a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) cell, showing the flow of
information through three gates: Forget Gate, Input Gate, and Output
Gate. The Forget Gate, marked in red, determines what information to
discard. The Input Gate, in blue, decides what new information to store.
The Output Gate, in green, controls the output. Symbols like sigma (σ)
and tanh represent activation functions. Inputs \(x_t\), \(h_{t-1}\),
and \(C_{t-1}\) are processed to produce outputs \(h_t\) and \(C_t\).

From Figure 8-2, note that during the processing of each unit x_t, there
are two flows of information represented by the two horizontal lines
that enter and exit the LSTM: the cell state c_(t), known as long-term
memory (LTM), and the hidden state h_(t), known as short-term memory
(STM).

As an alternative to LSTM networks, we will also consider gated
recurrent unit (GRU) neural networks, whose processing units have the
structure as in Figure 8-3.

[]

Diagram of a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) cell showing the flow of
information. The cell includes two main components: the Reset Gate and
the Update Gate. Inputs \( h_{t-1} \) and \( x_t \) are processed
through various operations, including addition, multiplication, and
activation functions such as sigmoid (σ) and hyperbolic tangent (tanh).
The Reset Gate influences the input to the tanh function, while the
Update Gate determines the final output \( h_t \).

A GRU network employs fewer calculations than the LSTM and is faster in
the predictive phase.

More details on the presented NNAR, LSTM, and GRU machine learning
models can be found in the paper by Giudici, Piergallini, Recchioni, and
Raffinetti.⁶⁴

We now apply the three described neural networks to the bitcoin price
data previously described and compare their performance metrics against
those of the time-independent neural network evaluated before.

In terms of accuracy, the RGA values for the NNAR, LSTM, and GRU
networks are the following, respectively: RGA(NNAR) = 0.3718; RGA(LSTM)
= 0.8186; RGA(GRU) = 0.8865. Recall that the RGA of the feed forward
model of the previous section (our baseline) was equal to 55%.

The results indicate that, while the NNAR worsens accuracy with respect
to the baseline, LSTM and GRU (and especially the latter) improve it
considerably. From a closer viewpoint, it could be concluded that the
NNAR includes too many input variables and leads to overfitting, while
the LSTM and the GRU make a more parsimonious use of past bitcoin price
data.

Moving to robustness, the baseline model has an RGR equal to 81%. It
turns out that NNAR has RGR = 0.7157, a very poor value, whereas
RGR(LSTM) = 0.9607 and RGR(GRU) = 0.9244. Both latter values indicate a
robustness higher than the baseline, especially for LSTM. The conclusive
explanation is that the NNAR has too many variables, leading to more
unstable results, whereas GRU and LSTM are more parsimonious and, thus,
more robust.

Moving to explainability, all new neural networks improve the total
explainability, as expressed by the sum of the RGE of the predictors.
The baseline model had a total RGE of about 31%, whereas RGE(NNAR) =
0.63, RGE(LSTM) = 0.56, and RGE(GRU) = 0.62. By choosing more
predictors, NNAR does well in explainability, whereas the more
parsimonious LSTM does a little worse.

How can we evaluate the results from the new networks? We already
pointed out that lack of accuracy is, for this problem, the most
important risk. We should therefore choose the most accurate model,
which is the GRU model. It is important however to be aware that an LSTM
model will perform slightly less in accuracy (and in explainability) but
slightly better in robustness.

We can thus conclude the human oversight application suggesting that the
AI application aimed at predicting bitcoin prices should change the
machine learning model based on a feed forward network with a machine
learning model based on a gated recurrent network.

Scoring Rubric

The scoring rubric for human-centered AI can be obtained by calculating
the difference between the values of the metrics before and after an
intervention action. For example, we can take the difference in the
values of RGA, RGR, and RGE (and possibly of RGF) under different models
and take the ratio between the difference and the original value. This
can lead to a scoring rubric as in Table 8-1. The values in the table
are an exemplification, and can easily be changed, in line with the
desired model quality and related risk appetite.

Table 8-1

A scoring rubric for human-centered AI

                                                                                  Excellent   Good      Fair      Borderline   Poor
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------- --------- --------- ------------ --------
  What is the obtained improvement using the new model instead of the baseline?   50%–100%    30%–50%   20%–30%   10%–20%      0%–10%

Mitigation

Now that you have a thorough understanding of how to measure the value
of human oversight, it’s important you work on improving your model if
it comes up with a low score.

Depending on the issue, there are various ways to improve a model, as we
have seen. Most of these involve increasing the available data and/or
changing the underlying machine learning model and algorithm.

In this chapter, we have considered how the initial model, based on a
simple neural network, could be improved especially with regard to
accuracy, using a more complex recurrent neural network. We also looked
at human-centered AI (HCAI) and its importance in evaluating AI models,
using a bitcoin analysis as an example. We discussed ways to ensure
models can be properly assessed using HCAI. In the next chapter, we’ll
wrap up the different Responsible AI principles we’ve discussed in this
book by reviewing governance processes and various harms associated with
AI technologies.

Part IVGovernance and Case Study

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_9

9. Governance Processes

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

In the previous chapter, we looked at human-centered AI (HCAI) with real
examples using accuracy on a neural network and the importance of HCAI
in AI development. We used bitcoin as an example. In this chapter, we’ll
deep dive into AI governance and how it plays a major role in the entire
AI development process and life cycle.

In Chapter 1, we reviewed different AI governing policies and discussed
the various components and how they relate to the SAFE-HAI framework.
Expanding on the existing governing policies for AI, it’s important that
AI adopters, developers, and users have a thorough understanding of AI
governance and create AI governance processes in their organizations.

AI governance refers to the structures and processes put in place to
oversee an organization’s AI strategy, management, and operations. With
the ever-increasing risks identified in AI systems, setting up an AI
governance structure is fundamental to ensuring successful AI
development and use.

To understand how to properly govern AI, it’s paramount to gain insight
on the various risks and harms associated with the technology as well as
the different stakeholders it affects. We referred to some AI risks in
the first chapter. In this chapter, we’ll deep dive into general risks
identified in open source, general-purpose, and foundational models.

Risks of AI Models and Applications

There are several risks and harms associated with AI models and
applications, regardless of AI type or domain, in other words, whether
it’s an open source or a closed model. Most of the risks across the
various types of AI systems overlap and have several similarities.
NIST’s risk management framework, referred to numerous times in this
book, categorizes AI’s harms across three areas:

1.  1.

    Harm to people: This affects individuals, groups, and society. It
    occurs when an individual’s civil liberties, human rights, or
    psychological and physical safety are adversely impacted by an AI
    system. Groups or communities can also be negatively impacted when
    biases and discrimination are portrayed as a result of AI
    technologies. Societal harm is also considered particularly when
    democratic participation is repressed or influenced by AI systems.

     

2.  2.

    Harm to an organization or enterprise: An organization or enterprise
    is considered to have been impacted by an AI system when technical
    systems and business operations are affected by AI, such as cyber
    attacks, security breaches, monetary loss, or reputational harms.

     

3.  3.

    Harm to a system: This occurs when a system of organizations is
    affected by an AI technology, such as a financial system or a global
    supply chain or an environmental ecosystem, which are not robust
    enough to withstand adverse AI impact.⁶⁵

     

Let’s deep dive into some of the various AI risks that pertain to the
mentioned categories. Some of these risks include the following:

1.  1.

    Disinformation and election interference: This refers to instances
    where several outputs from AI models contain incorrect information
    and are able to convince users of its credibility, even though
    responses are in error. This is quite common in LLMs. Due to this, a
    lot of focus is placed on social media sites which tend to have a
    proliferation of disinformation, and content moderation is
    necessary.

     

2.  2.

    Biorisk: This is a foreseen and not yet proven risk particularly
    pertaining to open source foundation models, where several studies
    have claimed that users can receive instructions on how to create
    bioweapons. These studies are yet to be proven as some of the
    instructions observed from these models and applications have been
    quite incorrect and misleading. However, biorisk is considered a
    high risk in AI systems.⁶⁶

     

3.  3.

    Spear-phishing scams: Generative AI models are known to have the
    ability to generate spear-phishing emails. These are email scams
    that appear legitimate and target specific individuals or groups,
    tricking recipients to share sensitive information, download
    malware, or send money to the scammer.⁶⁷ The main point of concern
    is the ability to affect downstream tasks and applications without
    any safeguards or guardrails. However, this could be considered a
    low risk as most operating systems and browsers have high security
    against malware like these, and there’s a high probability phishing
    emails may never get to the recipient in the first place.

     

4.  4.

    Voice-cloning scams: We’ve seen an increase in voice-cloning scams
    in recent times, where malicious actors impersonate a person’s
    friend or family and convince them to send money to their bank
    accounts. These impersonations use AI tools that are able to clone a
    person’s voice using a short audio clip. These scams have also been
    used to spread disinformation, particularly in war-ravaged
    countries.

     

5.  5.

    Nonconsensual intimate imagery (NCII) and child sexual abuse
    materials (CSAM): Particularly associated with open source
    text-to-image models, NCII and CSAM images can be easily generated
    using these systems, including nonconsensual deepfakes. These go
    against several regulations and pose a huge risk to women and
    children.

     

6.  6.

    Authoritarian or corporate surveillance: Authoritarian or Corporate
    Surveillance is commonly used across law enforcement
    agencies/organizations and corporate bodies. In most cases,
    surveilled entities are not made aware of any surveillance measures
    and, even if aware, have no means to challenge the results of these
    systems. This has resulted in violation of human rights across
    several countries in various ways, such as false arrests, false
    penalties on welfare fraud, etc.

     

7.  7.

    Cyber attacks: Most of the mentioned scams which use AI fall under
    the category of cyber attacks and have the potential to invade
    people’s privacy and data, causing harm to individuals, communities,
    and organizations.

     

Governance Processes

To address and potentially govern the development and deployment of AI,
in order to reduce the various risks associated with the technology,
it’s important to have a governance structure in place. Before making
any informed decisions and policies, a review of the various
stakeholders and users of AI is essential (apart from AI developers).
These stakeholders are considered users, civil society, and policymakers
who can make meaningful contributions to AI development, deployment, and
use:

- Users: Users, many times, have a wider knowledge and understanding of
  AI applications as they tend to use them on a daily basis, even more
  than the developers themselves. They usually have various satisfactory
  levels with these applications and systems, pain points, and desired
  capabilities which could be considered as feature requests. Engaging
  with the users of these technologies is an important way to form
  governance policies.

- Civil society: AI education and accurate information about AI
  technologies could better inform civil society and the general public
  to contribute meaningfully to its development and deployment through
  standards, processes, research, policies, and so on.

- Policymakers: Policymakers play a major role in AI regulation either
  locally or internationally. Processes such as auditing, red-teaming,
  and safety evaluations can help guide policymakers on developing
  appropriate governing policies for the development, deployment, and
  use of AI.

To properly govern AI and develop the right processes and policies,
adequate information about AI systems is required. This is illustrated
in Table 9-1.

Table 9-1

Required information for appropriate governance policies

  Information Category           Requirements
  ------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Capability of the model        It’s important to understand what the model is capable of. What tasks was it trained on? What datasets does it comprise? What are its error rates? False positives and false negatives? This provides insight on the potential of the model for misuse.
  Controllability of the model   Insights on the intentional/unintentional behavior of the model are important. For example, does it reliably act according to the developer and user intentions? In cases of outputs, does it produce toxic content, for example? Answers to these will provide guidance on the ability for the model to cause unintended harm.
  Model impact                   Having a thorough understanding of the impact of the model on users, groups, and society at large is crucial. Does it produce representational harms, spread disinformation, produce incorrect/false content? To what extent will it potentially displace workers or replace jobs?
  New and emerging information   Model developers might misrepresent their knowledge on the model or its impact for various reasons. It’s important to verify developer claims through relevant information, testing, and risk assessments.
  Uncovering new information     Most developers tend to test for accuracy and privacy only and fail to run safety and Responsible AI tests for their models, such as testing for robustness, security, fairness, sustainability, and data ethics. This could lead to a failure to identify relevant issues within their models, leading to further harms emanating from AI systems. Lack of scrutiny and understanding of AI systems can lead to various challenges that AI developers are unlikely to fix or be aware of.

Scrutiny, testing, investigation, and reporting of identified risks and
harms help with the creation and development of governance processes for
any AI domain.

To establish good governance practices, after a thorough risk assessment
and ongoing reviews of the AI systems in an organization have taken
place, the following need to be carried out as a governance structure:

1.  1.

    Define an AI policy: Working with the legal team and other relevant
    stakeholders in your organization, ensure you have a clear AI policy
    in place. This goes hand in hand with AI principles which form the
    overarching guidelines and positioning of your organization’s AI
    strategy. This policy should be publicized among the developer and
    engineering teams in the organization and other relevant teams. It
    should be clear, concise, understandable, and easily accessible.

     

2.  2.

    Establish an AI governance team: Ensuring there is an AI governance
    team/working group that oversees and reviews AI practices in your
    organization is quite important to successful AI development and
    deployment. The governance team will set up and manage processes to
    ensure safe and Responsible AI design, development, and deployment.
    Establishing a multidisciplinary governance team made up of AI
    researchers, engineers, product, and legal teams will lead to the
    successful development of safe and trustworthy AI.

     

3.  3.

    Regular reviews and risk assessments of AI systems: Conducting
    regular reviews and risk assessments of AI systems and
    products/applications in your organization is a critical part of AI
    governance. Reviews and assessments should include the evaluation of
    datasets, models, and applications that use ML within the
    organization. These should be carried out on an ongoing basis with
    clear processes, escalation paths, and solutions to resolve and fix
    issues once identified.

     

4.  4.

    Inclusion of stakeholder engagement: The involvement of various
    stakeholders, such as users, members of civil society, and
    policymakers, forms another key piece in AI governance. Regular
    meetings with these stakeholders will help inform the design of AI
    systems and how they are impacted. This will also help AI developers
    and organizations gain insights on user needs and how to better
    design/adjust the AI systems to be more suitable for users, society,
    and governmental organizations.

     

5.  5.

    Incorporation of user feedback: Feedback from regular meetings with
    stakeholders should be incorporated into the AI systems, ensuring
    solutions are in place to support safe deployment and results.
    Feedback mechanisms need to be included in AI applications, such as
    a “thumbs up” or “thumbs down” button, where users can provide
    feedback on the accuracy of the application’s responses. Processes
    to fine-tune and amend datasets, models, and applications should be
    set in place on a regular basis.

     

The risks and harms associated with AI technologies are too grave to
ignore. Adopting the right AI governance process for your organization
and measuring the risks using the framework introduced in this book will
help to reduce some of these harms and solve any identified issues.

In this chapter, we had a purview of some of the risks identified in AI
technologies, the various stakeholders involved in its engagement, and
ways to carry out governance measures in your organization. In the next
chapter, which is the final chapter of this book, we’ll have an in-depth
review of a case study which incorporates the SAFE-HAI framework in an
application that relates to credit lending, considered a high-risk
application of AI.

© Toju Duke and Paolo Giudici 2025

T. Duke, P. GiudiciResponsible AI in
Practicehttps://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1166-1_10

10. Case Study

Toju Duke¹   and Paolo Giudici²

(1)

Bedrock AI, London, UK

(2)

Via San Felice 7, 27100, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

 

(Written in collaboration with Golnoosh Babaei)

In the previous chapter, we carried out a deep dive on governance, a
review of the risks and harms associated with AI systems, and AI
governance processes in an organization. In this chapter, we’ll provide
a case study that involves both the application and evaluation of a
high-risk application of AI – a related case study can be found in
Babaei et al.⁶⁸ The application involves the decision to grant credit
loans through a credit scoring model. For this case study, we made use
of the SAFE AI (security, accuracy, fairness, and explainability)
statistical metrics available in the “safeaipackage” toolbox, a Python
framework that can measure the security, accuracy, fairness, and
explainability of a model. Considering the advantages of these metrics,
namely, consistency (all derived from a common underlying statistical
methodology: the Lorenz curve), easy interpretability, model-agnostic
(applicable to any machine learning (ML) methods), and fully
reproducible, by means of the available Python code, we apply this
framework to this case study to assess the accuracy, explainability,
fairness, and robustness of the considered ML models.

The main objective of a credit scoring model is to determine the credit
risks of potential customers, that is, the determination of the
probability that the customer will not pay back the credit on time
(probability of default). Credit risk, a continuous variable with values
​​in [0,1], is linked to the measurement of the customer’s
creditworthiness, an ordinal variable known as rating. The bank’s
decision (or other credit providers such as fintech and bigtech) on how
much credit to grant and what interest rate to apply usually depends on
the credit risk and, in particular, on the rating assigned.

In this chapter, we will examine how to determine the probability of
default for credit applicants based on a set of explanatory variables.
In particular, we will learn how to

1.  1.

    Evaluate the accuracy of the most important and well-known machine
    learning models: logistic regression, random forests, and neural
    networks to classify the observations.

     

2.  2.

    Determine which variables contribute to the model and which do not
    by assessing the explainability of the models.

     

3.  3.

    Determine whether the model is fair.

     

4.  4.

    Assess the robustness of the classifiers.

     

We will also discuss how to compare the predictions obtained from a
machine learning model with the actual true values and calculate their
differences as a main measure of model accuracy. Following this, we will
compare the model accuracy of logistic regression, random forests, and
neural networks.

The dataset used is a dataset containing 6707 observations, called the
“training set.” The data is made up of a binary variable, which we will
use as a response variable (Y), called “default” with values ​​equal to
zero when the customer is considered reliable and equal to one when the
customer is considered unreliable (risk of default or non repayment). In
addition to the binary variable, the data contains the values ​​of six
explanatory variables (X1, X2, X3, X4, X5, X6) measured before the
response variable: the interest rate, the amount of installment, the
customer’s annual income (expressed on a logarithmic scale), the ratio
of the customer’s overall debt to their income (Dti), the credit score
assigned to the customer by the American FICO software company, and the
average days of delay in payment of installments. Table 10-1 represents
some randomly selected rows from this dataset to provide an overview of
the data in this case study.

Table 10-1

The considered data: ten observations selected at random

+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
|    | Interest_rate | Installment | Annual_income | Dti   | FICO | Days_of_delay |
|    |               |             |               |       |      |               |
|    |               |             | (Log)         |       |      |               |
+:===+:==============+:============+:==============+:======+:=====+:==============+
| 1  | 0.12          | 829.10      | 11.35         | 19.48 | 737  | 5639.96       |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
| 2  | 0.11          | 228.22      | 11.08         | 14.29 | 707  | 2760.00       |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
| 3  | 0.14          | 366.86      | 10.37         | 11.63 | 682  | 4710.00       |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
| 4  | 0.10          | 162.34      | 11.35         | 8.1   | 712  | 2699.96       |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
| 5  | 0.14          | 102.92      | 11.30         | 14.97 | 667  | 4066.00       |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
| 6  | 0.15          | 344.76      | 12.18         | 10.39 | 672  | 10474.00      |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
| 7  | 0.13          | 257.70      | 11.14         | 0.21  | 722  | 4380.00       |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
| 8  | 0.11          | 97.81       | 10.60         | 13.09 | 687  | 3450.04       |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
| 9  | 0.16          | 351.58      | 10.82         | 19.18 | 692  | 1800.00       |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+
| 10 | 0.14          | 853.43      | 11.26         | 16.28 | 732  | 4740.00       |
+----+---------------+-------------+---------------+-------+------+---------------+

In Table 10-2, we share the descriptive statistics of the variables
which are potential predictors of the response. The response variable is
binary and describes whether a customer defaults (does not repay the
loan) or not. The percentage of defaults in the data is equal to 0.195,
which is quite common for consumer credit datasets.

Table 10-2

Descriptive statistics of the explanatory variables

+-------+---------------+-------------+---------------+----------+----------+---------------+
|       | Interest_rate | Installment | Annual_income | Dti      | FICO     | Days_of_delay |
|       |               |             |               |          |          |               |
|       |               |             | (Log)         |          |          |               |
+:======+:==============+:============+:==============+:=========+:=========+:==============+
| std   | 0.026834      | 207.0713    | 0.614834      | 6.88397  | 37.97054 | 6.88397       |
+-------+---------------+-------------+---------------+----------+----------+---------------+
| min   | 0.06          | 15.67       | 7.55          | 0        | 612      | 0             |
+-------+---------------+-------------+---------------+----------+----------+---------------+
| 25%   | 0.1           | 163.77      | 10.56         | 7.2125   | 682      | 7.2125        |
+-------+---------------+-------------+---------------+----------+----------+---------------+
| 50%   | 0.12          | 268.95      | 10.93         | 12.665   | 707      | 12.665        |
+-------+---------------+-------------+---------------+----------+----------+---------------+
| 75%   | 0.14          | 432.7625    | 11.29         | 17.95    | 737      | 17.95         |
+-------+---------------+-------------+---------------+----------+----------+---------------+
| max   | 0.22          | 940.14      | 14.53         | 29.96    | 827      | 29.96         |
+-------+---------------+-------------+---------------+----------+----------+---------------+
| count | 9578          | 9578        | 9578          | 9578     | 9578     | 9578          |
+-------+---------------+-------------+---------------+----------+----------+---------------+
| mean  | 0.122796      | 319.0894    | 10.93234      | 12.60668 | 710.8463 | 12.60668      |
+-------+---------------+-------------+---------------+----------+----------+---------------+

The objective of this analysis is to determine a statistical model that
estimates the relationship between the variable Y and the explanatory
variables (X1, X2, X3, X4, X5, X6), then using this model and based on
this relationship, predicting future values ​​of Y (for customers not
included in the training data) on the basis of the relative values ​​of
(X1, X2, X3, X4, X5, X6).

The target response variable considered in this chapter is binary. It is
therefore not possible to apply linear regression, as it could lead to
predictions for Y with values outside the interval [0,1]. While Y values
​​within the interval [0,1] can be interpreted as “probabilities of
default,” with 0 indicating the absolute reliability of the customer
(certain non-default) and 1 an absolute unreliability of the customer
(certain default), values ​​outside the interval will not be legitimate,
as the probability has values ​​in [0,1]. Therefore, a different
predictive model is needed, such as a logistic regression. The selected
ML models for the case study in this chapter are as follows.

Logistic Regression Models

A logistic regression model is a classification model which, in the
mentioned example, allows us to classify each customer as reliable or
unreliable based on the estimated probability of default of the credit
granted to each borrower.

Unlike the multiple regression model in which the X inputs are used to
take the value of the response variable, in a logistic regression model
the inputs are used to classify the response variable into one of the
available categories – reliable and unreliable as an example. The given
result can be used to take the condition of each potential future
customer, whether reliable or not, and allows you to decide whether to
give or not to give a loan.

A logistic regression model is described by the following equation:

Here, for (i=1,2,…,n):

[$$ \mathit{\log}\
\left[\frac{\pi_i}{1-{\pi}_i}\right]=a+{\beta}_1{x}_{i1}+{\beta}_2{x}_{i2}+\dots
+{\beta}_k{x}_{ik} $$]..

The left side of the equation above defines the logit function of the
estimated probability, as the logarithm of the odds of an event, that
is, the natural logarithm of the ratio between the probability of
success and that of failure.

Once calculated, an estimated value can be obtained for each dichotomous
observation, by introducing a threshold value above which label = 1 and
below which label = 0.

Our goal is to find estimates for the β_(k) values ​​1, 2, …, k that best
approximate the true relationship between Y and the set of X variables
we have chosen. In the case of the logistic regression model, the
relationship between Y and X is not linear and does not have an
analytical solution. The solution can, however, be approximate, with an
iterative numerical approximation method that is present in most
statistical software.

Application of the Logistic Regression Model

Consider a bank that intends to build a predictive model of the default
of its customers to find the relationship between the probability of
repayment and a set of six independent variables: interest rate (X1);
amount of the installment (X2); annual income (in log) (X3); debt/income
(X4); days late in payment (X6); FICO score, that is, a measure of the
customer’s creditworthiness (X5). The equation is

[$$ \mathit{\log}\
\left[\frac{\pi_i}{1-{\pi}_i}\right]=a+{b}_1{x}_{i1}+{b}_2{x}_{i2}+\dots
+{b}_k{x}_{ik} $$]..

= a + b1x1 + b2x2 + b3x3 + b4x4 + b5x5 +b6x6

The application of statistical software to our data led to the following
result:

log(Odds(D)) = -1.8327 -0.1589 installment amount + 0.0570 annual income
(in log) + 0.0681 debt/income +

-0.0591 days late in payment – ​​0.9630 FICO+ 0.3008 Interest rate

In other words, the software output provided the following coefficient
values:

a = -1.8327, b1 =-0.1589 , b2 = 0.0570 b3 = 0.0681 , b4 = -0.0591

b5 = –0.9630 b6= 0.3008

Banking analysts can interpret the coefficients as the change in the
odds of default. For example, an increase in the amount of the
installment will lead to a decrease in the probability of repayment
(and, therefore, of the odds) as well as for the days of delay and for
the FICO score. On the other hand, an increase in annual income,
debt/income ratio, and interest rate will lead to an increase in the
probability of default. In all cases, the effect of each variable is
considered without prejudice to the others.

The value of the coefficients must be interpreted from an economic point
of view. While the results on the installment, days late, FICO score,
and annual income are intuitive, those on the debt-to-income ratio and
interest rate are less obvious. The first can be explained by saying
that more debt (perhaps from other banks) allows one to repay the loan
better; the second, by saying that higher rates lead to a greater
incentive to repay the loan on time.

Verification of the Significance of the Logistic Regression Model

How to evaluate the goodness of fit of a logistic regression model?
First of all, we can evaluate the significance of the individual
coefficients by relating the estimate of each coefficient to the
relative standard error and observing the consequent p-value. A small
p-value will indicate a significant coefficient; otherwise, a large
value will indicate a non-significant coefficient, which means that the
associated variable is not a significant cause of the probability that
Y=1 (of default in the example).

We can also assess the significance of the whole model. To this aim, we
can compare the model with those that provide the best and worst fit.
The first corresponds to the so-called “saturated” model, a model which,
having as many parameters as observations, provides a complete
description of the data and a perfect fit. The worst model is the null
one with a single parameter which is the intercept. On the one hand, the
null model leaves all the variability of the response variable
unexplained. On the other hand, the saturated model has n parameters,
one for each observation, and, therefore, attributes all the variability
to the systematic component.

In practice, the null model is too simple, and the saturated model is
not informative because it does not summarize the observations
parsimoniously but simply reproduces them completely. However, the
saturated model provides a benchmark for measuring the goodness of fit
of an intermediate model with p parameters, in terms of its distance
from the saturated model.

We now present the output of the considered example found by Python for
the evaluation of logistic regression models. Table 10-3 reports, for
each coefficient, the relative estimate, standard error, value of the
test statistic (which is approximately normal, hence the symbol z), and
p-value.

Table 10-3

Estimates from a full logistic regression model

[]

A table displaying regression analysis results with coefficients,
standard errors, z-values, p-values, and confidence intervals for
various predictors. The predictors include constant, interest rate,
installment, annual income, debt-to-income ratio (dti), Fico score, and
days of delay. Notable coefficients are interest rate at 0.3008 and Fico
score at -0.9630, both with significant p-values of 0.000.

The output in Table 10-3 shows that the variables “Annual income” and
“days of delay” do not significantly influence the probability of
default, unlike the others. The next table compares the deviance of a
logistic regression model with four variables (the significant ones in
the previous table) with a complete six-variable model.

Table 10-4

Estimates from a reduced logistic regression model

[]

The image displays a statistical table with regression analysis results.
The top section lists coefficients, standard errors, z-values, p-values,
and confidence intervals for variables: const, Interest_rate,
Installment, dti, and Fico. Notably, the p-values for all variables are
0.000, indicating statistical significance. The bottom section compares
two models, Reduced and Full, showing degrees of freedom,
log-likelihood, deviance, chi-squared values, and p-values. The Full
model has a lower log-likelihood and deviance, suggesting a better fit.

Table 10-4 shows that the p-value for comparing the two models is equal
to 0.18 (the deviance difference is equal to only 3.38), and therefore
we do not reject the hypothesis that says the two models are the same.
They are indeed equivalent from the statistical viewpoint.

Tree Models

Let’s now compare the logistic regression model with a tree model for
the same data.

While linear and logistic regression models first produce a score and
then, possibly, a classification, according to a discriminant rule,
decision trees first produce a classification of the observations into
groups and then a score for each of them, constant in each group.

Tree models can be defined as a recursive procedure, through which a set
of n statistical units is progressively divided into groups, according
to a divisive rule that aims to maximize the internal homogeneity of the
groups obtained. At each step of the procedure, the divisive rule is
specified by a partition of the values ​​of one of the explanatory
variables. Therefore, at each step, choosing a divisive rule involves
choosing which explanatory variable to use and how to partition it.

The main result of the tree analysis is a final partition of the
observations: to achieve the latter, it is necessary to specify a
stopping criterion for the dividing process. Assume that a final
partition has been reached, consisting of g groups (g < n).

Then, for any given response variable yi, a regression tree produces an
estimated value that is equal to the mean of the response variable of
the group to which observation i belongs. Let m be such a group;
formally, we have that:

[$$ {\hat{y}}_i=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n_m}{y}_{lm}}{n_m}. $$]

For a classification tree, however, as seen for logistic regression, the
estimated values ​​are given in terms of estimated probabilities of
belonging to a single group. Assume that only two categories are
possible (binary classification); the probability of the event can take
the values ​​0 or 1 considering a threshold, and, therefore, the estimated
probability corresponds to the observed proportion of successes in group
m. Figure 10-1 represents the result of the tree models for the example
considered.

[]

A decision tree diagram used for classification, showing a hierarchical
structure with nodes and branches. The root node splits based on the
condition X[4] <= 659.5, with a Gini impurity of 0.314, covering 9578
samples divided into two classes with values [1868, 7710]. Subsequent
nodes further split the data based on different conditions, such as X[4]
<= 634.5 and X[5] <= 1109.98, with varying Gini values and sample
distributions. The tree illustrates the decision-making process, with
leaf nodes representing final classifications.

Figure 10-1 shows that the sample is first divided based on the values
​​of the variable X4 (debt to income ratio). On the left, the elements of
the sample with X4 less than 659.5 are further divided, again on the
basis of X4 and, then, in terms of X5 (FICO score). On the right, the
elements of the sample with X4 greater than 659.5 are divided in terms
of X5 (FICO score) and, then, in terms of X3 (log income).

Classification trees can be unstable, that is, they can be very
dependent on the data considered. To this end, they are evolved into
“random forests” that estimate multiple trees corresponding to different
samples and average the related results. In other words, the random
forest estimates are means of the values ​​estimated from the individual
trees.

[$$ \frac{1}{B}{\sum}_1^B{\hat{y}}_i $$]

The problem with random forest models is that, being averages between
multiple trees, they do not allow us to understand the causal factors
that enable us to identify the path which leads to a certain estimate.
To this end, we consider the so-called “variable importance plots” which
indicate how much each variable reduces the variability of the original
sample. Figure 10-2 shows an example for the data considered.

[]

A horizontal bar chart displays the importance of various financial
factors. The Fico score is the most significant, followed by Days of
delay, DTI (debt-to-income ratio), Installment, Annual income, and
Interest rate. The chart quantifies these factors, with Fico reaching
approximately 0.25 and Interest rate around 0.10.

Figure 10-2 identifies FICO score, days of delay, and dti as the most
important variables.

Neural Networks

Neural networks were originally developed to try to mimic the
neurophysiology of the human brain through combining simple
computational elements (neurons) into a highly interconnected system.
They have become an important, and probably the best known,
computational method of data mining.

A neural network is composed of a set of elementary computational units,
called neurons, connected to each other by means of weighted
connections. These units are organized into layers such that each neuron
in a layer is exclusively connected to the neurons of the previous and
subsequent layers. Each neuron (also called node, or unit) represents an
autonomous computational unit and is reached (in input) by a series of
signals that can determine its activation. Following activation, each
neuron produces an output signal. All input signals reach the neuron
simultaneously such that the neuron receives more than one input signal,
but transmits only one output signal.

For each input signal, a connection weight is associated which
determines the different relative importance that the input signals can
have in producing the final impulse emitted by the neuron. Connections
can be excitatory, inhibitory, or null (i.e., absent) depending on
whether the corresponding weights are positive, negative, or null,
respectively. The weights are adaptive coefficients which, in analogy
with the biological model, are modified in response to the various
signals traveling on the network based on an appropriate learning
algorithm. Furthermore, a threshold value called bias is usually
introduced. Its role is similar to that of an intercept in a regression
model. Neural networks are black box models: they may be very accurate,
providing accurate predictions, but their output is not interpretable.

Model Comparison

The classification models introduced in this chapter – logistic
regression, tree (and forest) models, and neural networks – are of
different nature: some have an underlying probabilistic model (the
former); others do not (the second and third). They are therefore not
comparable using statistical tests. Instead, they can be compared
directly in terms of the accuracy of their predictions.

If, in the predictive phase, a model correctly classifies more
individuals than another (e.g., as reliable or unreliable debtors), it
will be considered better.

This way of reasoning can be formalized in the concept of a confusion
matrix. The confusion matrix contains the number of elements classified
correctly or incorrectly for each class. On its main diagonal appears
the number of objects classified correctly for each class, while the
extra-diagonal elements indicate the number of objects classified
incorrectly. If it is (explicitly or implicitly) assumed that each
incorrect classification has the same cost, the proportion of incorrect
classifications out of the total cases constitutes the error rate and
represents the quantity that must be minimized. Clearly, the assumption
of equal costs can be replaced by errors weighted with the relative
costs.

Table 10-5 shows an example of a confusion matrix. The table classifies
the observations of the test dataset into four possible categories: (1)
observations predicted as events and actually such (with an absolute
frequency equal to a); (2) observations predicted as events and actually
not events (with frequency equal to c); (3) observations predicted as
non-events and actually events (with frequency equal to b); (4)
observations predicted as non-events and actually such (with a frequency
equal to d).

Table 10-5

Theoretical confusion matrix

  Predicted/Actual   Reliable (1)   Not Reliable (0)   Total
  ------------------ -------------- ------------------ ---------
  Reliable (1)       a              b                  a+b
  Not Reliable (0)   c              d                  c+d
  Total              a+c            b+d                a+b+c+d

For a binary classification problem such as the credit one considered in
this chapter, the confusion matrix is as in Table 10-6.

Table 10-6

Observed confusion matrix

  Predicted/Actual   Reliable   Not Reliable
  ------------------ ---------- --------------
  Reliable           45         30
  Not Reliable       15         60

In Table 10-6, the main diagonal shows the correct predictions. It can
be seen that the model predicted 60 borrowers as reliable
(creditworthy). Of these, however, only 45 were actually reliable (i.e.,
they repaid the credit granted on time), while 15 proved unreliable.
Similarly, 90 debtors were predicted as unreliable, but, of these, only
60 were actually unreliable. The overall accuracy rate of the model is
therefore equal to 105/150 = 70%.

We note that, for reasons of efficiency and confidentiality, the above
forecasting exercise is usually carried out on a so-called test sample,
rather than on real data. To this end, the available data sample is
divided into a training sample, which is used to learn the model
(training set), and a validation sample, whose Y data are used as actual
values ​​to be compared with the predicted values.

Another important observation concerns the transition from logistic
regression to the confusion matrix. Logistic regression does not provide
predictions in class form (zero and one) but in score (probability)
form. It is therefore necessary to “round” the probabilities to zero or
one. The rounding threshold is arbitrary. It is not always correct to
use 50% (majority rule) as a threshold. To solve this problem and have a
less arbitrary and more agnostic criterion for comparing models, we use
the ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve.

The ROC curve is a graph that also measures the predictive accuracy of a
model. It is based on the confusion matrix (Table 10-5).

Given an observed table and a value on the basis of which to carry out
the rounding (cutoff), the ROC curve is calculated on the basis of the
resulting joint frequencies of predicted and observed events (reliable
individuals) and non-events (unreliable individuals).

More precisely, it is based on the following conditional probabilities:

- Sensitivity (a / (a+b)): Proportion of events predicted as such

- Specificity (d / (c+d)): Proportion of non-events, predicted as such

- False positives (1-specificity) (c / (c+d)): Proportion of non-events,
  predicted as events (type II error)

- False negatives (1-sensitivity) (b / (a+b)): Proportion of events
  predicted as non-events (type I error)

The ROC curve is obtained by representing, for each fixed cutoff value,
a point on the Cartesian plane which has the false positive value
(1-specificity) on the x-axis and the true positive value (sensitivity)
on the y-axis. Each point in the curve therefore corresponds to a
particular cutoff.

In terms of comparing models, the best curve is the one most markedly
shifted to the left; ideally, it should coincide with the y-axis. The
area under the curve synthetically represents the performance of a
model. It is between zero and one; the closer to one, the better the
predictive ability of a given model. Figure 10-3 provides an example of
an ROC curve and calculation of the AUROC (Area Under the ROC).

[]

A Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve comparing two models.
The x-axis represents the false positive rate, and the y-axis represents
the true positive rate. Model 1, shown in red, has an Area Under the ROC
Curve (AUROC) of 0.621. Model 2, shown in blue, has an AUROC of 0.799.
Model 2 demonstrates better performance with a higher true positive rate
across various false positive rates.

From Figure 10-3, it shows that the best model is Model 2, with an AUROC
equal to 0.799 against 0.621 of Model 1.

We can now compare the different scoring models seen in the chapter.
Let’s start with logistic regression.

[]

A graph showing the ROC curve for Requisity classification using
logistic regression. The x-axis represents the False Positive Rate,
ranging from 0 to 1, and the y-axis represents the True Positive Rate,
also ranging from 0 to 1. The curve starts near the origin, rises
steadily, and approaches the top right corner, indicating the model's
performance.

The logistic ROC represented in Figure 10-4 has an underlying area equal
to AUROC = 0.7612. Regarding tree models: the tree model in Figure 10-5
has an AUROC equal to 0.70987, therefore worse than logistic regression.

[]

A line graph titled "ROC curve for Requisity classification with
decision tree" shows the relationship between the True Positive Rate
(y-axis) and the False Positive Rate (x-axis). The curve starts at the
origin, rises sharply to a True Positive Rate of 0.6 at a False Positive
Rate of 0.2, and then increases linearly to the top right corner,
indicating the performance of the decision tree model.

Let us now consider the random forest model.

[]

A graph showing the ROC curve for Requisity classification using a
random forest model. The curve plots the true positive rate against the
false positive rate, demonstrating the model's performance. The curve
rises steeply initially and then gradually levels off, indicating a good
balance between sensitivity and specificity.

In this case, the AUROC is equal to AUC = 0.8390, better than the three
models considered so far.

Finally, let’s consider the neural network.

[]

A graph showing the ROC curve for Requisity classification using a
neural network. The curve plots the true positive rate against the false
positive rate, demonstrating the model's performance. The curve rises
steeply initially, then gradually levels off, indicating a balance
between sensitivity and specificity.

For the neural network, AUROC = 0.8204. The result is very good, but
slightly lower than that of the random forest, which is therefore the
best model.

SAFE-HAI Assessment

The wide use of machine learning models requires developing risk
management models that can balance opportunities with risk of using
these models. “safeaipackage” is a Python package which implements the
SAFE-HAI approach proposed in this book and has a wide range of built-in
capabilities to implement the metrics introduced in the previous
chapters. The capabilities are divided into a set of modules, each
centered around the measurement of different AI principles: accuracy,
security, explainability, fairness, privacy, sustainability. This
package can be installed using pip as follows (more information about
this package is available on
https://github.com/GolnooshBabaei/safeaipackage):

pip install safeaipackage

Here are more details on the functions described in the Python package
applied to the considered data in this chapter.

Accuracy

To find the accuracy of the models, we can use the “check_accuracy”
module in which we have the “Accuracy” class. Using this module, we can
find the RGA metric for all the models we used in the previous section.
Remember that, for a binary response, RGA=AUROC.

Logistic regression:

acc_logistic_reg = check_accuracy.Accuracy(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_lr)

rga_logistic_reg = acc_logistic_reg.rga()

rga_logistic_reg

>>> 0.5925286280058539

This output says that the accuracy of the model considering the rga
function is equal to about 0.59, showing a not accurate model.

Decision tree:

acc_tree = check_accuracy.Accuracy(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_tree)

rga_tree = acc_tree.rga()

rga_tree

>>> 0.7097687795788048

We see that the accuracy of the decision tree model is about 0.71,
better than the logistic regression model.

Random forest:

acc_rf = check_accuracy.Accuracy(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_forest)

rga_rf = acc_rf.rga()

rga_rf

>>> 0.730511801466253

Doing the same for the random forest model, we find out that the
accuracy is better than the previous two models, equal to about 0.73.

Neural network:

acc_nn = check_accuracy.Accuracy(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_network)

rga_nn = acc_nn.rga()

rga_nn

>>> 0.6826493361169493

The accuracy of the neural network model is almost equal to the decision
tree model, almost equal to 0.7.

Explainability

To evaluate the explainability of the the models, we can use the
“check_explainability” module, in which there is the rge() function that
can calculate the RGE metric for all the explanatory variables in each
model.

Logistic regression:

exp_logistic_reg = check_explainability.Explainability(xtrain, xtest,
ytrain, ytest, model_lr)

rge_logistic_reg = exp_logistic_reg.rge()

rge_logistic_reg

>>>

RGE

Fico             0.326453

Interest_rate    0.083154

Installment      0.054892

Days_of_delay    0.036232

dti              0.024276

Annual_income    0.018660

Looking at the results found by the explainability module for the
logistic regression model, we can see that “FICO” has the highest
contribution, while “Annual_income” shows the smallest RGE value.

Decision tree:

exp_tree = check_explainability.Explainability(xtrain, xtest, ytrain,
ytest, model_tree)

rge_tree = exp_tree.rge()

rge_tree

>>>

RGE

Fico            0.338447

Days_of_delay   0.303410

dti             0.270506

Interest_rate   0.264183

Annual_income   0.233464

Installment     0.213933

We see that again here “FICO” is the most important variable.

Random forest:

exp_rf = check_explainability.Explainability(xtrain, xtest, ytrain,
ytest, model_rf)

rge_rf = exp_rf.rge()

rge_rf

>>>

RGE

Fico            0.199945

Days_of_delay   0.097260

dti             0.091773

Interest_rate   0.046991

Annual_income   0.025638

Installment     0.016505

As it can be seen, the results of the random forest are almost similar
to the decision tree but different from the RGE values found for the
logistic regression model. For example, while “Installment” is the third
significant variable, it is the least important variable for the random
forest model.

Neural network:

exp_nn= check_explainability.Explainability(xtrain, xtest, ytrain,
ytest, model_nn)

rge_nn = exp_nn.rge()

rge_nn

>>>

RGE

Fico            0.249193

Interest_rate   0.163634

Days_of_delay   0.136245

dti             0.124837

Installment     0.093381

Annual_income   0.081396

Robustness

To evaluate the robustness of the models, we can use the
“check_robustness” module. Using this module, there are two approaches
to measure the robustness. Using the rgr_all() function, we can check
the robustness of the model when all the variables are perturbed at the
same time. Another option is the rgr_single() function which checks the
robustness of the model when perturbing only one variable. Here, we
report the results of the rgr_all() function.

Logistic regression:

rob_lr= check_robustness.Robustness(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_lr)

rgr_lr = rob_lr.rgr_all()

rgr_lr

>>> 0.4907575208408846

Decision tree:

rob_dt= check_robustness.Robustness(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_dt)

rgr_dt = rob_dt.rgr_all()

rgr_dt

>>>  0.519388902090104

Random forest:

rob_rf = check_robustness.Robustness(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_rf)

rgr_rf = rob_rf.rgr_all()

rgr_rf

>>> 0.47538129620810476

Neural network:

rob_nn = check_robustness.Robustness(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_nn)

rgr_nn = rob_nn.rgr_all()

rgr_nn

>>> 0.46748678355614437

Looking at the results of the four models, we can see that the highest
RGR is for the decision tree model, which states that this model is the
most robust classifier in our example.

Fairness

To check the fairness of the models, we can use the “check_fairness”
module available in the package to evaluate the group fairness based on
the protected variable. Here, we consider the “Annual income” as the
protected variable. To this end, we group the observations to
“low_income” and “high_income” considering the average value of the
income.

Logistic regression:

fair_lr= check_fairness.Fairness(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest, model_lr)

rgf_lr = fair_lr.rgf(["Annual_income"])

rgf_lr

>>> 0.926443

Decision tree:

fair_dt= check_fairness.Fairness(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest, model_dt)

rgf_dt = fair_dt.rgf(["Annual_income"])

rgf_dt

>>>  0.922399

Random forest:

fair_rf = check_fairness.Fairness(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_rf)

rgf_rf = fair_rf.rgf(["Annual_income"])

rgf_rf

>>> 0.972109

Neural network:

fair_nn = check_fairness.Fairness(xtrain, xtest, ytrain, ytest,
model_nn)

rgf_nn = fair_nn.rgf(["Annual_income"])

rgf_nn

>>> 0.924922

Looking at the RGF values, random forest model represents the highest
level of fairness toward the protected variable.

To conclude this chapter, we’ve reviewed a case study for credit loan
applications and looked at various AI models that could be used during
this analysis. We also provided a brief practical introduction on the
SAFE-HAI Python package and how it relates to the mentioned AI models.

We hope you have gained valuable insights from reading this book. As AI
technologies are steadily being integrated to existing tech
infrastructure and are a part of people’s daily workflows, it’s crucial
that the development of these technologies are supported by practical
and implementable guidelines on responsible, ethical, and safe ways to
build AI systems that pose less risks to users and society. Building on
the Responsible AI framework introduced by Duke, already mentioned in
Chapter 1, we’ve expanded the framework, as a second step to include
accuracy, security, and sustainability. We also paid special attention
to human rights which is a fundamental challenge facing many people from
minority groups with their interaction with AI. These additions form the
SAFE-HAI framework which is the core focus of this book. We extensively
demonstrated and explained ways to measure each principle across each
chapter in this book, with key metrics using a “rank graduation” score.
This is a new and novel way to measure Responsible AI principles for any
AI model or application.

AI systems cannot be properly developed, deployed, and used without
appropriate governing processes in place. To this end, we provided a
brief review on the various existing AI policies and ways to include AI
governance in your organization. We’ve wrapped up the book, with an
in-depth case study, looking at the process for evaluating a credit loan
application using the SAFE-HAI framework.

As AI technologies and use are on the rise, let’s ensure Responsible AI
processes and practices are also on the rise. Otherwise, we’d have a big
problem on our hands with a proliferation of technologies that
increasingly pose more harm than good to members of society, consumers,
and the world at large. We hope you’ve gained valuable insights to
develop Responsible AI practices to your AI/ML life cycle and workflows.

Appendix

Chapter 1

1.  1.

    Neal Johnson, Responsible AI – an overview,
    www.​hippodigital.​co.​uk/​responsible-ai-an-overview.

     

2.  2.

    Jakob Uszkoreit, Transformer: A Novel Neural Network Architecture
    for Language Understanding,
    www.​blog.​research.​google/​2017/​08/​transformer-novel-neural-network.​html.

     

3.  3.

    Toju Duke (2023). Building Responsible AI Algorithms, Apress.

     

4.  4.

    AIAAIC, LAION-5B image-text pairing dataset,
    www.​aiaaic.​org/​aiaaic-repository/​ai-algorithmic-and-automation-incidents/​laion-5b-image-text-pairing-dataset.

     

5.  5.

    Chloe Xiang, A Photographer Tried to Get His Photos Removed from an
    AI Dataset. He Got an Invoice Instead,
    www.​vice.​com/​en/​article/​pkapb7/​a-photographer-tried-to-get-his-photos-removed-from-an-ai-dataset-he-got-an-invoice-instead.

     

6.  6.

    Benj Edwards, Artist finds private medical record photos in popular
    AI training data set,
    www.​arstechnica.​com/​information-technology/​2022/​09/​artist-finds-private-medical-record-photos-in-popular-ai-training-data-set.

     

7.  7.

    Audrey Azoulay, Towards an Ethics of Artificial Intelligence,
    www.​un.​org/​en/​chronicle/​article/​towards-ethics-artificial-intelligence.

     

8.  8.

    UNESCO, Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence,
    www.​unesco.​org/​en/​articles/​recommendation-ethics-artificial-intelligence.

     

9.  9.

    United Nations, Final Report – Governing AI for Humanity,
    www.​un.​org/​ai-advisory-body.

     

10. 10.

    The White House, Executive Order on the Safe, Secure and Trustworthy
    Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence,
    www.​whitehouse.​gov/​briefing-room/​presidential-actions/​2023/​10/​30/​executive-order-on-the-safe-secure-and-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-artificial-intelligence.

     

11. 11.

    EU Artificial Intelligence Act, The EU Artificial Intelligence Act,
    www.​artificialintell​igenceact.​eu.

     

12. 12.

    UK Parliament, Artificial Intelligence (Regulation) Bill,
    www.​bills.​parliament.​uk/​publications/​53068/​documents/​4030.

     

13. 13.

    Paolo Giudici and Emanuela Raffinetti (2023). SAFE Artificial
    Intelligence in finance, Finance Research Letters, Volume 56,
    104088, ISSN 1544-6123.

     

14. 14.

    BIS, The Basel Framework, www.​bis.​org/​basel_​framework/​index.​htm.

     

15. 15.

    Max Lorenz (1905). Methods of measuring the concentration of wealth.
    Publications of the American Statistical Association, 9(70):
    209–219.

     

16. 16.

    Corrado Gini (1921). Measurement of Inequality of Incomes. Economic
    Journal, 31, 124–126.

     

17. 17.

    Global Citizen, The Richest 1% Own Almost Half the World’s Wealth &
    9 Other Mind-Blowing Facts on Wealth Inequality,
    www.​globalcitizen.​org/​en/​content/​wealth-inequality-oxfam-billionaires-elon-musk.

     

Chapter 2

1.  18.

    Raffinetti, E. (2023). A rank graduation accuracy measure to
    mitigate artificial intelligence risks. Quality and Quantity, 57,
    131–150.

     

2.  19.

    Giudici, P. and Raffinetti, E. (2024). RGA: a unified measure of
    predictive accuracy. Advances in Data Analysis and Classification.

     

3.  20.

    Huang, Y., Zhang, Q., Yu, P., Sun, L. (2023). TrustGPT: A Benchmark
    for Trustworthy and Responsible Large Language Models.

     

4.  21.

    Diebold, F. and Mariano, R. (1995). Comparing Predictive Accuracy,
    Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 13 (3), 253–263.

     

5.  22.

    DeLong, E.R., DeLong, D.M., and Clarke-Pearson, D.L. (1988).
    Comparing the areas under two or more correlated receiver operating
    characteristic curves: a nonparametric approach. Biometrics, 44(3),
    837–845.

     

6.  23.

    Wang A., Pruksachatkun Y., Nangia N., Singh A., Michael J., Hill F.,
    Levy O., Bowman S. (2020). SuperGLUE: A Stickier Benchmark for
    General-Purpose Language Understanding Systems.

     

7.  24.

    Jeffrey Ip, An Introduction to LLM Benchmarking,
    www.​confident-ai.​com/​blog/​the-current-state-of-benchmarking-llms.

     

8.  25.

    AWS, Amazon Machine Learning – Developer Guide,
    www.​docs.​aws.​amazon.​com/​pdfs/​machine-learning/​latest/​dg/​machinelearning-dg.​pdf#improving-model-accuracy.

     

Chapter 3

1.  26.

    Croce, F., Andriushchenko, M., Sehwag, V., Debenedetti, E.,
    Flammarion, N., Chiang, M., Mittal, P., Hein, M. (2023).
    Robustbench: a standardised adversarial robustness benchmark, arXiv
    paper.

     

2.  27.

    James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. (2023). An
    introduction to statistical learning, with applications in Python
    and R. Springer-Verlag.

     

3.  28.

    Babaei, G., Giudici, P., and Raffinetti, E. (2024). SafeAIpackage: a
    python package for AI risk management. SSRN.

     

4.  29.

    Babaei, G. and Giudici, P. (2024). GPT classifications, Machine
    learning with applications.

     

5.  30.

    Bai, Y., Anderson, B.G., Kim, A., Sojudi, S. (2023). Improving the
    accuracy-robustness tradeoff of classifiers via adaptive smoothing.
    arXiv:2301.12554.

     

6.  31.

    Gridlex, Building Robust Machine Learning Models: Tips and Tricks,
    www.​gridlex.​com/​a/​building-robust-machine-learning-models-st6324.

     

Chapter 4

1.  32.

    Bracke, P., Datta, A., Jung, C., and Shayak, S. (2019). Machine
    learning explainability in finance: an application to default risk
    analysis. Staff Working Paper No. 816, Bank of England.

     

2.  33.

    XAI-2024, The 2nd World Conference on eXplainable Artificial
    Intelligence, www.​xaiworldconferen​ce.​com/​2024.

     

3.  34.

    Shapley, L. (1953). A value for n-person games. Contributions to the
    Theory of Games, II, 307–317, Princeton University Press.

     

4.  35.

    Lundberg, S. M. and Lee, S. (2017). A unified approach to
    interpreting model predictions. Proceedings of the 31st
    International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
    (NIPS), 4768–4777.

     

5.  36.

    Giudici, P. and Raffinetti, E. (2021). Shapley Lorenz explainable
    artificial intelligence. Expert Systems with applications, 167,
    114104.

     

6.  37.

    Saranya, A., Subhashini, R. (2023). A systematic review of
    Explainable Artificial Intelligence models and applications: Recent
    developments and future trends, Decision Analytics Journal, 7.

     

7.  38.

    Babei, G., Giudici, P., Raffinetti, E. (2023). Explainable fintech
    lending. Journal of economics and business, volume 125–126.

     

Chapter 5

1.  39.

    Teodorescu, M. and Yao, X. (2021). Machine learning fairness is
    computationally difficult and algorithmically unsatisfactorily
    solved. IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC),
    1–8.

     

2.  40.

    Horesh, Y., Haas, N., Mishraky, E., Resheff, Y., Meir Lador, S.
    (2020). Paired-consistency: An example-based model-agnostic approach
    to fairness regularization in machine learning. Machine Learning and
    Knowledge Discovery in Databases: International Workshops of ECML
    PKDD 2019, 590–604.

     

3.  41.

    Karimi, H., Khan, M.F.A., Liu, H., Derr, T., and Liu, H. (2022).
    Enhancing individual fairness through propensity score matching.
    IEEE 9th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced
    Analytics, 1–10.

     

4.  42.

    Grabowicz, P. A., Perello, N., and Mishra, A. (2022). Marrying
    fairness and explainability in supervised learning. ACM Conference
    on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 1905–1916.

     

5.  43.

    Jiang, H. and Nachum, O. (2024). Identifying and correcting bias in
    machine learning. Google research paper.

     

6.  44.

    Agarwal, S., Muckley, C., and Neelakantan, P. (2023). Countering
    racial discrimination in algorithmic lending: A case for
    model-agnostic interpretation methods. Economics Letters, 26.

     

7.  45.

    Chen, Y., Giudici, P., Liu, K., Raffinetti, E. (2024). Measuring
    fairness in credit ratings, Expert Systems with Applications, Volume
    258, 125184.

     

Chapter 6

1.  46.

    Terzi, E., Liu, K. (2010). A framework for computing the privacy
    scores of users in online social networks. ACM Transactions on
    Knowledge discovery data, 5:6, 2010.

     

2.  47.

    Li, X. (2020). Graph convolutional networks for privacy metrics in
    online social networks. Social networks in applied sciences, 10,
    2020.

     

3.  48.

    Babaei, G., Giudici, P., and Raffinetti, E. (2024). Safeaipackage: a
    Python package for AI risk management, SSRN.

     

4.  49.

    Medium, Privacy-preserving machine learning: Techniques for
    protecting sensitive data,
    www.​medium.​com/​@zhonghong9998/​privacy-preserving-machine-learning-techniques-for-protecting-sensitive-data-d199b450e5a9#:​~:​text=​Homomorphic%20​encryption%20​is%20​a%20​cryptographic,even%20​during%20​the%20​computation%20​process.

     

Chapter 7

1.  50.

    United Nations, Governing AI for Humanity,
    www.​un.​org/​sites/​un2.​un.​org/​files/​un_​ai_​advisory_​body_​governing_​ai_​for_​humanity_​interim_​report.​pdf.

     

2.  51.

    Morgan Stanley (2019). ESG approaches and principles (Report).
    Morgan Stanley.
    www.​morganstanley.​com/​im/​publication/​resources/​esg-approach-and-principles-enja.​pdf.

     

3.  52.

    Forstater, M., & Zhang, N. (2016). ESG definitions and concepts:
    Background note. UNEP Inquiry: Nairobi, Kenya.

     

4.  53.

    Delmas, M. A., & Burbano, V. C. (2011). The drivers of greenwashing.
    California management review, 54 (1), 64–87.

     

5.  54.

    Furlow, N. E. (2010). Greenwashing in the new millennium. The
    Journal of Applied Business and Economics, 10 (6), 22.

     

6.  55.

    Strobel, G. (2020). Making sense of ESG: A primer on social
    corporate responsibility (Forbes, Ed.).
    www.​forbes.​com/​sites/​forbesfinancecou​ncil.

     

7.  56.

    Agosto, A., Cerchiello, P., Giudici, P. (2023). Bayesian learning
    models to measure the relative impact of ESG factors on credit
    ratings. International journal of data science and analytics.

     

8.  57.

    Bosone, C., Bogliardi, S. M., Giudici, P. (2022). Are ESG Female?
    The hidden benefits of female presence on sustainable finance.
    Review of Economic Analysis, 2022, 14(2), pp. 253–274.

     

9.  58.

    Ali, S., Liu, B., & Su, J. J. (2018). Does corporate governance
    quality affect default risk? The role of growth opportunities and
    stock liquidity. International Review of Economics & Finance, 58,
    422–448.

     

10. 59.

    La Rosa, F., Liberatore, G., Mazzi, F., & Terzani, S. (2018). The
    impact of corporate social performance on the cost of debt and
    access to debt financing for listed European non-financial firms.
    European Management Journal, 36 (4), 519–529.

     

11. 60.

    Forbes, We Need To Make Machine Learning Sustainable. Here’s How,
    www.​forbes.​com/​sites/​esade/​2023/​03/​17/​we-need-to-make-machine-learning-sustainable-heres-how.

     

Chapter 8

1.  61.

    Giudici, P., and Raffinetti E., (2023). SAFE Artificial Intelligence
    in Finance. Finance Research Letters, 56, 104088.

     

2.  62.

    Giudici, P., Abu-Hashish, I. (2019). What determines bitcoin
    exchange prices? A network VAR approach. Finance Research Letters,
    vol. 28, 309–318.

     

3.  63.

    Abercrombie, G., Benbouzid, D., Giudici, P., Golpayegani, D.,
    Hernandez, J., Noro, P., Pandit, H., Paraschou, E., Pownall, C.,
    Prajapati, J., Sayre, M., Sengupta, U., Suriyawongful, A., Thelot,
    R., Vei, S., and Waltersdorfer, L. (2024). A Collaborative,
    Human-Centred Taxonomy of AI, Algorithmic, and Automation Harms.

     

4.  64.

    Giudici, P., Piergallini, A., Recchioni, M., and Raffinetti, E.
    (2024). Explainable AI for time series models. Physica A.

     

Chapter 9

1.  65.

    Bommasani, R., Kapoor, S., Klyman, K., Longpre, S., Ramaswami, A.,
    Zhang, D., Schaake, M., Ho, D., Narayanan, A., Liang, P. (2023).
    Considerations for governing open foundation models, Issue Brief HAI
    Policy & Society.

     

2.  66.

    IBM, What is spear phishing? www.​ibm.​com/​topics/​spear-phishing#.

     

3.  67.

    Anderljung, M., Smith, E., O’Brien, J., Soder, L., Bucknall, B.,
    Bluemke, E., Schuett, J., Trager, R., Strahm, L., Chowdhury, R.
    (2023). NeurIPS 2023.

     

Chapter 10

1.  68.

    Babaei, G., Giudici, P., Raffinetti, E. A Rank Graduation Box for
    SAFE AI, Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 259 (2025).

     

Index

A

Accuracy

ACC

AI application

of classifications

AUROC

Euclidean distance

FP and FN calculation

FP and FN statistics

predicted score and labels

ROC curve

classification tasks

data leakage

definitions

mitigation

ML performance evaluation

multidimensional predictions

NIST risk management framework

performance tests

predictive accuracy

p-value of statistical test

RMF

scoring rubric

textual predictions

ACC values

Adaptive smoothing

Adversarial robustness

Adversarial training

AI Act (AIA)

AI developers and organizations

AI governance

AI regulation and policies

process

structure

team/working group

AI models

AI principles

AI regulation and policies

AI system

the European Union’s (EU) AI Act

human-centric approach

life-changing technology

Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Technology

principles

risk categories, AI technologies

safe and responsible AI

safe, technical measures and guardrails

skeptical c

UK AI Safety Summit

UN

US government

AI risk management

AI risks

Authoritarian / Corporate Surveillance

biorisk

cyber attacks

disinformation and election interference

NCII and CSAM

spear-phishing scams

voice-cloning scams

AI safety

AI’s harms

AI systems

Alternative neural network models

American NIST risk management framework

Area Under the ROC (AUROC)

Artificial intelligence

Authoritarian or Corporate Surveillance

AutoAttack

Autoregressive (AR) models

B

Bayesian ensemble model

financial ratios

MSCI ESG score

rating class

S&P Global ESG Rank

Bias-variance trade-off

Biorisk

Bitcoin

Boolean questions

C

check_privacy

classification model

classification problem

descriptive analysis

minority classification

observations of interest

prediction model

privacy requirement

Python code

RandomForestClassifier

real-life example

RGP-based test

RGP metric

salary growth prediction

“stima” R package

Child sexual abuse material (CSAM)

Choice of Plausible Alternatives (COPA)

Civil society

Classical “model” risk

Classification trees

CommitmentBank (CB)

“Computational-centric” measures

Concordance curve C

Conditional fairness

Confusion matrix

Consumer lending

Consumer protection laws

Corporate Social Responsible (CSR)

Cosine similarity

Credit risk

Credit scoring

Cyber attacks

D

Data commons

Data leakage

Data perturbation

Debt to their income (Dti)

Decision tree model

DeLong’s test

Differential privacy

Dimensionality reduction methods

Disruptive technical revolution

Dual Lorenz curve

E

Earnings before income tax, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA)

Environmental, social, and governance (ESG)

artificial intelligence applications

definition

dimensions

Great Recession, 2008

key performance indicators

positive social and environmental outcomes

scores interpretation

Environmental sustainability

assessment

assumption

Bayesian ensemble model

building model

case study

credit rating

data sample, assessment

ESG scores

machine learning model

measuring accuracy

PD

ESG scores

Ethical AI

EU AI Act

Euclidean distance

European Union’s (EU) AI Act

Explainability

AI system

data distribution

definition

EU AI Act

heterogeneity

Lasso and Ridge

linear and logistic regression

machine learning models

mitigation

PLTax

scoring rubric

Shapley game theory

Shapley Lorenz values

Shapley values

sustainability

variable importance plot, random forest credit scores

Explainable and interpretable artificial intelligence systems

Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI)

Explanatory variables

F

FairMatch

Fairness

credit scores

decision-making processes

experimental or “counterfactual” design setting

group-based approach

individual-based

measurement

independent variable of interest

for individuals vs. organizations

in loan acceptance

for organizations

preliminary data analysis

random forest model

Simpson’s paradox

PSM method

Python implementation

recommendations for mitigation

RGA measurement

RGF measurement

scoring rubric

Feature importance plot

Feature selection optimization methods

Federated learning

Feedback mechanisms

Feed forward neural network

G

Gated recurrent unit (GRU)

Gender equality–related indicators

Generalizability

Generative AI

Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) model

Generic attacks

Gini index

Global Financial Crisis

Governance policies, information

Governance practices

Governance processes

Governance structure

AI governance team/working group

defining AI policy

regular reviews and risk assessments

stakeholder engagement inclusion

user feedback incorporation

Government-Sponsored Enterprises or of Federal Housing Administrations
(GSEs/FHA)

Graphics Processing Units (GPUs)

Group-based fairness

H

Hallucination

“High-risk” AI systems

Holistic Evaluation of Language Models (HELM)

Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data repository

Homomorphic encryption

Human-centered AI (HCAI)

assessing AI

evaluating AI

improving AI

Human rights

I

International Human Rights Law

Investment decision-making process

J, K

Jaccard distance

L

LAION-5B dataset

Large language models (LLMs)

Levenshtein distance

Logistic regression model

banking analysts

full logistic regression model

probability of repayment

reduced logistic regression model

saturated model

significance

with tree model

variables

Long short-term memory networks (LSTM)

Lorenz curve

Loss of generality

M

Machine learning (ML) model

Mann-Whitney statistics

Marginal fairness

Mean error

Mean squared error (MSE)

ML algorithms

ML privacy-preserving techniques

adversarial training

differential privacy

federated learning

homomorphic encryption

MPC

Model accuracy

Morgan Stanley Score Index (MSCI) ESG Score

Multidisciplinary governance

Multiple regression model

Multi-Sentence Reading Comprehension (MultiRC)

N

Neural network autoregressive model (NNAR)

Neural network model

Neurons

NIST risk management framework

Nonconsensual intimate imagery (NCII)

Nonprofit and environmental organizations

O

Overfitting

P, Q

Personal data

PLTax

Policymakers

Predictive accuracy

Privacy

compliance metrics

Lorenz and dual Lorenz curves

NIST AI RMF recommendation

Python code

RGA and RGP measurement

Probability component

Probability of default (PD)

Propensity score matching (PSM) method

Public data commons

p-value

Python code

R

Random forest model

RandomForestRegressor function

Rank Graduation Accuracy (RGA) measure

calculation

check_accuracy

concentration curve

concordance

coordinates Ci

cumulative distributions Qi and Fi

definition

distribution of incomes

Gini index

Lorenz, dual Lorenz and concentration curve

predicted rank

predictions for response variable

properties

rank-based measure, accuracy

Rank Graduation Explainability (RGE)

advantage

AI application

check_explainability

define

mitigation

predictive problem, calculation

properties

RGE function

Rank Graduation Fairness (RGF)

Rank Graduation Human Oversight (RGH)

Rank Graduation Privacy (RGP)

Rank Graduation Robustness (RGR)

Rank Graduation Sustainability (RGS)

Reading Comprehension with Commonsense Reasoning Dataset (ReCoRD)

Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve

for decision tree model

for logistic regression model

for neural network model

for random forest model

Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE)

Refinitiv ESG Score

Reliability

Replika

Response variable

Responsible AI

accuracy

definition

ethical AI

history

LAION-5B dataset

robustness

Responsible AI principles

Return on assets (ROA)

Return on Equity (ROE)

Return on investment (ROI)

rga function

rge() function

RGF function

RGP-based statistical test

RGP-based test

RGP measure calculation

RGP metrics

RGP properties

rgr_single() function

Risk management framework (RMF)

AIA’s requirements

EU AI Act

ML model

NIST risk management framework

validation

RobustBench

Robustness

adversarial robustness

and cybersecurity

definitions, NIST’s

direct measurement

EU AI Act

indirect measurement

measurement

measure robustness of model

check_robustness

“classic” machine learning model

comparison of performance

cyber attack

data perturbation

frequency

generic attacks

GPT model

machine learning

RGA measurement

RGR measurement

rgr.single function

variability

model comparison

backward model selection procedure

dimensionality reduction methods

five-dimensional Gaussian distribution

forward model selection procedure

lasso regularization

linear regression model

principal component analysis

random forest model

regression tree model

RGA metrics

RGR measure

ridge regularization

selection and regularization methods

statistical test

stepwise selection models

recommendations for mitigation

scoring rubric

security

Root mean squared error (RMSE)

S

“Safeaipackage” toolbox

SAFE-HAI assessment

accuracy

explainability

fairness

robustness

SAFE-HAI framework

agnostic statistical tools

compliance principles

accuracy

AI system

explainability

fairness

security

Lorenz curve

Lorenz curveres methodologies, responsible AI principles

measure compliance risk, AI systems

overview

responsible AI principles

SAFE metrics, applications

SAFE risk metrics

statistical metrics

SAFE-HAI model

SAFE-HAI Python package

SAFE metrics

Safety

Saturated model

Scoring rubric

HCAI

privacy

sustainability

Secure, Accurate, Fair, and Explainable Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence (SAFE-HAI) framework

Secure multi-party computation (MPC)

Severity component

Shapley Lorenz values

Shapley values

Short-term memory (STM)

Simpson’s paradox

Small number of features

Social and governance

binary variable

Bloomberg database

case study

control variables

cross-sectional data points

default probability

equal opportunity policies

ESG factors

explanatory variables

“female presence” assessment

female representation

logistic regression model

positive correlation

remuneration policy

research assumption

summary statistics

Social criteria

Spear-phishing scams

Stakeholders

Standard and Poor’s (S&P) Global ESG Rank

Standard variance/covariance formula

SuperGLUE

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

Synthetic data

T

Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequencies (TF-IDF)

Time-independent neural network

Toxicity

Training set

Tree model

TrustGPT benchmark

Trustworthy AI

U

Underfitting

US AI Risk Management Framework

V

Variable importance plots

Voice-cloning scams

W, X, Y, Z

Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC)

Word embeddings

Word-in-Context (WIC)
