[]

Health Informatics

This series is directed to healthcare professionals leading the
transformation of healthcare by using information and knowledge. For
over 20 years, Health Informatics has offered a broad range of titles:
some address specific professions such as nursing, medicine, and health
administration; others cover special areas of practice such as trauma
and radiology; still other books in the series focus on
interdisciplinary issues, such as the computer based patient record,
electronic health records, and networked healthcare systems. Editors and
authors, eminent experts in their fields, offer their accounts of
innovations in health informatics. Increasingly, these accounts go
beyond hardware and software to address the role of information in
influencing the transformation of healthcare delivery systems around the
world. The series also increasingly focuses on the users of the
information and systems: the organizational, behavioral, and societal
changes that accompany the diffusion of information technology in health
services environments.

Developments in healthcare delivery are constant; in recent years,
bioinformatics has emerged as a new field in health informatics to
support emerging and ongoing developments in molecular biology. At the
same time, further evolution of the field of health informatics is
reflected in the introduction of concepts at the macro or health systems
delivery level with major national initiatives related to electronic
health records (EHR), data standards, and public health informatics.

These changes will continue to shape health services in the twenty-first
century. By making full and creative use of the technology to tame data
and to transform information, Health Informatics will foster the
development and use of new knowledge in healthcare.

Editors

Gyorgy J. Simon

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

Constantin Aliferis

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

[Creative Commons]

ISSN 1431-1917e-ISSN 2197-3741

Health Informatics

ISBN 978-3-031-39354-9e-ISBN 978-3-031-39355-6

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2024

This book is an open access publication.

Open Access This book is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this book are included in
the book's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the book's
Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks,
service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the
absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the
relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general
use.

The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the
advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate
at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the
editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the
material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have
been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer
Nature Switzerland AG

The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham,
Switzerland

I am dedicating this book to my wife, Mayuko, and our children, George
and Klara, for their love and for their patience with my long hours
writing this book. I could not have succeeded either in my career or
with this book without Mayuko’s dedication and support.

Gyorgy J. Simon

I most affectionately dedicate this work to my wife Alla, for the
inspiration she gives me daily and for her love.

Constantin Aliferis

Foreword 1

Imagine a world where you receive treatment that is precisely targeted
to give you the best outcome possible, where care is efficient and safe,
and where you have guidance in managing your health at home and are a
partner in your healthcare. We dream of a world like this, and you as a
reader of this book probably see a role for AI in making that dream come
true.

Rear Admiral Grace Hopper, developer of the first compiler for a
computer language, repeated a motto coined by John Augustus Shedd: “A
ship in port is safe; but that is not what ships are built for. Sail out
to sea and do new things.”^([1]) As a reader of this book, you are
leaving a safe harbor to do something hard and something risky.

I left that safe harbor in 1994 when I pivoted from my humanities
university degree in linguistics and Chinese to enroll in a graduate
program in medical informatics at the University of Utah. My husband
introduced me to the field, and my love of language steered me to the
new world of natural language processing. In classrooms, I raised my
hand to ask about the meaning of basic words like “algorithm,”
“heuristic,” and “ML,” and as the only female in the campus computer lab
at 2 am, I sat with my 2-year-old son asleep at my feet trying to get my
linked list to compile. I was an outsider in the world of computers and
AI, and I was an outsider in the world of healthcare. But like each of
you, I brought unique experience, and embracing that, I have been able
to both develop methodological innovations and apply those to problems
like disease surveillance and creation of research cohorts from
electronic health record data.

The department where I studied was chaired by Homer R. Warner,^([2]) who
founded the department in 1964.

  Homer Warner … developed in 1961 the first computerized program for
  diagnosing disease. Basing it on 1,000 children with various
  congenital heart diseases, Warner showed that Bayes’ [theorem] could
  identify their underlying problems quite accurately. “Old
  cardiologists just couldn’t believe that a computer could do something
  better than a human,” Warner recalled.^([3])

Homer sailed from a safe harbor, and, in doing so, he developed one of
the first electronic medical records to collect data not only to improve
access to information but ultimately to transform the diagnostic and
patient care process through building intelligence into the
system.^([4])

And now you are here, in this open sea. It has been over half a century
since Homer Warner and other pioneers developed and implemented AI
systems in healthcare. The age of AI seems to be upon us. The big tech
industry sees the opportunity and is making unprecedented investments in
healthcare.

So, what is the risk?

When creating innovative healthcare solutions using AI, challenges will
arise in at least three steps: development, application, and
implementation. In developing ML and AI models, you will not be able to
fully trust the output of the tools, because the learnings and
predictions only represent a potentially deceptive proxy of the real
situation,^([5]) and the algorithms are most likely learning from biased
data and biased healthcare delivery practices. In applying ML and AI
models to healthcare problems, you will encounter unintended
consequences—your predictive model may lead to a rapid upsurge in
overdiagnoses, for example. In implementing your tools, you may discover
that the reality does not match the hype: most never even make it to the
real world, and when they do, the results are often disappointing.^([6])
When you put a new technology into the complex system of healthcare,
everything around it changes. You will shift relationships, you will
shift workflows, and you will shift power differentials. And those
changes can cause harm.

Given the risks and the difficulty you will face, should you even launch
your boat into the sea of healthcare AI? Yes! We need you. We need the
smartest brains tackling problems more consequential than how to get
people to click on ads.^([7]) And that is where this book comes in.
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Health Care and the
Health Sciences: Pitfalls and Best Practices will be your compass to
help you chart a more successful path.

The lead authors of this book have decades of experience teaching and
doing research on this topic. Dr. Aliferis has dedicated his career to
the responsible use of AI to improve human lives and support scientific
discovery. He is an innovator of high-performing and reliable methods
with a goal of improving safety and effectiveness. Dr. Simon has
extensive experience in data mining, machine learning, statistical
analysis, and biostatistics. He has a solid background in hands-on
software development in academic and commercial settings. The editors
have pulled together a star-studded cast of content contributors with
both knowledge and experience. Never before has so much wisdom about
best practices in health and biomedical AI been compiled into one place.

This book is comprehensive but also extremely practical. It provides
diverse and reliable best practices through a wide range of illustrative
applications of machine learning and AI. The book will detail specific
requirements and adaptations that are necessary to successfully tailor
general algorithms and techniques to healthcare and health sciences
discovery. Authors describe common pitfalls that plague research and
commercial attempts at applying AI to healthcare and will give advice on
how to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past. Through this book, you
will learn how to develop AI applications that can be trusted and
therefore have a higher likelihood of success to achieve the goal of
high performance, safety, and cost-effectiveness in healthcare.

Pedro Domingos said, “People worry that computers will get too smart and
take over the world, but the real problem is that they're too stupid and
they've already taken over the world.”^([8]) If you come from outside of
healthcare, you may be surprised at how “stupid” their computers are and
how long the path may be to apply your cutting-edge innovation. If you
come from within healthcare, you understand why it has taken so long to
bring the innovations you see around you to healthcare, but you may not
understand the technical aspects well enough to bridge the gap. Studying
this book will make us all more informed partners and will accelerate
our journey to improved health and discovery through AI.

Wendy Chapman

Foreword 2

The emergence of advanced technologies impacts healthcare. For several
years now, anticipation has been building that artificial intelligence
(AI) and machine learning (ML) will lead to a paradigm shift in
healthcare, promoting seamless, safe, and convenient access to
healthcare services including disease management and prevention. AI/ML
technologies can support the diagnosis of complex medical conditions,
help clinicians make more informed decisions, and ultimately improve
patient outcomes through timely diagnosis and tailored treatment. These
technologies can facilitate the collection and analysis of diverse data
including clinical data and behavioral, genomic, and environmental
datasets that all can provide unique insights into individual healthcare
needs in the context of precision health.

In my own work, I have focused on the use of technology to support aging
and studied the use of AI and ML in the space of gerontology and
geriatrics. I lead the Penn Artificial Intelligence and Technology
(PennAITech) Collaboratory for Healthy Aging, which has the goal to
identify, develop, evaluate, commercialize, and disseminate innovative
technology and artificial intelligence (AI) methods and software to
support older adults and those with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD) in their home
environment. These technologies cover a broad spectrum ranging from
home-based monitoring technologies and smart home sensors to robotic
applications, conversational agents, wearables, and other digital
phenotyping tools. The Collaboratory is motivated by the need for a
comprehensive pipeline across technology-based monitoring of older
adults in the home, collection and processing of monitoring data,
integration of those data with clinical data from electronic health
records, analysis with cutting-edge AI methods and software, and
deployment of validated AI models at point of care for decision support.

In this work, it becomes clear that AI and ML technologies can create
new opportunities for monitoring and supporting older adults and their
families in a variety of settings. However, for these technologies to be
widely adopted and trusted by healthcare providers, patients, and
families, it is essential to not only generate solid evidence of their
effectiveness but also establish best practices in their development and
use.

Such best practices are important to ensure the safety and efficacy of
AI and ML technologies in patient care. As has been argued numerous
times, AI and ML algorithms are only as good as the data they are
trained on, and if the data are biased or inaccurate, the algorithms
will produce biased or inaccurate results. The consequences can be
significant; incorrect diagnoses can lead to harm or even death, and
bias in treatment selection may affect outcomes and exacerbate existing
inequities. Informed efforts such as using large, diverse, and
representative datasets can in many cases help to mitigate these risks
and eliminate algorithmic bias. We have to ensure the transparency and
accountability of such technologies. Healthcare providers and patients
need to understand how AI and ML technologies “make decisions” and what
factors influence these decisions.

Establishing best practices in the development and use of AI and ML
technologies in patient care and more broadly in biomedicine is crucial
for ensuring the safety, efficacy, transparency, accountability, and
ethical use of these technologies. However, to date, data scientists in
health sciences, clinicians, and administrators do not have concrete
frameworks to help them navigate this landscape. As computational
advances accelerate the growth of AI and ML, the healthcare industry
appears to try to catch up with methodological, policy, and clinical
guidelines. The book by Drs. Simon and Aliferis, “Pitfalls and Best
Practices in AI/ML for Healthcare and Health Science,” addresses this
gap as it provides an interdisciplinary perspective and an in-depth
insight into reliable AI/ML methods and their properties, approaches for
benchmarking, best practices for transparency and dissemination, and
broad range of tools allowing data scientists, informaticians, and
clinicians to develop or utilize AI/ML while maximizing effectiveness
and safety and avoiding well-documented pitfalls. This timely book
delves into the application of AI and ML in healthcare, exploring
benefits and limitations and providing insights into the future of AI;
the book features interdisciplinary and evidence-based perspectives that
will lead to more accurate, efficient, and personalized patient care.

George Demiris

Preface 1

We are living in an interesting time. Broad adoption of AI is underway
with very significant achievements, including chatbots with humanlike
language skills and autonomous taxi services operating in many parts of
the country, and we are at the cusp of broad adoption of AI in clinical
care and health sciences.

AI is not without its risks. We have seen AI dish out bad advice, be
racist, and be sometimes utterly incompetent. In the summer of 2019,
Constantin and I sat down to write a paper about the “Knowledge Cliff”
problem in AI/ML in biomedicine. While researching this paper, we
realized that merely pointing out problems with AI, while it is useful,
is not particularly constructive or actionable. Drawing on our decades
of teaching and research, we refocused the paper into explaining the
pitfalls of certain approaches and providing actionable best practice
recommendations in six (or so) different areas. As such, one paper had
to grow into six. It did not take long to recognize that our goal
requires an entire book. We also recognized the dearth of AI/ML
textbooks that focus on healthcare, its special characteristics, and
requirements, with sufficient technical depth to enable a meaningful
discussion about pitfalls and best practices of building AI/ML systems
for biomedicine.

This book is meant for a broad audience; virtually anyone can benefit
from reading it. Although this book can be read cover to cover in
sequential order of the chapters, we aimed to make chapters
self-contained (sometimes at the cost of minor repetitions), because
certain audiences benefit from some chapters more than others. My
recommendations on how to use this book for certain audiences follow.

First, AI/ML professionals with extensive training in computer science
and general-purpose AI/ML, who consider getting into healthcare or
health sciences. I am a computer scientist who made this transition into
biomedicine; thus, the book reflects on my personal experience. For this
audience, the book offers overviews of aspects of method and model
development that are often neglected in general-purpose AI/ML (Chapters
“Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI
Methods and Systems” and “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”
), an introduction to data design (Chapter “Data Design”), detailed
(more detailed than others) description of modeling methods for
time-to-event and longitudinal data (Chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science”), introduction to model evaluation from the perspective of
health benefits and health economics (Chapter “Evaluation”), description
of healthcare standards, terminologies, and ontologies (Chapter “Data
Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and Management”), etc. The goal of our
book for this audience is to help them transition into healthcare
seamlessly.

Second, analysts without a rigorous computer science training who are
already building health AI/ML models. To this audience, we cover the
foundational concepts in computer science, AI and ML (Chapter
“Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”), a 10,000-foot view of a
broad range of modeling methods (Chapters “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science” and “Foundations of Causal ML”), and other important aspects of
health modeling (Chapters “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems,” “The Development Process
and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”, “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical
Legal Societal Implications (ELSI)”, and “Reporting Standards,
Certification/Accreditation, and Reproducibility”). The goal of our book
for this audience is to entice and enable them to be more rigorous with
their work.

Third, decision makers, who wish to gain a better understanding of the
capabilities and limitations of AI in healthcare and health sciences. To
this audience, I recommend Chapters “Lessons Learned from Historical
Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML in Healthcare and the
Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of BPs” (historic case
studies and lessons learnt), “Characterizing, Diagnosing and Managing
the Risk of Error of ML & AI Models in Clinical and Organizational
Application”, “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal
Implications (ELSI)”, and “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems” for appraising existing
methods, and any other chapter that discusses topics that they wish to
deepen their knowledge of.

It is my opinion that everybody will find something new. Even readers
with minimal technical background will find Chapters “Lessons Learned
from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML in
Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of
BPs” fascinating, and on the other end, experts in AI/ML may find new
nuggets of knowledge in Chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General
Model Overconfidence and under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices
in Machine Learning and AI” or about human cognitive biases (Chapter
“From ‘Human versus Machine’ to ‘Human with Machine’”) or design biases
(Chapter “Data Design”). Chapters are self-contained; please feel free
to read any chapter you find interesting.

Inspired by my co-author’s, mentors’, and collaborators’ passion for
patient care and safety, my ultimate goal with this book, and more
broadly with my career, is to promote better patient care, safety, and
ethics. This book aims to lay the foundations and instill the scientific
rigor necessary for the successful implementation of helpful and safe AI
in clinical care and for making fruitful discoveries in health sciences.
I wish the reader great success in the exciting and growing field of
biomedical AI.

Gyorgy J. Simon

Minneapolis, MN, USA

Preface 2

The promise and challenges of health artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML). After a long history of exploration and
experimentation, brilliant successes interleaved with some striking
failures, springs of optimism, and winters of disappointment, AI has
arrived and is here to stay. This realization is engraved in the minds
of the scientific community and lay public alike.

It is not hyperbolic to recognize that the AI and ML methods and
technologies at the service of health sciences and healthcare of our
times are nothing short of amazing. As remarkable as the problem-solving
tools we have are, in order to be deployed for clinical and other
mission-critical tasks, they have to overcome significant gaps in
performance and safety, however.

The comparison with other areas of applied technology is both striking
and worrisome. Consider a humble and low-tech device such as an oven
toaster (or any other electric appliance operating with high voltage):
in order to be approved for the consumer market, rigorous testing must
be done to ensure that it is not a fire hazard or that it will not
electrocute its operator. Bridges are not opened to public use unless
the civil engineers that built them provide plans that undergo
tremendous scrutiny and establish, for example, how much load they can
withstand, what wind forces or earthquakes they can tolerate without
collapsing, and what maintenance they need and how often. Similarly,
cars, mechanical tools, children’s toys, drugs, and so on across the
whole gamut of human activity are closely scrutinized and become
available for consumer use only when sufficient measures have been
established to ensure safe application. Public and individual safety is
of paramount consideration and enforced everywhere.

Everywhere, except in health AI and ML, it seems. Poorly constructed,
evaluated, deployed, or monitored AI and ML models, apps, and systems
have the potential to cause great benefit or grave harm at a massive
scale. This is true for healthcare medical applications, healthcare
business decisions, and health sciences. Regulation is only now
emerging, and AI/ML products have been offered for years (often at huge
financial costs) to the trusting healthcare providers and find their
ways to profoundly affect human lives, without providing guarantees of
effectiveness and safety.

Another related deficiency of the present state of the health AI/ML
market is that of efficiency. It would be unthinkable for a car
manufacturer to market, for example, a four-passenger automobile for
everyday commuting purposes with fuel consumption of 1 mile per gallon.
Yet, we routinely see commercial and noncommercial AI/ML offerings that
are worse offenders than this example in terms of the computing costs
per unit of output when perfectly capable (or better) alternatives exist
with orders of magnitude lower costs of use.

From another viewpoint, and to use an electrical engineering analogy,
the ML models of today function as components of a larger system that
presently lacks protection against overloading the system. Well-designed
consumer electrical devices are routinely engineered in such a way that
their input and output obey specifications ensuring that a system of
interconnected such units will function properly. Nothing like this
exists in health AI/ML at present.

But even if a very high standard of accountability was put in place (and
steps are being taken recently in this direction by the FDA, NIST, EU,
etc. as described in the present volume), it would be of little value,
unless we could equip the data scientists and the organizations adopting
AI/ML solutions with the technical means by which to achieve (and
verify) the standard’s expectation.

Pitfalls and Best Practices: A Personal Perspective. This book aims
precisely to contributing to solving these problems by providing
comprehensive information in the form of identifiable pitfalls and
practical best practices supporting the effective, safe, efficient,
cost-effective, science-driven, rigorous, informed, rational, de-risked,
trust-inspiring, and accountable health AI and ML.

Some of the book’s concepts started forming in my mind many years ago
when I was a beginning graduate student in AI. I have written
elsewhere^([9]) how my personal journey started and why I believed early
on that AI could make medicine more scientific and ultimately more
effective. A formative experience of particular relevance to this book
has been the NSF-funded ML Pneumonia Prediction project led by my
graduate advisor Greg Cooper (connected with the broader Pneumonia
Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) cohort study). The ML project
aimed at exploring many cutting-edge methods of the era to create the
most accurate and practical models possible for predicting
community-acquired pneumonia mortality. Several word-class labs and AI
and machine learning luminaries from the University of Pittsburgh and
CMU participated in the effort (i.e., the Bruce Buchanan lab, Greg
Cooper lab, Tom Mitchel lab, Peter Spirtes lab, Clark Glymour lab),
along with Dr. Michael Fine, the leader of the PORT study, which ended
having very significant impact nationally. Everyone strived to produce
the best models working off a single discovery dataset. In these
circumstances, it would have been very easy to totally overfit the
models, but thanks to Greg’s scientific foresight and rigor, a nested
cross-validation design and other safeguards were put in place to
eliminate the risk of overfitting and taught me a career-defining lesson
about the value of pursuing high-stakes modeling with utmost rigor.

As I started my career as a faculty, 24 years ago, I placed significant
emphasis on the modeling challenges of the very novel at the time gene
expression microarray, mass spectrometry, and other high-dimensional
data. I was surprised and occasionally dismayed at what appeared to be
technical abuse and overinterpretation of methods with widespread lack
of rigor in the bioinformatics field fueled by exuberant expectations.
In one of many memorable incidents during my early faculty career, a
cancer biology professor, whom I respected very much for his scientific
accomplishments, reached out to me one day and asked me if I could
“cluster his gene expression data to predict cancer.” I asked how many
patients he had assayed, and to my astonishment, he said “three.” I
asked him what made him believe that clustering three patients in two
groups would have any statistical validity and predictive modeling
usefulness, and to my continuing amazement, he showed me a recent copy
of one of the two most respected biology journals. “Can’t you just do it
like they did it in this article?” he asked, pointing to the cover
article. This incident was representative of the whole field of genomics
of the time at the infancy of high-throughput technology and showed me
that applying complex AI/ML to genomic datasets had a long way to go in
terms of educating many of the key practitioners.

Over the years, I watched many scientific accomplishments and
breakthroughs in pure AI and machine learning and followed the numerous
applied biomedical advances that they enabled. I also built new methods
and put those and every other major technique invented by others to
practice, in many NIH-funded projects. I taught students and
early-career faculty AI and ML and watched how this knowledge helped
them in their careers. I also organized and oversaw at NYU and my
current institution, the UMN, institutional-level research support teams
and cores that deployed AI and ML via consulting, and team science for
hundreds of projects and thousands of consults between 2008 and today. I
also gave invited lectures in both academic and industry settings about
the dangers inherent in AI and ML when not used with enough rigor and
discipline. I followed closely the literature and developments in
regulatory frameworks, best practices, and major failures and case
studies in AI/ML. Finally, my group conducted some of the largest (and
in some cases, I dare say, authoritative) benchmarks of ML in several
fields of biomedical research.

Embarking on a long-overdue project. It was thus about time in 2021 to
finally put together a book distilling the above information in a format
that would be accessible, backed up by all relevant scientific evidence,
and practically useful for working scientists, students, administrators,
practitioners, and other stakeholders of health AI. With regard to
style, a great influence has always been the late Richard Feynman and
his monumental Lectures on Physics, in which he managed to condense the
full range of physics, sparing no difficult subject, in a way that was
accessible to first-year college students, without getting vague or
sacrificing accuracy. Tom Mitchell, Sholom Weiss, and one of my most
respected role models, Casimir Kulikowski, achieved in their
corresponding books on ML similar levels of clarity, accuracy, and
accessibility. Gyorgy and I used the above three works as inspiration
and our “Northern Star” in terms of clarity and accessibility for the
present volume.

Best practices imply necessary conditions for success, or necessary and
sufficient conditions in some cases. But it also, unavoidably, involves
describing sufficient conditions for failure that need to be prevented.
Not uncommonly, when the knowledge in some topic is not enough to
delineate with absolute certainty what needs to be done, a best practice
is no more than the best possible recommendation for how to apply AI/ML
given the limited knowledge of the time. In Chapter “Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health
Sciences: The Need for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML”, we
explain in detail the sources for best practices and pitfalls presented
in this work. We decided early on that we should not expunge from this
work our personal experiences or hands-on expertise in specific methods
and applications. We resolutely decided, however, that this book should
not be a summary of our preferred way of developing and applying AI/ML,
and our own personal practices would have a place here if and only if
they are solidly backed by the scientific evidence in the literature and
if they are paradigmatic of the various messages we wish to convey. In
many chapters, this decision has worked particularly well, in my view,
because we were able to dive deeply into topics that would be hard to
present in a clear manner if we did not describe details stemming from
in-depth and first-hand experience (Chapter “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems” on method
development and appraisal is an example whereby we try to “lift the
curtain” and show, from the inside, an example of how
rigorously-designed and -executed new methods can come to existence).

Regarding helpfulness and defensibility, we realized that such a book
should be constructive but not sugarcoat the facts. This is not a volume
about presenting on even ground all methods, systems, or efforts,
without taking a position on strengths, weaknesses, and relative
performance. The result may not be viewed favorably within circles where
dogged devotion to this or the other method supersedes objective
performance considerations. This is however a book about pitfalls and
best practices. The notion of pitfalls entails dangers, failures, and
risk that we should avoid or minimize. It is imperative that all
students, teachers, and practitioners of AI/ML embrace its collective
history, learn from it, own any mistakes made, and not repeat them
again. Showcasing failures in the field is not intended to diminish the
people or organizations behind them, but to learn from these case
studies how to do AI/ML in a safe and effective manner. Conversely, it
is essential to show what can (and does) happen when AI/ML is not done
systematically with sufficient scientific and technical rigor.
Naturally, it is entirely possible to disappoint people whose methods or
practices are criticized. Gyorgy and I took this seriously into account,
but we balanced it with the need to present scientific truth (the best
way we can grasp it anyway) and above all to protect patients. AI/ML can
critically affect the well-being of patients and of society and will
increasingly do so in the future, after all.

In terms of scope, we cast a very wide net, first taking a broad look at
all types of health science and healthcare applications of AI/ML. We
generally refrain in the book from engaging in analysis of methods with
only historical significance, except in cases where historical case
studies or other works are highly informative for modern-day AI/ML. We
retrieved all health AI/ML best practice and guideline papers as well as
meta-analyses and systematic reviews of AI/ML methods and model
comparisons across all biomedical fields, in PubMed. Chapter “Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health
Sciences: The Need for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” gives
a glimpse of that space. This material was supplemented with our
personal collection of AI/ML books and papers, which comprises thousands
of entries plus many more that were identified in PubMed and Google
Scholar to help with topics outside our usual scope of work. We
synthesized and integrated prior best practices, in many cases invisibly
to the reader, and in some cases bringing certain preexisting best
practices to the forefront of the book because we saw them as very
important, or in need of discussion, extensions, etc. Most importantly,
we placed a huge emphasis on principles of operation and properties of
AI/ML methods for two reasons: on the one hand, these provide the
necessary justification for recommended use (or avoidance). On the other
hand, method properties can be applied to infinite situations and the
readers can tailor them to their own specific projects, which we could
not possibly anticipate in full, whereas guidelines and best practices
are by necessity more context and problem sensitive. We also worked to
modularize the recommended practices to mirror the stages that AI/ML
methods are being created, validated, and deployed. This should make
reading the material easier. In the end of the book, we provide a
collection of all best practices and annotate them as being high or
medium impact and as being highly mature or evolving. High-impact
recommendations are ones that following or discarding them will have the
gravest consequences across most contexts of use. Lower impact ones may
have lesser consequences or significant consequences but in a small
portion of application areas. Evolving best practices are ones that will
likely improve over time as the field’s understanding advances, whereas
highly mature ones are so foundational that they will almost certainly
continue to be applicable far into the future.

Constantin Aliferis

Minneapolis, MN, USA

Acknowledgments

First and foremost, I wish to acknowledge Constantin, with whom I
co-authored this book, for convincing me, over a 1-year-plus time
period, to write this book. He did a job, worthy of the deepest
admiration, with some of the most difficult topics, including lessons
learnt and ethics. He managed to keep these difficult chapters, like all
other chapters, constructive, actionable, and objective, and I believe
that they became the crown jewels of this book. I recommend absolutely
everyone to read these chapters. Clearly, this book would not have been
possible without his hard work.

Besides co-authoring the book, I owe Constantin a debt of gratitude for
his professional mentoring, passion for scientific discovery, and his
appreciation of rigor in our work to make those valuable scientific
discoveries happen.

I would also like to acknowledge Dr. Vipin Kumar, a well-recognized
leader in (general-purpose) data mining and machine learning and a
scientific role model to me and many other scientists. I feel fortunate
to have had him as my thesis advisor, and he remains one of my
professional mentors and collaborators to this day.

At the time I started out as a junior faculty, mentorship for faculty
was scarce. I was lucky that Dr. Genevieve Melton-Meaux, a surgeon, NLP
expert, and executive at a large health system, offered a helping hand.
Drawing on her vast experience in the health system, she channeled my ML
knowledge in a direction that is most valuable to clinical care and
healthcare delivery research.

Dr. Pedro Caraballo, an MD passionate about patient care and an advocate
for ML in clinical decision support, was one of my first collaborators
in the ML-based clinical decision support realm who instilled in me the
importance of ML in research as well as clinical decision support.

I would also like to thank my past and present co-workers who helped
with the book, including Drs. Steve Johnson, Erich Kummerfeld, Sisi Ma,
Dennis Murphree, Rui Zhang, Jinhua Wang, Bryan Andrews, Dalton Schutte,
Anirudh Choudhary, Puneet Bhullar, and Nneka I. I thank them for the
valuable insights they gave me, and especially thank them for the
chapters they contributed.

I thank Melissa Malkowski and Beth Madson for their outstanding
administrative support and Nithya Sechin from Springer.

Thanks also go to the UMN Office of Academic and Clinical Affairs (Dr.
Jakub Tolar) for funding that made the book possible as open access.

I also thank Springer and especially senior editor Grant Weston, who
believed and encouraged this project with great passion.

Gyorgy J. Simon

I would be amiss if I did not express my deep gratitude to a number of
individuals that made my personal journey in biomedical AI and ML
worthwhile and indirectly or directly benefited this book.

The first foundations I received in the data sciences were provided by
the late Professor Dimitrios Trichopoulos and his faculty at the
University of Athens School of Medicine. Trichopoulos was
internationally renowned as an epidemiologist of formidable intellect
and scholarship, and he made sure that his students received a wealth of
knowledge in research design, biostatistics, and public health methods.
Other mentors and collaborators were instrumental in nurturing my
curiosity about the quantitative data sciences in the context of several
research projects. I am deeply grateful to my former medical school
professors and mentors E. Batrinos, E. Geordiadis, N. Katsilambros, and
especially E. Georgiou who was my first mentor in biomedical
informatics.

Greg Cooper’s influence on my AI training was instrumental because of
the early formative experience in the years I worked with him as
postdoctoral fellow in his Pneumonia Prediction project and the years
during which he served as my MS and PhD theses’ main advisor. Greg and I
became lifelong friends, and he has never stopped giving me valuable
guidance for which I am grateful. I am also grateful to all my teachers
in the Intelligent Systems Studies Program of the University of
Pittsburgh. My other advisors, Bruce Buchanan, Randy Miller, Martha
Pollack, Michael Wagner, and Howard Doyle, were outstanding mentors and
role models who above all helped me learn to think critically.

I am most grateful to my colleague and co-author Gyorgy Simon for
believing that this project could be done, for writing brilliant
material, and for working with me in harmony even under a most demanding
work schedule and difficult deadlines. Gyorgy is as knowledgeable, and
effective, as he is humble and collegial. I thank him for sharing so
much of his extensive knowledge in this book and being instrumental in
making it a reality.

I am profoundly grateful to Grant Weston, senior editor at Springer, for
being a true believer to the need for such a work. His enthusiasm,
patience, and support are deeply appreciated.

Frank Harrell has been a great mentor and a fantastic role model both as
a distinguished biostatistician and for setting a standard for “speaking
the truth that others do not dare say.”

Isabelle Guyon has been a wonderful collaborator and inspiring role
model in AI/ML. I had the pleasure to work with her as a co-author in
several books and papers and in a major ML challenge. I learnt so much
from her scientific example and approach to structuring complex tasks
and managing teams of diverse competencies.

Perry Miller, Henry Lowe, John Wilbur, and Michael Kahn, along with Greg
Cooper, guided me in my early years as informatics leader at NYU and
taught me many valuable lessons in leadership. Richard Woodrow, my
executive leadership coach at NYU, spent 2 years teaching me how to put
honesty above other concerns, and I am very grateful for his wisdom,
which I tried to put to practice in this volume. Vivian Lee gave me a
big career boost by making me Head of Informatics at NYU Langone and
nurtured my developing leadership skills in navigating a complex
landscape of avant-garde science in desperate need of high-quality data
science and AI/ML modeling. Apostolos Georgopoulos at the UMN has been a
most generous mentor and friend and encouraged this volume with great
enthusiasm.

Bill Stead and Randy Miller gave me my first faculty academic home at
Vanderbilt and enabled my lab there (the Discovery Systems Lab) to exist
and make foundational algorithmic advances. I am very grateful for this
opportunity. Stead has in addition been an inspiring role model in his
unending quest to transform medicine using informatics. I am deeply
appreciative of main collaborators in pursuing method development and
landmark or other large-scale benchmarking: especially Ioannis
Tsamardinos, Alexander Statnikov at Vanderbilt and NYU, and Sisi Ma and
Roshan Tourani at the UMN. Had it not been for the extraordinary ability
of Alexander Statnikov to execute benchmarking studies of immense
complexity and scale in record time, a large body of invaluable
benchmarking knowledge would have not existed today. Alexander, my
second ever PhD student and later faculty colleague at NYU, has also
made very significant methodological contributions with unique
capabilities that are discussed in this volume.

I am also thankful to many of my students and mentees who took AI/ML
classes from me or sought to receive scientific mentoring because
invariably I learnt a lot from them, and they influenced the evolution
of my teaching style and provided me with an empirical basis for how
certain AI/ML topics can be best conveyed in order to help learners the
most. Yindalon Aphinyanaphongs, and Larry Fu in particular, come vividly
to mind, in addition, because their work allowed a joint exploration of
AI/ML in health information retrieval, scientometrics, translational
science, and text categorization that has stood the test of time.

I am also grateful to my extraordinary IP lawyer and friend, Laurence
Weinberger, who in the context of preparing >20 patent applications has
helped me and other co-inventors immensely toward clarifying and
formulating very complicated technical concepts in a way that is
accessible to broad audiences. Certainly, the appropriate use of AI/ML
comes from theoretical knowledge but equally importantly from successful
empirical applications in real-life projects. I have been privileged
throughout my career to collaborate with several exceptional clinical,
basic, and translational scientists. My main long-term collaborators in
AI/ML applications that have most informed the present volume are Glenn
Saxe (psychiatry), Boris Winterhoff (cancer precision medicine), Pamala
Jacobson (pharmacogenomics), Virginia Kraus (aging and longevity), Bill
Kraus (cardiometabolic outcomes), and Laura Niederhoffer (cellular
senescence). Several other superb scientists collaborated with me and my
lab in shorter term but highly rewarding applied research projects.
Marty Blaser (microbiomics), Ed Fisher (atherosclerosis), Steve Abramson
(osteoarthritis), and Doug Hardin (text categorization) in particular
gave me the opportunity to put AI to good and challenging use in the
corresponding fruitful biomedical areas. Our joint work, for which I am
grateful, has been a testing lab and proving ground for the principles
and practices espoused in the present volume.

Although the majority of this volume was written by Gyorgy Simon and I,
we had the good luck to receive wonderful supplemental material by Erich
Kummerfeld, Sisi Ma, Bryan Andrews, Jinhua Wang, Steve Johnson, Dalton
Schutte, Rui Zhang, Dennis Murphree, Anirudh Choudhary, Puneet Bhullar,
and Nneka I. Comfere. I am very appreciative of their expert
contributions to this volume.

Melissa Malkowski and Beth Madson provided us with excellent
administrative support at the UMN, and Nithya Sechin’s, Hashwini
Vytheswaran’s and the whole editorial support and production teams’ work
from the Springer side is much appreciated.

The UMN OACA-Office of Academic and Clinical Affairs (led by VP and Dean
Dr. Jakub Tolar) and the UMN CTSI (led by Dr. Bruce Blazar and Daniel
Weisdorf) provided the Institute for Health Informatics with an
environment where we can explore and put novel ideas to test and
practice, typically at large scale (across all of the health sciences
institutionally and beyond). I am also grateful to OACA for providing
financial resources to make this book open access.

Finally, I am grateful to the two eminent colleagues who graciously
provided forewords to this volume. Professor Wendy Chapman and Professor
George Demiris are distinguished researchers, scholars, innovators, and
academic leaders in health AI. They graced this volume with opening
remarks that set the stage for the book in intellectually stimulating,
compelling, and insightful ways.

It is my hope that the material here will contribute to developing,
validating, evaluating, and applying health AI/ML with rigor, leading to
performance and safety guarantees for the benefit of patients, science,
and the industry. Hopefully, the reader will find the book to be a
valuable companion in what is surely going to be a long and exciting
journey for the field.

Constantin Aliferis

Footnotes

1

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

6

 

7

 

8

 

9

 

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_1

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: The Need for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML

Constantin Aliferis¹   and Gyorgy Simon¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

In the opening chapter we first introduce essential concepts about
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI/ML) in Health Care and
the Health Sciences (aka Biomedical AI/ML). We then provide a brief
historical perspective of the field including highlights of achievements
of Biomedical AI/ML, the various generations of AI/ML efforts, and the
recent explosive interest in such methods and future growth
expectations. We summarize how biomedical AI and ML differ from
general-purpose AI/ML. We show that pitfalls and related lack of best
practices undermine practice and potential of Biomedical AI/ML. We
introduce high-level requirements for biomedical AI/ML and 7 dimensions
of trust, acceptance and ultimately adoption, which serve as the driving
principles of the present volume. We outline the contents of the volume,
both overall and chapter-by-chapter, noting the interconnections. We
discuss the intended audience, and differences from other AI/ML books.
We finally discuss format, style/tone, and state a few important caveats
and disclosures.

Keywords

Machine learning (ML)Artificial intelligence (AI)AlgorithmModelAI
trustAcceptanceAdoption

What Is Machine Learning? Algorithms, Programs, and Models

A myth that was pervasive in earlier stages of the history of computing
was that computers can only solve problems (or perform actions) that a
human programmer had specifically instructed them how to tackle. As even
the broad lay audience can appreciate circa 2023, computers equipped
with Machine Learning (ML) capabilities can learn from data how to
perform intelligent tasks and perform complicated problem solving on
their own [1–3]. Whereas the ML algorithms are typically programmed by
humans, once implemented, these types of software can interpret data in
ways that far exceed the capabilities of their human creators, not just
in terms of speed but also by making inferences that are qualitatively
superior to humans, for example by avoiding human cognitive biases and
blind spots and performing inferences that humans do not do at all or
are not good at performing (e.g., pattern recognition in very high
dimensional spaces sometimes in the 10⁶ variables scale or more) [4]. In
addition, whereas ML programs are currently typically presented with
data prepared by human operators/analysts, it is entirely possible (and
in some cases routine) to collect data on their own, or instruct human
operators to collect data needed for problem solving [5–7].

Definition

Machine Learning (ML) is the science and technology of computing systems
that learn how to solve problems by analyzing data related to the
problems.

To go into slightly more detail, ML algorithms implemented in ML
programs and systems, use so-called training data from which they build
problem-solving models. It is useful to understand these important
concepts further since there is confusion among the non-technical
audience (including biomedical scientists and healthcare providers and
administrators).

A computer program is a set of instructions that a computer can
understand and execute toward performing a task intended by the program
[8]. For example, a program written in the language Python that
instructs a personal computer with the ability to execute Python
commands, how to sort a set of numbers into descending order.

A software computer system is a complex set of interconnected programs
that perform a number of interrelated functions. For example, an
Electronic Health Record (EHR) system comprises a set of programs and
databases that manage patient data to support patient care, record
actions for compliance, perform billing and reimbursement, etc.

A computer algorithm is a generalized (programming language-agnostic)
set of computer instructions designed to solve a class of problems.
Computer algorithms are presented in a form (so called pseudo-code [9])
that is geared towards being interpretable by humans. In contrast,
computer programs are written in a computer language that is
interpretable by computers. For example, the “quicksort” number sorting
algorithm is a set of instructions, written in a format meant for human
interpretation, that can be translated to any general-purpose computer
programming language. Furthermore, the quicksort algorithm needs to be
translated by a programmer into a programming language, a process known
as implementing the algorithm, before it can be executed by a computer.
In another ML example, the ID3 algorithm creates, from
previously-diagnosed patient data, decision tree models that can be used
for diagnosing new patients.

An AI/ML model is therefore a computable representation of some
problem-solving domain so that when informed with a set of inputs
describing specific instances of the problem space, outputs solutions to
those. These models are created by hand by using AI knowledge and other
knowledge engineering methods and tools, and in the case of ML fully
automatically from training data [10].

Computer algorithms [9, 11] have a number of distinguishing
characteristics from computer programs:

1.  (a)

    They (typically, and formally) not need be described in a specific
    programming language, but in pseudo-code, as previously explained.

     

2.  (b)

    They represent a potentially infinite set of programs that can be
    implemented in every applicable programming language and computing
    environment.

     

3.  (c)

    When properly constructed, they have well-defined properties that
    guarantee performance, error free (or error-acceptable) operation,
    generalizability etc. (more on this later in the book).

     

4.  (d)

    When properly implemented (i.e., translated to a specific
    programming language) they guarantee that the algorithm properties
    are imparted in the particular program that implements the
    algorithm.

     

The field of Design and Analysis of Algorithms studies the properties of
algorithms (and associated data structures [9, 11] (i.e., ways to
represent and organize data for storage, retrieval and other
operations)) and methods to design algorithms for specific problems so
that desired operating characteristics (e.g., speed, memory usage,
accuracy etc.) are achieved.

Pitfall 1.1

Very commonly in the commercial healthcare space a computer program or
system implements unspecified, undisclosed or insufficiently-analyzed
algorithms, hence no-one knows what the properties of the program are.

In chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” but also in
several other places of the present volume, we will address the
fundamental issue of guaranteed properties of AI/ML systems and best
practices enforcing those.

Pitfall 1.2

In healthcare and the health sciences, clinical algorithms are often
confused with computer algorithms (including ML algorithms). A clinical
algorithm [12, 13] describes diagnostic, risk assessment, preventative,
treatment or other actions needed to care for patients with specific
diseases, usually in the context of evidence-based guideline-driven
medicine. It can be written in human language or specialized computable
languages. A clinical algorithm is a human-assistive decision model and
is not an algorithm that can learn how to solve the problem from data.
Finally, a model produced by a ML algorithm can serve as a clinical
algorithm in a health care setting.

ML algorithms are therefore implemented in ML computer programs that
when presented with training data, learn and output decision models. In
chapters “An Appraisal of Operating Characteristics of Major Machine
Learning Methods Applicable to Healthcare and Health Sciences”, and
“Foundations of Causal Machine Learning” we will review major ML
families of algorithms and describe the types of models they output. In
several other chapters of the present volume we will discuss specific
algorithms and models and their characteristics and optimal use.

Well-constructed ML models do have general applicability beyond the
training data, otherwise they would be just a catalogue of past problem
instances and their solutions, without the ability to be used for new
problem instances. Machine Learning theory [14, 15] provides results and
techniques that enable and ideally guarantee the generalization
properties of ML models beyond the training data.

Artificial Intelligence (AI); Types of AI and ML Tasks; on the Pervasive Applicability of ML and AI

The language we adopted on ML algorithms as a means of solving problems,
has a deeper significance as it relates to the definition of Artificial
Intelligence. AI depending on the context, the era and the author, has
been viewed as (a) the field of science and technology that investigates
the creation of fully autonomous computer systems (i.e., “Intelligent
Systems”); (b) exhibiting intelligence capabilities indistinguishable to
those of humans (i.e., so-called “hard AI”); (c) providing the empirical
means for putting forth and testing under controlled (computer lab)
conditions theories of cognition; or (d) creating programs capable of
solving hard (computational, mathematical, cognitive, decision,
optimization and other inferential) problems [2]. Operationally we will
adopt the following view on AI:

Definition

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the science and technology of computing
systems that can autonomously solve hard inferential problems.

Such problems historically have been associated with the prerequisite of
“intelligence”.

From a perspective of organization of scientific fields and their
relationships, ML is one of the fields of AI which, in turn, is a field
of Computer Science (CS). At the same time, ML is a core part and
arguably the most important component (along with statistics) of the
nascent field of Data Science.

Definition

Data Science is the field of science and technology that studies the:
(a) design and execution of data measurements, sampling/collection; (b)
data representation and management, harmonization, secure storage and
transmission; (c) analysis, interpretation, and (d) deployment of
results in applied problem-solving settings.

Data Science spans and connects several fields including ML and
statistics, as well as parts relevant to data sampling and modeling from
applied mathematics, operations research, econometrics, psychometrics,
decision sciences, information science, scientometrics and
bibliometrics, statistical genetics and genomics, etc. [16, 17].

Figure 1 shows the relationship among Computer Science, AI and ML. As
can be seen in the figure, both AI and ML are very diverse and
developed, comprising many types of research, systems, algorithms, and
applications.

[]

A classification chart of computer science. Artificial intelligence has
11 subjects that include the theory of computation and databases.
Machine learning includes robotics and computational linguistics.
Subfields include supervised learning, feature selection, and anomaly or
outlier detection.

An important pitfall (the importance of which will become abundantly
obvious in this volume) is to consider one very narrow subfield, for
example Deep Learning, as the totality or the main focus/armamentarium
of all of ML and AI, or as another example, considering ML as the
totality of AI. This has serious consequences as we will see in this
book because it prevents users of AI and ML to have the right
perspective in which a plurality of methods can be brought to bear on
solving problems by matching the right method to the problems at hand.

Pitfall 1.3

Very commonly novice advocates of ML and AI, or vendors promoting
certain products will present the whole field as being about one narrow
technology or a small set of tools, ignoring the broader spectrum of
available options that can solve the problem at hand. The many options
available however, have hugely varying performance characteristics that
need careful consideration as no single class of methods is suitable for
all biomedical problems.

In the present book we place a heavy emphasis on data-driven forms
versus expert-knowledge-driven AI, for the following reasons: first,
modern health AI is predominantly data driven and will continue to be so
in the foreseeable future. Second, ML is vastly more scalable than
expert knowledge-driven construction of AI systems. Third, ML has many
pitfalls and intricacies that require addressing. Fourth, ML is also an
important component of other forms of AI (e.g., NLP, computer vision,
robotics). Finally, the highlighted pitfalls and best practices are
often useful for both ML and other forms of AI.

Readers not already deeply familiar with AI/M applications in the health
sciences and care delivery are likely to be surprised by the
extraordinarily wide range of applications of these fields. This
pervasive applicability of ML and AI is not accidental, however. It can
be immediately grasped once one considers that both health sciences and
care are fundamentally designed to pursue discovery and application of
predictive and causal knowledge. Predictive modeling encompasses
diagnosis, prognosis, forecasting and general pattern recognition [1–4].
Causal modeling [18–20] seeks to discover cause-effect relationships, to
quantify their effects, and to choose among various interventions those
that will maximize some desired outcome. It encompasses discovery of
laws of biology, therapeutics, understanding the factors that drive
system and patient-level outcomes such as development, treatment and
prevention of disease at the individual level. At the level of the
system of care, they encompass intervention on factors that affect
quality of care, costs, reimbursements, patient experience and all other
desiderata of health systems [21].

Neither General AI/ML, Nor Biomedical AI/ML Are New. Highlights of Achievements of Biomedical AI/ML

The general public became aware of AI and ML as a viable technology in
very recent years as a result of the emergence of commercial offerings
backed by established corporations as well as numerous startups catering
to healthcare systems and health research organizations. The scope of
adoption and widespread use of AI and ML, is currently breathtaking and
includes: autonomous vehicle navigation (cars, airplanes, industrial
robots), cybersecurity, fraud and spam detection, financial
applications, internet and e-commerce applications, manufacturing,
games, education, legal, and numerous other applications [22].

In healthcare and the health sciences, examples of successful
applications include automated diagnosis, prognosis, treatment selection
(using as inputs: coded clinical data, text reports, images, omics data,
etc.) [23]; discovery of gene mutations causing specific forms of cancer
or other disease [24]; precision medicine tests (e.g., genes’ expression
level patterns determining response to a treatment used for treatment
selection) [25]; automated evaluation of scientific papers to determine
whether the research design was good [26]; annotating genomes and other
genetics applications [27]; predicting tertiary & quaternary protein
structure from amino acid sequence [28]; predicting drug-drug and
drug-food interactions [29]; medical imaging [30] and numerous other
applications which we will cover in depth in the present volume.

The advent of big data in particular, in healthcare and population
health (e.g., EHR, sensor, environmental, social networks) and the
health sciences (e.g., genomics, proteomics, metabolomics, microbiomics,
copy number variation, and other “bulk” and single cell “omics” data,
deep sequencing databases, research consortia data, etc.) has
simultaneously demanded the development of high-quality scalable
analysis methods and strongly incentivized their deployment at scale
[31]. In the last 20 years there is a synergistic co-evolution of big
data generation/capture and ML-driven analysis and discovery with key
themes of modern health science and health care such as: rational drug
development [32], modern post-sequencing era genomics precision and
personalized medicine [25], learning health systems and care
cost/quality/experience improvements [33], to mention just some of the
key developments that depend on ML and AI and that are foci of the
present work.

To give a sense of the immense scope and rapid maturity with respect to
health outcomes the following searches^([10]) return:

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------
  ((“outcomes” or “health services”) and “machine learning”)                           → 6255 results (most since 2015)
  ((“outcomes” or “health services”) and “machine learning”) and “systematic review“   → 240 results
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------

These systematic reviews (not cited explicitly here for space, but
readily retrievable from PubMed with the stated queries) represent broad
application areas with significant and diverse bodies of work. They
include predictive, prognostic, diagnostic and etiologic outcomes
modeling in:

Neurosurgical outcomes, depression, obesity, surgical outcomes, EEG
classification, dermatology, urology outcomes, suicide prevention, Covid
mortality, autoimmune disease outcomes, stroke, various cancers,
dementias, orthopedic surgery, heart failure outcomes, pregnancy
outcomes, imaging and radiomics analysis, sepsis in the ICU, managing
covid-19, assessing physician competence, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT), various infectious diseases, cardiac surgery,
management and treatment of burns, infant pain evaluation, management of
heart failure patients, bipolar disorder, degenerative cervical and
lumbar spine disease, cardiovascular outcomes from wearable data,
psychosocial outcomes in acquired brain injury, acute gastrointestinal
bleeding, personalized dosing of heparin, Parkinson’s disease, genetic
prediction of psychiatric disorders, diabetes, clinical deterioration in
hospitalized patients, community-based primary health care, palliative
and end-of-life care, hypertension, graft failure following kidney
transplantation, outcomes in neonatal intensive care units, degenerative
spine surgery, predicting fatal and serious injury crashes from driver
crash and offense history data, health care spending, extraction of data
from randomized trials, improving medication adherence in hypertensive
patients, neighborhood-level risk factors, gait analysis, wearable
inertial sensors to quantify everyday life motor activity in people with
mobility impairments, outcome prediction of medical litigation,
rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases, analysis of patient online
reviews, chronic low back pain, risk of readmission and several other
topics.

PubMed is also informative on relative literature volumes pertaining to
AI/ML methods and applications, and their trends^([11]):

Figure 2 illustrates the explosive growth of ML and AI through the
number of Pubmed publications over the years between 1990 and 2022. The
blue line represents the number of publications for AI [MeSH] (left) and
Machine Learning [Keyword] (right); the black dotted line represents the
scaled number of total citations (from any field). The rate of growth in
AI and ML far outpaces the overall growth rate of publications since
2015.

[]

2 line graphs plot publication counts versus years. The count for A I
increases with fluctuations till 2015, and then increases steeply to end
above 25000 in the year 2020. The count of machine learning increases
exponentially from 0 in 1990, to end above 25000 in the year 2020.

In Fig. 3, we show how the growth in health AI is distributed over some
of its subfields. Machine Learning enjoys most of the growth, with
Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Image Analysis following closely.
Modern advances in Machine Learning, Deep Learning in particular, serve
as an enabling technology for both of these subfields. Other subfields,
such as Knowledge Representation exhibited a more modest growth, while
Expert Systems appears to have experienced negative growth since they
are being replaced by ML. We need to remember that PubMed focuses on
biomedicine.

[]

2 line graphs plot publication counts versus years. The count of machine
learning increases exponentially to end above 25000 in the year 2020.
The counts for N L P, image analysis, and knowledge representations
increase with fluctuations to above 1500, 2500, and 80, Expert systems
decrease to 160.

In terms of absolute volume of publications, the following tables
provide relevant data (Table 1):

Table 1

Health AI/ML publication volumes

  -------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------
  “machine learning” (Mesh term)                                 → 89,260 entries
  artificial intelligence (Mesh term)                            → 165,990 results
  (“artificial intelligence” or “machine learning”) (keywords)   → 113,531 results
  -------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------

These results are to some degree an artifact of the indexing of articles
employed by Pubmed. For example:

+:----------------------------------------+:------------------+
| “clustering” (which is a form of ML)    | → 489,442 results |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------+
| “Artificial neural network” (Mesh term) | → 23,746 results  |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------+
| But:                                                        |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------+
| “Deep learning” (Mesh term)             | → 40,377 results  |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------+

Caveat: Deep Learning is a special type of artificial neural network,
which entails that if indexed properly the entries indexed by
“artificial neural network” should be a strict superset of the entries
indexed by “Deep Learning”.

As to articles with key types of ML, in addition to the ones above we
see:

  --------------------------------- ------------------
  “Decision tree” (Mesh)            → 23,206 results
  “Support vector machine” (Mesh)   → 22,675
  “Genetic algorithm” (Mesh)        → 90,728 results
  “Random forest” (Mesh)            → 23,357 results
  “Bayesian network” (Mesh)         → 10,076 results
  “Bayesian classifier” (Mesh)      → 12,503 results
  “Granger causality” (Mesh)        → 3810 results
  --------------------------------- ------------------

With regards to major types of AI in addition to the ML ones mentioned
we see:

  ------------------------------- ------------------------------------
  “Autonomous robot”              → 2743 results (most since 2005)
  “Expert systems”                → 20,627 results (most since 1990)
  “Knowledge representation”      → 12,526 results (most since 1990)
  “Semantic network”              → 6482 results (most since 2005)
  “Natural language processing”   → 9659 results (most since 2005)
  ------------------------------- ------------------------------------

The exponential-rate growth of most of these methods in the biomedical
literature started and took place for the most part in the last 15-to
30 years. It is worth noting that in the field of Biomedical Informatics
(aka Health Informatics) seminal publications in ML and AI appeared as
early as in 1959, however. The 1959 article by Ledley and Lusted [34] is
particularly important since it anticipated many of the key themes and
methods that were rediscovered (and in some cases ignored) by modern
commercial vendors and academic or industry adopters of biomedical AI/ML
63 years later.

Similarly, the 1961 article by Warner et al. is [35] is a seminal paper
for the field of Medical Informatics and describes a ML-based approach
to improving diagnosis in a significant disease, later expanded to many
other diseases in the 60s all the way to the 80s by these and other
pioneering investigators.

Another important seminal early work, this time in human expert
knowledge- driven AI was the work by Miller et al. [36]. This notable AI
system employed heuristic knowledge representation and reasoning that
managed to perform at a hard reasoning task (challenging diagnostic
cases across all of internal medicine) at a level that matched or in
some cases exceeded expert physicians. This system was emblematic of the
efforts in the 70 s and the 80 s to create AI that was driven by
extracting and representing in computable form human expert problem
solving. These efforts were followed by newer ML-based systems with the
advent of more capable ML algorithms and representations taking
advantage of increasing amounts of training data, such as Bayesian
Networks and other sophisticated Bayesian classifiers [37, 38], early
multi-layered artificial neural networks [39, 40], decision tree
learners and other ML algorithms [1–4] that vastly outperformed in ease
of use, cost-effectiveness and accuracy early ML algorithms and human
expert knowledge.

The “Perfect Storm” for Biomedical AI/ML

The ability to capture massive Big Data (as indicated above) in the
2000s and onward, fueled the explosive application and refinements in
kernel-based nonlinear classifiers (e.g., SVMs) [1–4], boosting
algorithms, causal discovery and inference algorithms [18–20], deep
artificial neural networks [39, 40, 41], significant extensions to
decision trees (Random Forests [42]), regularized versions of
statistical regression algorithms [43], and other methods that could now
manage tens, hundreds and in some cases millions of variables with
modest compute requirements and most importantly with extreme tolerance
to low sample sizes without overfitting [44]. These methods exhibited
properties that classical statistical science and practice previously
considered impossible [4, 14]. Some types of newer algorithms also had
the ability to discover causality without experiments which have also
been considered previously impossible [18–20] and newer scalable causal
algorithms that made application to high dimensional data as well as
scalable hybrid predictive and causal modeling feasible [45–48]. This
“perfect storm” for biomedical AI/ML led to its current cycle of
explosive growth. It is not surprising that the above developments in
general AI and ML are closely associated with the work of 9 Turing award
recipients (Marvin Minsky, John McCarthy, Herbert A. Simon, Edward
Feigenbaum, Raj Reddy, Judea Pearl, Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton, Yan
Le Cun), and 7 Nobel Prize recipients in economics: (Herbert A. Simon,
Daniel Kahneman, Clive Granger, Thomas A. Sargent, Christopher A. Sims,
Joshua Angirst, Guido Imbens) solidifying thus the scientific
credibility and immense importance of these methods.

Yet, despite all of this scientific activity and accomplishments (>three
million entries in Google Scholar mentioning ML and > three million
mentioning AI as of 2023), these fields have been presented to the
general public and the non-experts, as either entirely new, or they have
been presented as invented recently in the laboratories of a handful of
commercial companies. This brings us to another important pitfall:

Pitfall 1.4

The field of general and biomedical AI and ML is not a new one. Ignoring
the vast literature and re-inventing the wheel in some cases, fails to
take advantage of a wealth of very substantial prior work that can
inform effective, safe and cost-effective use. Methods that have
undergone rigorous development, analysis and validation over many years
have in general better-understood properties, better performance
robustness, and better operating safety characteristics than newer less
well-developed methods.

Best Practice 1.1

When considering development or application of AI/ML, ensure that it is
informed by the well-developed and evaluated pre-existing science and
technology.

Differentiation of Biomedical AI and ML from General-Purpose AI/ML

Another important pitfall we will address in this volume is the
distinction between general purpose AI & ML versus biomedically-tailored
AI & ML.

Pitfall 1.5

Biomedical AI and ML have specific requirements and adaptations tailored
to the goals of healthcare and of health sciences discovery. AI and ML
devised and tested in unrelated fields have very different properties
and do not ensure the goals of healthcare and health science
applications.

A summary of the adaptations and differentiation, to be elaborated
further in this volume, is as follows:

Biomedical AI/ML:

1.  (a)

    Is driven by, and has strong interactions with clinical objectives,
    health economics, and healthcare delivery within specific health
    systems.

     

2.  (b)

    Requires the ability to handle very large dimensionalities (i.e.,
    number of variables).

     

3.  (c)

    Requires the ability to handle very small sample sizes without
    overfitting.

     

4.  (d)

    Must be equipped with the ability to discover and model causality,
    since it is often necessary to estimate effects of interventions.

     

5.  (e)

    Requires specialized data operations and the ability to handle
    diverse data types including clinical coded data, text, imaging,
    biomolecular data, and combinations.

     

6.  (f)

    Places great emphasis on accuracy, cost-effectiveness, quality
    control and de-risking.

     

All of these requirements will be addressed in detail in the present
volume.

Future Potential of Biomedical AI/ML

As widespread and rapidly growing biomedical AI/ML is, it has potential
for orders of magnitude more growth. For example, compared to classical
biostatistics, AI/ML has a smaller data science footprint in biomedical
literature as revealed by the following PubMed searches:

  -------------------------- ---------------------
  “Cox regression” (Mesh)    → 105,385 results
  “Chi square test” (Mesh)   → 116,546 results
  “ANOVA” (Mesh)             → 522,350 results
  “Regression” (Mesh)        → 1,011,918 results
  -------------------------- ---------------------

AI/ML methods are rapidly substituting complex inferential statistics
and/or are extending them in substantial ways, however. There are many
signals for the forthcoming growth of biomedical AI/ML. We mention a few
strong indicators:

1.  (a)

    In the domain of molecular profiling for precision medicine [25],
    only just a handful of such profiles have been brought to market so
    far, although, >170,000 molecular signature papers have been
    published (many of them showing feasibility of clinical signatures).
    The number of patient-touching precision tests expected to be in use
    at any given time in the future, if estimated as the combination of
    (diseases * drugs), exceeds 100,000.

     

2.  (b)

    Other areas where massive biomedical AI/ML growth is expected
    include health systems outcomes improvement [21] with hundreds of
    thousands of AI/ML models conceivable to be developed and deployed
    in the future, assuming that at least one model will be deployed for
    every major decision/disease/outcome combination that is affecting
    patients, units and systems.

     

3.  (c)

    Similarly in the space of precision clinical trials [25] currently
    much less than 1% of all trials are precision trials and migrating
    to this model of clinical therapeutics validation will necessitate
    application of AI/ML at scale across the research domain (>20,000
    new large new trials annually).

     

4.  (d)

    In radiology, we can safely expect a massive transition to
    computer-assisted (and in some cases fully automated) interpretation
    of clinical or research imaging, across many health science and care
    domains.

     

5.  (e)

    In single-cell transcriptomics and other omics (including
    “multiplexed” combinations) and their spatiotemporal extensions, the
    use of AI/ML is absolutely necessitated by the immense
    dimensionalities (> 5000 cells * 10,000 molecular probes with
    current technology yields dimensionalities of > 50 million variables
    per patient/research subject). Single-cell omics technologies are
    the successor of bulk deep sequencing technologies (themselves the
    successor of microarray technologies) and according to all
    indications, will be driving biological discovery for decades to
    come. If these precursors are an indication, then 100,000 s of
    applications of AI/ML single-cell omics are to be expected [49, 50].

     

6.  (f)

    The vast majority of models referenced in the hundreds of systematic
    reviews (covering thousands of modeling studies) mentioned in
    section “Neither General AI/ML, nor Biomedical AI/ML are New.
    Highlights of Achievements of Biomedical AI/ML”, are pre-clinical or
    otherwise feasibility efforts as stated in the corresponding
    systematic reviews. These reviews found very promising results but
    identified that the models have not yet reached the clinically
    mature stages needed for broad deployment. Closing this gap will
    undoubtedly be a large part of the future of health AI/ML.

     

Pitfalls and Related Lack of Best Practices Undermine Biomedical AI/ML. AI/ML Trust and Acceptance

The strong and sustained trends outlined above in the literature and
commercial AI/ML, suggest that AI/ML will grow to be a science and
technology that permanently and irrevocably enables progress across all
aspects of health science research and health care delivery. There is an
ethical and utilitarian necessity therefore for this science and
technology to be executed with an emphasis on meeting performance,
safety, and cost-effectiveness requirements.

Performance requirements entail that AI/ML has to be accurate and
minimize false positive and false negative results. For example, the
massive application of AI/ML if allowed to generate false positives will
drown the research system in noise, rendering the space of scientific
investigation a destructively low signal-to-noise environment. Avoidable
false negatives due to poorly thought AI/ML represents the space of
corresponding opportunity cost.

Safety requirements entail that AI/ML systems applied in clinical care
settings as well as preventative policy and other public health settings
should not allow for any avoidable errors of either wrong
treatment/intervention decisions that incur risk to patients,
populations, or systems of care. They should also not allow errors of
failing to identify opportunities to improve patient/human subject
health (for example, diagnosis of treatable diseases, opportunities to
improve cost and quality of the system of care) as such failures
translate to decreased life expectancy/quality of life of individuals,
populations and negatively affect the health systems that care for them.

Cost-effectiveness requirements entail that AI/ML systems applied in
care settings as well as health science discovery should not be wasteful
in either time-to-results, or compute requirements, or sample size
requirements, or cost of decisions. The costs of such inefficiencies can
quickly become unmanageable.

Perspectives on building trust, adoption, and acceptance of technology
by humans (as individuals or at the society level) are diverse and
encompass performance, economic, legal, accountability, ethical,
psychological, social and other factors [51–59]. Operationally we frame
the above requirements from the perspective of stakeholders using a
Biomedical AI/ML trust and acceptance framework, comprising the
following 7 dimensions:

1.  1.

    Scientific and Technical Trust and Acceptance. AI/MLmodels must be
    accurate at deployment (e.g., low error rate, not falling outside
    their boundaries of strong performance (known as their “knowledge
    cliff”)).

     

2.  2.

    Health System Trust and Acceptance AI/ML models must be safe,
    cost-effective and well-embedded in systems of health with clear
    benefits and without unexpected/unacceptable risks, disruptions or
    other negative consequences.

     

3.  3.

    System-of-science Trust and Acceptance. AI/ML models must be safe
    and cost-effective to operate in the system of science without
    unexpected/unacceptable risks and consequences.

     

4.  4.

    Beneficiary Trust and Acceptance. AI/ML models must be accepted by
    patients and human subjects individually and at the community level.

     

5.  5.

    Delivery and Operator Trust and Acceptance. AI/ML models must be
    accepted by clinicians and scientists.

     

6.  6.

    Regulatory Trust and Acceptance. AI/ML models must be compliant to
    applicable laws and approved by regulatory bodies.

     

7.  7.

    Ethical Trust and Acceptance. AI/ML models must be
    non-discriminatory and must promote health equity and social justice
    related to health science and care (e.g., by being
    non-discriminatory on the basis of race, socioeconomic factors,
    gender, etc.).

     

In their 2022 program solicitation (NSF 22–502), entitled “National AI
Research Institutes Accelerating Research, Transforming Society, and
Growing the American Workforce”, the National Science Foundation (NSF)
acknowledged that identifying, prioritizing, and satisfying the
fundamental attributes that render an AI trustworthy are open research
challenges. Notably the program described trustworthiness through
examples from other areas of mature technology such as automobiles or
electric lighting. These systems are trustworthy, “because they are
reliable, predictable, governed by rigorous and measurable standards,
and provide the expected benefits. Facilitated by basic knowledge of
their operation, we are familiar with common faults and how to address
them, and there is infrastructure to deal with problems we cannot handle
ourselves.” It’s a compelling proposition that health-related AI should
have similar characteristics.

The whole purpose of the present volume therefore is to outline a set of
preferred practical requirements and methods (“Best Practices’) that
will move us forward to biomedical AI/ML that avoids pitfalls and
achieves the 7 dimensions of trust, acceptance and eventual adoption. In
order to justify the requirements and assemble/build the proposed best
practices we will also need to introduce a body of necessary technical
background knowledge.

Intended Purpose and Audience of the Book

AI & ML are extremely popular topics and numerous books are available,
generally falling into four categories:

1.  1.

    Hands-on instructional texts on how to build a general-purpose AI
    system, e.g., using a particular Python software package. Such books
    are not specific to health care or health sciences and their
    specific problems; nor do they provide a strong conceptual
    understanding of how different models work and how this relates to
    their applicability to different health problems.

     

2.  2.

    General purpose data mining, AI, and ML textbooks. Such books do not
    relate to health care or health science and do not give advice on
    how to develop models specifically for health care or any other
    area: they focus on a very narrow aspect of model development.
    Moreover they do not differentiate between feasibility and
    exploratory analysis from the much more mission-critical clinical
    and other high-stakes modelling settings that are so prominent in
    healthcare and the health sciences.

     

3.  3.

    Health care analytics and the promise of AI in health care. Most
    works in this category focus on conventional (reporting and
    compliance) analytics. A few address the new capabilities brought by
    AI/ML. They are not designed to provide the reader with a deep
    understanding of what the (primarily) technical challenges are in
    health care AI, or what the pitfalls are and how specifically and
    systematically to avoid them.

     

4.  4.

    Bioinformatics and genomics discussing AI/ML approaches in that
    context. These are technical books that typically do not focus on
    systematic methodologies for ensuring appropriateness of various
    AI/ML methods, or their methodological underpinnings.

     

From our review of the literature there are more than 100 textbooks in
2023 in press in the above categories. We view them as very useful
background for broad fundamentals and/or context of use: from such books
readers can learn basic concepts of general machine learning, and can
also learn how to build certain types of models; our present effort
however focuses on knowledge and practices specific to how health
science, clinical, translational, and healthcare AI/ML systems differ
from the general-purpose AI/ML. The book aspires to impart comprehensive
and in-depth knowledge on how to build robust and safe models for the
high-stakes settings in health science and care, and to evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of such models produced by others. We will
cover both general (mostly immutable) scientific principles as well as
specific technical guidance that may evolve over time.

More precisely, we envisioned the present volume to be the first book in
the field to provide guidance for the following concepts/topics:

1.  1.

    The critical differences between general-purpose AI & ML and
    medically-applicable AI & ML.

     

2.  2.

    Building models that can be applied with minimal risk in high-stakes
    settings including clinical applications, healthcare system
    optimization, and discovery of clinical modalities.

     

3.  3.

    Models that integrate multi-level, multi-modal clinical and
    molecular data.

     

4.  4.

    The importance of data design and post-modelling safeguards for
    high-stakes applications.

     

5.  5.

    Common limitations and remedies of efforts (commercial and academic)
    in the field.

     

6.  6.

    In-depth presentation of not just predictive but also causal and
    hybrid causal-predictive methods.

     

7.  7.

    A comprehensive summary and critique of operating characteristics of
    all major AI & ML methods.

     

This volume emphasizes the need and methods for biomedical AI/ML to:

1.  1.

    Be intentional, with well-defined and meaningful goals and metrics
    of success.

     

2.  2.

    Effectively manage risk for errors that may affect adversely the
    health of patients, the effectiveness of health systems, and the
    effectiveness of the system of science.

     

3.  3.

    Operate in real-life (as opposed to idealized and simplified
    theoretical) health care as well as in health science discovery
    ecosystems.

     

4.  4.

    Develop within a lifecycle that starts from problem statements and
    needs all the way to successful deployment and continuous iterative
    improvement.

     

5.  5.

    Prevent and overcome the fundamental dangers of over fitting and
    under fitting as well over confidence in models and under
    performance of models.

     

6.  6.

    Have known properties that guarantee performance and safety.

     

7.  7.

    Be based on sophisticated and appropriate data designs.

     

8.  8.

    Be differentiated along the levels of systems/stacks, protocols,
    algorithms, models.

     

We adopt an interdisciplinary perspective, using and integrating methods
from Data Science, Computer science (Machine Learning, AI, predictive
analytics), Statistics, Epidemiology (study design), Clinical Decision
Support, Bioinformatics, Clinical and Health Informatics, Genomics,
Learning Health Systems, and Precision and Personalized Medicine.

Our intended audience comprises all stakeholders to the healthcare and
health science ecosystems: (a) Applied and research Health Data
Scientists working in industry, academia, and healthcare. (b)
Clinicians/Professionals/Practitioners who are called on to evaluate,
select, and use AI&ML based decision support. (c) Healthcare and
translational (e.g. pharmaceutics and biotechnology) industry leaders/
administrators including but not limited to IT leaders who wish to
evaluate and deploy competing technologies in medical AI&ML. (d)
Educators and Students in informatics, ML & AI, health economics, health
business administration, and data science. (e) Funding agency officers.
(f) Journals and their editors. (g) Regulatory agency officers. And (h)
Community members, representatives and advocates.

We elected to make this book an open access one, ensuring that all
members of our intended audience can access this volume without
financial restrictions.

Outline of the Book: Style, Format, and How to Read

The book is organized in three parts (with a total of 18 chapters):
Foundations, Modelling, and Implementation. Each chapter typically
covers several of the following: technical didactic exposition, case
studies (of success and failure varieties), related pitfalls discussion,
best practices addressing the pitfalls and serving the trust principles,
along with literature references and occasional discussion thereof. We
also provide brief chapter abstracts (at the start of each chapter),
assignments for classroom use, and recapitulation of concepts,
definitions, pitfalls and Best Practices (at the end of each chapter).

Educators may wish to use the book in whole or in part as classroom
textbook. Features supporting classroom use include:

1.  1.

    Consistent structure and tone to the chapters. The two main authors
    have written the majority of the material and have co-authored or
    edited the contributing chapters to harmonize the content and style
    across the volume.

     

2.  2.

    Practice questions, discussion topics and assignments. Some of those
    are more conceptual and open-ended (e.g. appropriate for less
    technical learners) and some are more technology-oriented (e.g.
    targeting learners who need to develop technical knowledge and
    skills).

     

3.  3.

    Comprehensive coverage of the topic, not just the methods that the
    authors have invented, have used, or prefer.

     

4.  4.

    In the future we intend to provide an “official” answer key to the
    assignments and discussion topics of this volume.

     

Because our intended audience is very diverse, we make every effort to
use plain language with minimal jargon and to keep mathematical,
statistical and computer science technical details at a minimum. This
does not mean that we shy away from presenting formulas, algorithms, and
theorems. However, when we do so, we present them only when they are
necessary for making sense of the Pitfalls/Best Practices in discussion.
We also sought to use the simplest language possible that does not
sacrifice validity. We also introduce background we think is required to
understand these technical elements and emphasize the intuition and
their practical consequences behind them.

The style and level of detail has been ground-tested on our teaching
these concepts (for a combined 30+ years) in a variety of settings and
audiences (e.g., from undergrad college interns to professional
programmers, to graduate students in data science fields, to medical
residents, to health sciences faculty, and to national tutorials with
mixed health care and health science audiences). As is expected, our
writing reflects our own formal training in these fields (spanning
27 years combined). More importantly, both main authors of the present
volume are working scientists who have led and are active in many R&D
method/technology and applications projects. These have occurred in the
health sciences domain (mostly funded by the NIH and the NSF) but also
in industry and in health care contexts. These experiences have provided
us with a wealth of knowledge about the roadblocks that our intended
audience routinely faces, and the ways to overcome them.

At the end, of course, the reader will decide if the approach taken here
is as effective as we hope it will be. We caution that audiences with
strong technical backgrounds may find the text “hiding” some technical
details. We advise these readers to explore the ample references for
more technical depth, and to focus their reading of the book on applied
aspects that are not covered at all or are not synthesized sufficiently
in the primary technical literature.

Audiences without or with incomplete technical backgrounds may find some
concepts challenging at first read. Unless otherwise noted, we advise
this type of reader to not skip the scientific and technological
principles underlying ML/AI, since these are critical for successful use
in high stakes tasks and environments.

With regards to the book assignments, we revisit and incrementally
enrich and deepen many of them as new knowledge is provided by the
various chapters. Readers should address them with the knowledge gained
up until the chapter they are encountered.

Finally we recommend the independent reader to read the chapters in
sequence (possibly only skimming material that the reader has already
mastered elsewhere). We made every effort to cross-reference in each
chapter concepts with all other parts of the book where they are
discussed so even an out-of-sequence reading should be free of
confusion.

For in-classroom use, the class instructor is trusted to determine the
right components to emphasize or omit, and in the right sequence for her
class objectives and learners’ background and needs. The incremental
structure of assignments and discussion topics is valuable for
developing gradually an increasingly sophisticated understanding of
recurring themes and topics. It can also serve as a record of the
students’ progress in mastering the related body of knowledge and their
ability to integrate and evaluate the material. This will be disrupted
unavoidably in any out-of-sequence reading, however, and the instructor
has to make adjustments to the assignments in such cases.

We also note that all assignments are motivated by real-life examples of
methods development and application challenges. They can be traced to
literature and case studies in the public domain as well as to our
personal experience as working scientists, teachers, advisors,
consultants and administrators. Whenever we felt there was possibility
to breach upon privacy or reputation of third parties, we omitted
specific references to technology and persons, in all other cases we
name methods, products, and scientists, especially when credit was due
for important discoveries or other scientific and technological
contribution acknowledgment.

Caveats and Disclosures: Sourcing Best Practices

Where Do Best Practices Come from?

The realistic answer is that, circa 2023, biomedical AI/ML Best
Practices are not to be found in one place, stated as such, and having
fully complete and immutable status. This volume, to the best of our
knowledge, is the first book to strive for that goal. Our
recommendations originate from a variety of sources and are
characterized by different levels of (a) maturity/validation, (b)
breadth of applicability, and (c) technical clarity and depth. We have
thus considered and included in the present volume the following sources
for the presented Best Practices:

1.  1.

    Published guidelines stated as such, for example the PubMed search
    (“artificial intelligence” or “machine learning”) and “best
    practices“(e.g., [60]) yields 217 results, several of which contain
    proposed best practices (of various degrees of validation and
    usefulness as we will see in subsequent chapters). In some cases
    important Best Practices and guidelines are contained in articles
    with a broader scope, for example, guidance issued by the biometrics
    division of the NCI [61].

     

2.  2.

    Implicit but clear findings and recommendations published by quality
    control consortia (e.g., [62]).

     

3.  3.

    Broad and well-designed benchmark studies that demonstrate the
    appropriateness and effectiveness of various algorithms in specific
    settings (e.g., [62, 63]).

     

4.  4.

    AI/ML competitions (properly designed to prevent biases) e.g., [64].

     

5.  5.

    Criteria used in meta-analytic and systematic review studies to
    assess quality, risk of bias etc. (see for example
    chapter “Reporting standards, Certification/Accreditation &
    Reproducibility”).

     

6.  6.

    Published reporting, regulatory, and certification standards and
    requirements (e.g., [65]).

     

7.  7.

    Theoretical properties of AI/ML algorithms, protocols and related
    methods that directly suggest proper and improper usage (see for
    example chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An
    Appraisal of Operating Characteristics of Major Machine Learning
    Methods Applicable to Healthcare and Health Sciences”, and
    “Introduction to Causal Inference and Causal Structure Discovery”).

     

8.  8.

    Case studies that inform generalizable types of errors and suggest
    strategies to avoid them (see for example chapter “Lessons Learnt
    from Historical Failures, Limitations and Success of Health AI/ML.
    Enduring Problems and the Role of Best Practices”).

     

9.  9.

    Literature reports that have focused on identifying specific types
    of errors or modeling/analysis problems and have provided reusable
    approaches for avoiding or minimizing them (e.g., [66]).

     

In general this volume avoids offering guidance based on the authors’
preferred workflows or methods unless these are falling in one of the
above categories.

A key value proposition of the present work therefore is that we have
assembled, reviewed, critically analyzed, and synthesized a plurality of
sources to inform pitfalls and related best ways currently known for
improving AI/ML quality, performance, effectiveness and safety.

We caution the reader that like every other cutting-edge field of
scientific endeavor, this is work in progress and some of the currently
known Best Practices in ML/AI will undoubtedly improve and be revised as
new methods come into play and the field deepens and widens its
knowledge. We welcome reader feedback and criticism and we will make
every effort to appraise and incorporate all useful suggestions in
future editions. See also “Final Synthesis of Recommendations” for
discussion about future evolution of Best Practices.

Outline of the Book: Contents Summary by Part and Chapter

Part I: Foundations

This present chapter entitled “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine
Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the need for Best
Practices enabling Trust in AI and ML”), aims to provide introductory
concepts about the field, to motivate the need for best practices in
biomedical AI and ML, and to map out the book’s scope and contents so
that readers are well oriented. A small set of high-level pitfalls and
guidelines are also included.

Chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” provides a broad
introduction to the foundations of health AI and ML systems and
includes: (1) Theoretical properties and formal vs heuristic systems;
practical implications of complexity for system tractability. (2)
Foundations of AI including logics and symbolic vs non-symbolic AI,
Reasoning with Uncertainty, AI/ML programming languages. (3) Foundations
of Machine Learning Theory.

Chapter “An Appraisal of Operating Characteristics of Major Machine
Learning Methods Applicable to Healthcare and Health Sciences” provides
an outline of how each method works, and in addition we summarize the
intended uses, the usual way it is employed in practice, and its known
and unknown properties. Readers who have not delved into ML before, will
find a useful introduction and review of key methods. Readers who may
already know about some or all of these methods will gain additional
insights as we critically revisit the key concepts and add to their
prior knowledge summary guidance on whether and when each technique is
applicable or preferred (or not) in healthcare and health science
problem solving.

Chapter “Introduction to Causal Machine Learning” covers the important
dimension of causality. The vast majority of texts in biomedical AI/ML
focuses on predictive modeling and does not address causal methods,
their requirements and properties. Yet these are essential for
determining and assisting patient-level or healthcare-level
interventions toward improving outcomes of interest. Causal methods are
also indispensable for discovery in the health sciences.

Chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and
AI Methods and Systems” outlines a comprehensive process, governing all
steps from analysis and problem domain needs specification, to creation
and validation of AI/ML methods that can address them. The stages are
explained and grounded in many existing methods. The process discussed
equates to a generalizable Best Practice guideline applicable across all
of AI/ML. An equally important use of this Best Practice is as a guide
for understanding and evaluating any ML/AI technology under
consideration for adoption for a particular problem domain.

Part II: Modelling

Chapter “The Process and Lifecycle of a Clinical-Grade AI/ML Model”
introduces the notion of “clinical-grade” models and contrasts such
models with feasibility, exploratory, or pre-clinical ones. The main
tenet of the chapter is that AI/ML systems and models must be designed
and deployed in a manner that is aware of, and seamlessly integrated in
healthcare systems or discovery processes (for healthcare and health
science discovery, respectively). The steps outlined span from
requirements engineering to deployment, monitoring and iterative
development and continuous improvement. They also emphasize contextual
factors that influence success.

Chapter “Data Design for Biomedical AI/ML” addresses the critical aspect
of data (or research) design and related best practices. This endeavor
is foundational to the success of AI/ML for both clinical care and
scientific discovery. Yet to the extent of our review of the literature,
a systematic and in-depth treatment of this most important aspect
receives little attention in the ML literature. In this chapter (a) we
present common designs (e.g., retrospective, cohort, case/control, EHR,
time series, RCT, hybrid, etc.) and implications of design choices for
the success of modelling; (b) we discuss common data biases (e.g.,
selection bias, assertion bias, confounding bias, Simpson’s paradox,
etc.).

Chapter “Data Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and Management”
introduces guidance for performing data preparations so that the goals
of modeling are effectively and efficiently accomplished. It also
addresses data quality, mapping, feature engineering, data
transformations, clinical and research data warehousing and management.

Chapter “Model Selection and Evaluation” addresses best practices for
finding models that are accurate, and generalize well. Estimation of the
generalization error is also addressed both in terms of error estimator
procedures and their interaction with model selection as well as in
terms of error metrics and their effect on analysis. In addition to
general-purpose performance metrics, this chapter also discusses aspects
of model evaluation that are unique to biomedical applications, such as
evaluating clinical efficacy, the suitability of a model for clinical
decision support, and health economic evaluations.

Chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and Model Overconfidence and
Under-performance in Machine Learning and AI” makes a deep dive into
overfitting and under fitting which are arguably two of the most
far-reaching and impactful challenges in AI/ML with high-dimensional
data, modest or small sample sizes, and modern high-capacity learners.
Avoiding over and under-fitted analyses and models is critical for
ensuring high generalization performance. In modern ML/AI practice these
factors are typically interacting with error estimator procedures and
model selection, as well as with sampling and reporting biases and thus
are considered together in context. These concepts are also closely
related to statistical significance and scientific reproducibility. We
examine several common scenarios where over confidence in model
performance and/or model under performance occur as well as recommended
practices for preventing, testing and correcting them.

Chapter “From ‘Human vs Machine’ to ‘Human with Machine’” addresses: (a)
empirical evaluations of healthcare and health science AI/ML
decision-making. (b) Empirical comparisons of computer vs human decision
making in health sciences and health care. (c) Important human cognitive
biases that lead to decision errors. (d) Summary comparison of human vs
computer strengths and limitations that may manifest as errors in
medical practice or science discovery settings. (e) Practical
considerations in constructing hybrid computer-human problem-solving
systems.

Chapter “Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and
Successes of Health AI/ML. Enduring Problems, and the Role of Best
Practices” covers a variety of case studies relevant to best practices.
Examples include: the infamous “AI winters”; overfitting; using methods
not built to purpose; over-estimating the value and potential of early
and heuristic technology; developing AI that is disconnected from
real-life needs and application contexts; over-interpreting or
misinterpreting results from learning theory; failures/shortcomings of
literature including the persistence of incorrect findings;
failures/shortcomings of modeling protocols, data and evaluation
designs; high profile science failures; factors that may render
guidelines themselves problematic. These case studies in most cases were
followed by improved technology that overcame the limitations. The case
studies reinforce, and demonstrate the value of rigorous, science-driven
practices for addressing enduring and new challenges.

Chapter “Characterizing and Managing the Risk of AI/ML Models in
Clinical and Organizational Application” covers practical methods for
reviewing the face validity of AI/ML models, and characterizing and
managing risk of such models at development and at deployment stages.
This chapter also briefly discusses broader methods and practices for
detecting and correcting issues with ML modeling and the emerging
concept of debugging ML models and analyses.

Part III: Implementation

Chapter “Considerations for Specialized Health AI/ML Modelling and
Applications: NLP” looks into the field- and task-specific best
practices for the domain of health NLP.

Chapter “Considerations for Specialized Health AI/ML Modelling and
Applications: Imaging – Through the perspective of Dermatology” looks
into field and task-specific best practices in the specialized domain of
Imaging (with a dermatology focus).

Chapter “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical, Legal, and Societal
Implications (ELSI)” reviews the regulation of AI/ML models, the risk
management principles underlying international regulations of clinical
AI/ML, discusses the conditions under which AI/ML models in the U.S. are
regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and reviews FDA’s
Good Machine Learning Practice (GMLP) principles. In its second part,
the chapter provides an introduction to the nascent field of biomedical
AI ethics, covering general AI ELSI studies, AI/ML racial bias, and
AI/ML health equity principles. The chapter discusses (and gives
illustrative examples) of the importance of causality and equivalence
classes for practical detection of racial bias in models. It concludes
with a series of recommended best practices for promoting health equity
and reducing health disparities via the design and use of health AI/ML.

Chapter “Reporting Standards, Certification/Accreditation &
Reproducibility” covers the interrelated topics enhancing the quality
safety and reproducibility of clinical AI/ML via (a) reporting
standards; (b) recent efforts for accrediting health care provider
organizations for AI readiness and maturity; (c) professional
certification; and (d) education and related accreditation of
educational programs in data science and biomedical informatics,
specific to AI/ML.

Chapter “Final Synthesis of Recommendations” presents a consolidated
view of the identified pitfalls and recommended practices across the
book. We differentiate between macro-, meso- and micro-levels of
pitfalls and corresponding best practices- roughly corresponding to
high-level principles, concrete differentiations of the above and
granular/detailed tools and techniques for implementation. We discuss
the non-uniqueness of best practice frameworks and several open
problems. The continued development and dissemination of Best Practices
for biomedical AI/ML is certain to become in the years to come a field
of inquiry with significant growth and value.

Key Concepts Discussed in Chapter “ Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: The Need for
Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML”

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML)

Data Science

Computer program

Computer system

Computer algorithm

AI/ML model

Data Science

Performance requirements

Safety requirements

Cost-effectiveness requirements

Trust, acceptance, and adoption

Key Messages Discussed in Chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: The Need for
Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML”

1.  1.

    AI/ML are long standing disciplines with millions of published
    articles since the 1960s and with several Turing and Nobel awards
    linked to them.

     

2.  2.

    Biomedical AI/ML has a long history and extensive literature behind
    them also starting in the 1960s. They have recently exploded in the
    literature in adoption for discovery and care and as their own
    fields of study.

     

3.  3.

    AI/ML are applied broadly in science and health care because they
    relate to extremely broad classes of prediction/pattern recognition
    and causal modeling and problem solving tasks.

     

4.  4.

    Biomedical AI/ML has several distinct requirements than
    general-purpose AI/ML.

     

5.  5.

    AI/ML Algorithms, programs and systems must inspire and guarantee
    trust in their safety, effectiveness and cost effectiveness. Best
    Practices must be developed, shared and followed to enable trust and
    acceptance.

     

6.  6.

    Known properties are essential for AI/ML trust.

     

7.  7.

    Currently known Best Practices originate from a variety of sources,
    have different levels of maturity or validation and will undoubtedly
    expand and improve in the future.

     

Pitfalls Discussed^([12]) in Chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: The Need for
Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML”

Pitfall 1.1: Unspecified, undisclosed or insufficiently-analyzed
algorithms.

Pitfall 1.2: In healthcare and health sciences, clinical algorithms are
often confused with computer algorithms.

Pitfall 1.3: Viewing the whole field as being about one narrow
technology or a small set of tools, ignoring the broader spectrum of
available options.

Pitfall 1.4: Ignoring the vast literature or “re-inventing the wheel”.

Pitfall 1.5: Ignoring the specific requirements and adaptations tailored
to the goals of healthcare and of health sciences discovery.

Best Practices Discussed in Chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: The Need for
Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML”

Best Practice 1.1 When considering development or application of AI/ML
ensure that it is informed by well-developed and evaluated existing
science and technology.

Classroom Assignments and Discussion Topics^([13]) chapter “Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health
Sciences: The Need for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML”

1.  1.

    If science is self-correcting via reproducibility studies, what are
    the dangers/downsides to producing AI/ML systems/methods and related
    articles with a high proportion of false results?

     

2.  2.

    Identify from news sources and business publications articles about
    past industry failures in health AI/ML. Summarize and draw your
    conclusions about how to remedy and avoid such problems.

     

3.  3.

    What, in your view, is the ideal relationship (i.e., rules of
    engagement and assignment of responsibilities/foci) of industry and
    academia in developing and delivering health AI/ML?

     

4.  4.

    What are areas where health AI/ML cannot reach human problem
    solving? What about the reverse?

     

5.  5.

    The so-called No Free Lunch Theorem (NFLT) states (in simplified
    language) that all ML and more broadly all AI optimization methods
    are equally accurate over all problems on average. Discuss the
    implications for choice of AI/ML methods in practical use cases.

     

6.  6.

    “It is not the tool but the craftsman”. Does this maxim apply to
    health AI/ML?

     

7.  7.

    How would you go about identifying and measuring/documenting the
    impact that AI/ML has had on specific health science discoveries?

     

8.  8.

    Is AI confined to computer systems? Can other artificial intelligent
    agents such as corporations be viewed as AI? Discuss implications of
    such a broader view.

     

9.  9.

    Construct a “pyramid of evidence” for health AI/ML similar to the
    one used in evidence based care practice. Consider two pyramids: one
    focusing on clinical healthcare and another on health science
    discovery.

     

10. 10.

    You are part of a university/hospital evaluation committee for a
    vendor offering a patient-clinical trial matching AI product. Your
    institution strongly needs to improve the patient-trial matching
    process to increase trial success and efficiency metrics.

    The sales team makes the statement that “this is a completely
    innovative AI/ML product; nothing like this exists in the market and
    there is no similar literature; we cannot at this time provide
    theoretical or empirical accuracy analysis, however you are welcome
    to try out our product for free for a limited time and decide if it
    helpful to you”. The product is fairly expensive (multi $ million
    license fees over 5 years covering >1000 trials steady-state).

    What would be your concerns based on these statements? Would you be
    in position of making an institutional buy/not buy recommendation?

     

11. 11.

    A company has launched a major national marketing campaign across
    health provider systems for a new AI/ML healthcare product based on
    its success on playing backgammon, reading and analyzing backgammon
    playing books and human games, extracting novel winning strategies
    from matches, answering questions about backgammon, and teaching
    backgammon to human players.

    How relevant is this impressive AI track record to health care? How
    would you go about determining relevance to health care AI/ML? How
    your reasoning would change if the product was not based on success
    in backgammon but success in identifying oil and gas deposits? How
    about success in financial investments?

     

12. 12.

    Your university-affiliated hospital wishes to increase early
    diagnosis of cognitive decline across the population it serves. You
    are tasked to choose between the following AI/ML technologies/tools:
    1.  (a)

        AI/ML tool A guarantees optimal predictivity in the sample limit
        in distributions that are multivariate normal.

         

    2.  (b)

        AI/ML tool B has no known properties but is has been shown to be
        very accurate in several datasets for microarray
        cancer-vs-normal classification.

         

    3.  (c)

        AI/ML tool C is a commercial offshoot of a tool that was fairly
        accurate in early (pre-trauma) diagnosis of PTSD.

         

    4.  (d)

        AI/ML tool D is an application running on a ground-breaking
        quantum computing platform (Quantum computing is an exciting and
        frontier technology that many believe has potential to make
        AI/ML with hugely improved capabilities in the future).

         

    5.  (e)

        AI/ML tool E runs on a novel massively parallel cloud computing
        platform capable of Zettascale performance.

         

    What are your thoughts about these options?

     

13. 13.

    The same question as #12 but with the following additional data:
    1.  (a)

        AI/ML tool A sales reps are very professional, friendly and open
        to offering deep discounts.

         

    2.  (b)

        AI/ML tool B is offered by a company co-founded by a
        widely-respected Nobel laureate.

         

    3.  (c)

        AI/Ml tool C is offered by a vendor with which your organization
        has a successful and long relationship.

         

    4.  (d)

        AI/Ml tool D is part of a university initiative to develop
        thought leadership in quantum computing.

         

    5.  (e)

        AI/Ml tool E will provide patient-specific results in 1
        picosecond or less.

         

    How does this additional information influences your assessment?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Hart PE, Stork DG, Duda RO. Pattern classification. Hoboken: Wiley;
    2000.

2.  2.

    Russell, S.J., 2010. Artificial intelligence a modern approach.
    Pearson Education, Inc.

3.  3.

    Weiss SM, Kulikowski CA. Computer systems that learn: classification
    and prediction methods from statistics, neural nets, machine
    learning, and expert systems. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.; 1991.

4.  4.

    Statnikov A. A gentle introduction to support vector machines in
    biomedicine: theory and methods, vol. 1. world scientific; 2011.

5.  5.

    Sverchkov Y, Craven M. A review of active learning approaches to
    experimental design for uncovering biological networks. PLoS Comput
    Biol. 2017;13(6):e1005466.

6.  6.

    Statnikov A, Ma S, Henaff M, Lytkin N, Efstathiadis E, Peskin ER,
    Aliferis CF. Ultra-scalable and efficient methods for hybrid
    observational and experimental local causal pathway discovery. J
    Mach Learn Res. 2015;16(1):3219–67.

7.  7.

    Guyon I, Cawley GC, Dror G, Lemaire V. Results of the active
    learning challenge. In: Active learning and experimental design
    workshop in conjunction with AISTATS 2010. JMLR Workshop and
    Conference Proceedings; 2011, April. p. 19–45.

8.  8.

    Tanenbaum AS. Structured computer organization. Prentice Hall; 1984.

9.  9.

    Cormen TH, Leiserson CE, Rivest RL, Stein C. Introduction to
    algorithms. MIT press; 2022.

10. 10.

    Brookshear, J.G. Computer science: An overview. Benjamin-Cummings
    Publishing Co., Inc; 1991.

11. 11.

    Sedgewick R. Algorithms in c++, parts 1–4: fundamentals, data
    structure, sorting, searching. Pearson Education; 1998.

12. 12.

    Margolis CZ. Uses of clinical algorithms. JAMA. 1983;249(5):627–32.

13. 13.

    Grimshaw J, Russell I. Achieving health gain through clinical
    guidelines. I: developing scientifically valid guidelines. Qual
    Health Care. 1993;2(4):243–8.

14. 14.

    Vapnik, V. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer
    science & business media. 1999.

15. 15.

    Kearns MJ, Vazirani U. An introduction to computational learning
    theory. MIT press; 1994.

16. 16.

    Donoho D. 50 years of data science. J Comput Graph Stat.
    2017;26(4):745–66.

17. 17.

    Cao L. Data science: a comprehensive overview. ACM Comput Surv.
    2017;50(3):1–42.

18. 18.

    Spirtes P, Glymour CN, Scheines R, Heckerman D. Causation,
    prediction, and search. MIT press; 2000.

19. 19.

    Glymour CN, Cooper GF, editors. Computation, causation, and
    discovery. AAAI Press; 1999.

20. 20.

    Pearl J. Causality. Cambridge university press; 2009.

21. 21.

    Roski J, Bo-Linn GW, Andrews TA. Creating value in health care
    through big data: opportunities and policy implications. Health Aff.
    2014;33(7):1115–22.

22. 22.

    https://​en.​wikipedia.​org/​wiki/​Applications_​of_​artificial_​intelligence.

23. 23.

    Cohen TA, Patel VL, Shortliffe EH, editors. Intelligent Systems in
    Medicine and Health: the role of AI. Springer Nature; 2022.

24. 24.

    Szymczak S, Biernacka JM, Cordell HJ, González-Recio O, König IR,
    Zhang H, Sun YV. Machine learning in genome-wide association
    studies. Genet Epidemiol. 2009;33(S1):S51–7.

25. 25.

    Adam T, Aliferis C. Personalized and Precision Medicine Informatics.
    Health Informatics Series. Basel, Springer Nature Switzerland. 2020.

26. 26.

    Aphinyanaphongs Y, Tsamardinos I, Statnikov A, Hardin D, Aliferis
    CF. Text categorization models for high-quality article retrieval in
    internal medicine. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2005;12(2):207–16.

27. 27.

    Libbrecht MW, Noble WS. Machine learning applications in genetics
    and genomics. Nat Rev Genet. 2015;16(6):321–32.

28. 28.

    Cheng J, Tegge AN, Baldi P. Machine learning methods for protein
    structure prediction. IEEE Rev Biomed Eng. 2008;1:41–9.

29. 29.

    Ryu JY, Kim HU, Lee SY. Deep learning improves prediction of
    drug–drug and drug–food interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
    2018;115(18):E4304–11.

30. 30.

    Erickson BJ, Korfiatis P, Akkus Z, Kline TL. Machine learning for
    medical imaging. Radiographics. 2017;37(2):505–15.

31. 31.

    Andreu-Perez J, Poon CC, Merrifield RD, Wong ST, Yang GZ. Big data
    for health. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 2015;19(4):1193–208.

32. 32.

    Vamathevan J, Clark D, Czodrowski P, Dunham I, Ferran E, Lee G, Li
    B, Madabhushi A, Shah P, Spitzer M, Zhao S. Applications of machine
    learning in drug discovery and development. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
    2019;18(6):463–77.

33. 33.

    Olsen L, Aisner D, McGinnis JM. The learning healthcare system:
    workshop summary. Institute of Medicine (US). National Academies
    Press (US); 2007. ISBN 978-0-309-10300-8.

34. 34.

    Ledley RS, Lusted LB. Reasoning foundations of medical diagnosis:
    symbolic logic, probability, and value theory aid our understanding
    of how physicians reason. Science. 1959;130(3366):9–21.

35. 35.

    Warner HR, Toronto AF, Veasey LG, Stephenson R. A mathematical
    approach to medical diagnosis: application to congenital heart
    disease. JAMA. 1961;177(3):177–83.

36. 36.

    Miller RA, Pople HE Jr, Myers JD. Internist-I, an experimental
    computer-based diagnostic consultant for general internal medicine.
    N Engl J Med. 1982;307(8):468–76.

37. 37.

    Pearl J. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of
    plausible inference. Morgan kaufmann; 1988.

38. 38.

    Shwe MA, Middleton B, Heckerman DE, Henrion M, Horvitz EJ, Lehmann
    HP, Cooper GF. Probabilistic diagnosis using a reformulation of the
    INTERNIST-1/QMR knowledge base. Methods Inf Med. 1991;30(04):241–55.

39. 39.

    Rumelhart DE, McClelland JL, PDP Research Group. Parallel
    distributed processing, vol. 1. New York: IEEE; 1988. p. 354–62.

40. 40.

    LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G. Deep learning. Nature.
    2015;521(7553):436–44.

41. 41.

    Saba L, Biswas M, Kuppili V, Godia EC, Suri HS, Edla DR, Omerzu T,
    Laird JR, Khanna NN, Mavrogeni S, Protogerou A. The present and
    future of deep learning in radiology. Eur J Radiol. 2019;114:14–24.

42. 42.

    Breiman L. Random forests. Mach Learn. 2001;45(1):5–32.

43. 43.

    Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman JH, Friedman JH. The elements of
    statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction (Vol.
    2, pp. 1-758). New York: springer.

44. 44.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part I: algorithms and
    empirical evaluation. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(1):171–234.

45. 45.

    Tsamardinos I, Brown LE, Aliferis CF. The max-min hill-climbing
    Bayesian network structure learning algorithm. Mach Learn.
    2006;65(1):31–78.

46. 46.

    Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF, Statnikov AR, Statnikov E. Algorithms
    for large scale Markov blanket discovery, vol. 2. FLAIRS
    conference; 2003. p. 376–80.

47. 47.

    Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF, Statnikov A. Time and sample efficient
    discovery of Markov blankets and direct causal relations. In:
    Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on
    knowledge discovery and data mining; 2003, August. p. 673–8.

48. 48.

    Aliferis CF, Tsamardinos I, Statnikov A. HITON: a novel Markov
    blanket algorithm for optimal variable selection. In: AMIA annual
    symposium proceedings, vol. 2003. American Medical Informatics
    Association; 2003. p. 21.

49. 49.

    Wang X, Fan J. Spatiotemporal molecular medicine: a new era of
    clinical and translational medicine. Clin Transl Med.
    2021;11(1):e294.

50. 50.

    Wu Y, Cheng Y, Wang X, Fan J, Gao Q. Spatial omics: navigating to
    the golden era of cancer research. Clin Transl Med. 2022;12(1):e696.

51. 51.

    Glikson E, Woolley AW. Human trust in artificial intelligence:
    review of empirical research. Acad Manag Ann. 2020;14(2):627–60.

52. 52.

    Hengstler M, Enkel E, Duelli S. Applied artificial intelligence and
    trust—the case of autonomous vehicles and medical assistance
    devices. Technol Forecast Soc Chang. 2016;105:105–20.

53. 53.

    Siau K, Wang W. Building trust in artificial intelligence, machine
    learning, and robotics. Cut Bus Technol J. 2018;31(2):47–53.

54. 54.

    Winfield AF, Jirotka M. Ethical governance is essential to building
    trust in robotics and artificial intelligence systems. Philos Trans
    R Soc A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2018;376(2133):20180085.

55. 55.

    Jacovi A, Marasović A, Miller T, Goldberg Y. Formalizing trust in
    artificial intelligence: prerequisites, causes and goals of human
    trust in AI. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness,
    accountability, and transparency; 2021. p. 624–35.

56. 56.

    Asan O, Bayrak AE, Choudhury A. Artificial intelligence and human
    trust in healthcare: focus on clinicians. J Med Internet Res.
    2020;22(6):e15154.

57. 57.

    Matheny M, Israni ST, Ahmed M, Whicher D. Artificial intelligence in
    health care: the hope, the hype, the promise, the peril. Washington,
    DC: National Academy of Medicine; 2019.

58. 58.

    Rigby MJ. Ethical dimensions of using artificial intelligence in
    health care. AMA J Ethics. 2019;21(2):121–4.

59. 59.

    Bates DW, Auerbach A, Schulam P, Wright A, Saria S. Reporting and
    implementing interventions involving machine learning and artificial
    intelligence. Ann Intern Med. 2020;172(11_Supplement):S137–44.

60. 60.

    Makarov VA, Stouch T, Allgood B, Willis CD, Lynch N. Best practices
    for artificial intelligence in life sciences research. Drug Discov
    Today. 2021;26(5):1107–10.

61. 61.

    Dupuy A, Simon RM. Critical review of published microarray studies
    for cancer outcome and guidelines on statistical analysis and
    reporting. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99(2):147–57.

62. 62.

    Shi L, Campbell G, Jones WD, et al. The MicroArray quality control
    (MAQC)-II study of common practices for the development and
    validation of microarray-based predictive models. Nat Biotechnol.
    2010;28(8):827–38.

63. 63.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF, Tsamardinos I, Hardin D, Levy S. A
    comprehensive evaluation of multicategory classification methods for
    microarray gene expression cancer diagnosis. Bioinformatics.
    2005;21(5):631–43.

64. 64.

    Guyon I, Aliferis C, Cooper G, Elisseeff A, Pellet JP, Spirtes P,
    Statnikov A. Design and analysis of the causation and prediction
    challenge. In: Causation and prediction challenge. PMLR; 2008. p.
    1–33.

65. 65.

    https://​www.​fda.​gov/​medical-devices/​software-medical-device-samd/​artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning-aiml-enabled-medical-devices.

66. 66.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Schildcrout JS, Shepherd
    BE, Harrell FE Jr. Factors influencing the statistical power of
    complex data analysis protocols for molecular signature development
    from microarray data. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4922.

Footnotes

1

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_2

Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems

Constantin Aliferis¹   and Gyorgy Simon¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

The chapter provides a broad introduction to the foundations of health
AI and ML systems and is organized as follows: (1) Theoretical
properties and formal vs. heuristic systems: computability,
incompleteness theorem, space and time complexity, exact vs. asymptotic
complexity, complexity classes and how to establish complexity of
problems even in the absence of known algorithms that solve them,
problem complexity vs. algorithm and program complexity, and various
other properties. Moreover, we discuss the practical implications of
complexity for system tractability, the folly of expecting Moore’s Law
and large-scale computing to solve intractable problems, and common
techniques for creating tractable systems that operate in intractable
problem spaces. We also discuss the distinction between heuristic and
formal systems and show that they exist on a continuum rather than in
separate spaces. (2) Foundations of AI including logics and logic based
systems (rule based systems, semantic networks, planning systems search,
NLP parsers), symbolic vs. non-symbolic AI, Reasoning with Uncertainty,
Decision Making theory, Bayesian Networks, and AI/ML programming
languages. (3) Foundations of Computational Learning Theory: ML as
search, ML as geometrical construction and function optimization, role
of inductive biases, PAC learning, VC dimension, Theory of Feature
Selection, Theory of Causal Discovery. Optimal Bayes Classifier, No Free
Lunch Theorems, Universal Function Approximation, generative vs.
discriminative models; Bias-Variance Decomposition of error and
essential concepts of mathematical statistics.

Keywords

Properties of AI/ML modelsComputational complexity (time,
space)Tractable vs intractable computer solutionsSymbolic and
non-symbolic AIShallow vs. ontologically rich AIBayesian networksMachine
Learning theoretical foundations

Theoretical AI/ML Properties and Formal Vs Heuristic Systems

We will first address a few key concepts regarding studying and
understanding, but also designing, AI systems by way of their formal
properties. By formal properties we mean theoretical properties that are
mathematical or computational, and technical and objective in nature.

Computability/Provability and Turing-Church Thesis

The most foundational property for any computer system (not just AI/ML
systems) is computability, that is the fundamental question of whether
there can even exist a computer program or system that achieves the
computation needed for the inferences that we want this system to
perform. Goedel [1] proved a theorem that shook the mathematical and
computer science worlds.

- Goedel’s celebrated “incompleteness theorem” shows that any
  non-trivial mathematical system for making deductive inferences is
  either complete or consistent but not both. Or stated differently,
  statements can be formed in this system that are true but cannot be
  proven if we wish to maintain the correctness of deductions.

- A complete system is one that can deduce (or prove) from the axioms of
  the system all statements that are true.

- A consistent system is one that does not produce contradictory
  conclusions (which entails false conclusions).

- Correspondingly, in the realm of computing there are functions that
  are not computable, that is there is no computer program that can
  compute them.

These two results (provability and computability) are essentially
mirroring each other because there is a close correspondence
relationship between a “proof” in a mathematical system and a “program”
in an equivalent computing system implementing the mathematical system.
Non-computable functions are the ones that cannot be proven and vice
versa.

Notice that the existence of non-computable functions/non-provable
statements is with reference to a specific computing system. A different
system may be able to prove certain statements at the expense of not
being able to prove others that the first system can. Also, we note that
in systems involving a finite number of domain elements, we do not face
restrictions in computability. However, this is of small consolation if
we realize that even systems as “basic” as common arithmetic, for
example, involve many non computable functions.

What is the relationship of computability/provability in the
computational/mathematical realm with that in human intelligence and
reasoning?

The Turing-Church thesis posits that everything that the human mind can
infer can also be inferred by a computer/mathematical system [1].
According to the thesis, there are no special functions of human
intelligence that a computer or mathematical system cannot emulate. This
thesis is axiomatic, meaning not proven. From what we know so far from
neuroscience, cognitive science etc., there is nothing in the human
brain that a computer system cannot model in principle, and the vast
majority of AI scientists accept the Turing-Church thesis.

Computational Complexity of a Problem, Algorithm of Program

Computational complexity of a program refers to the efficiency of
running a computer program that solves a particular problem according to
a specific algorithm (that the program implements). In other words, it
describes (for problems that can be solved by computer), how expensive
is to solve the problem. Computational complexity is in the form of a
function that typically takes the size of the problem instance as
inputs.

Computational complexity of an algorithm applies the same rationale to
algorithms instead of programs. Typically we analyze computational
complexity at the level of algorithms assuming that programs will be the
most efficient implementation of the algorithm (when exceptions happen
in practice, we state upfront that a particular implementation of an
algorithm is not as efficient as it can be).

Computational complexity of a problem is then analyzed at the level of
the most efficient algorithm known (or that could be devised but not yet
known—we will see later how this is accomplished) for solving this
problem.

Space complexity refers to how much space the computer
program/algorithm/problem class requires to reach a solution. Time
complexity refers to how much time the computer
program/algorithm/problem class requires to reach a solution. Because
different computers differ greatly in the time needed to execute the
same basic operation (e.g., one addition or one access of a random
access memory location, etc.) we often measure time complexity not in
units of time but in numbers of some essential operation (and then we
can translate these units to time units for available computer systems).
Because the differences between computers are within constant factors,
this does not make a difference in an asymptotic sense.

Worst, average, and best-case complexity. Often, not all problem
instances require the same amount of resources (space or time) to be
solved by the same program/algorithm. Worst case complexity refers to
the cost of the worst (most expensive) instance of the problem when
solved by the best possible algorithm (or, alternative for a specific
algorithm of interest). Best case complexity refers to the cost of the
best (least expensive) instance of the problem. Average case complexity
refers to the cost averaged over all instances of the problem.

Exact complexity refers to a precise complexity for example:

[$$ Cost(x)={x}^2 $$]

(1)

where x is the size of the i^(th) problem instance. In this example, the
cost of solving the problem is exactly the square of the size of the
problem instance.

Asymptotic complexity refers to complexity as an asymptotic growth
function, i.e., that is how fast the complexity grows as input size
grows. For example,

[$$ Cost(x)=O\left(f(x)\right) $$]

(2)

The “Big O” notation O(f(.)) denotes that there is a problem instance
size k, above which the complexity (cost) of all problem instances of
size at least as large as k, is bounded from above within a positive
constant from the value of function f(.), or more compactly stated:

[$$ \exists k\;\mathrm{s}.\mathrm{t}.,\forall x\ge k: Cost(x)\le cf(x)
$$]

- Where ∃ is the existential operator (denoting that the quantity in the
  scope of the operator exists)

- ∀ is the universal operator denoting that for all entities in the
  scope of the operator a statement that follows is true

- x is the size of the i^(th) problem instance

- Cost (x) is the computational cost of running the algorithm for input
  size x

- k is a input size threshold above which the complexity statement holds

- c is a positive constant

- “S.t.” is the common abbreviation “such that”.

We often use asymptotic cost complexity for two reasons: (a) It
eliminates confusion created by differences in the speeds of various
computer systems since in practice these are all within a small constant
factor of each other. (b) It shifts the attention to the broad classes
of rates of cost growth (e.g. linear, quadratic, exponential, etc.) and
not the precise cost formulas that can be convoluted. Mathematical
analysis can accordingly be greatly simplified.

To understand the implications of asymptotic growth contrast the
polynomial asymptotic complexity of formula (1) with the one below:

[$$ Cost(x)=O\left({2}^x\right) $$]

(3)

The following Table 1 shows how quickly these cost functions grow
(assuming, for illustration purposes, c = 1). For input sizes above 100,
the cost in terms of space and time complexity grows to sizes comparable
to the size of the universe (measured in atoms) and quickly becomes much
larger than the size of the universe. This means that there is not
enough physical space or time to solve these problems!

Table 1

Demonstration of the practical significance of asymptotic computational
complexity

+----------+-------------+---------------+------------------------------+------------+
|          | Quadratic   | Exponential   | Related to complexity O      |            |
|          | Cost        | Cost          | (2^(X))                      |            |
+:=========+:============+:==============+:=============+:==============+:===========+
| Size of  | If cost of  | Cost of       | Moore’s Law  | Parallelize   | Other      |
| problem  | computation | computation   | (here: If    | (linearly by  | comments   |
| instance | grows as O  | grows as O    | speed        | using m CPUs) |            |
|          | (x²)        | (2^(x))       | doubled      |               |            |
|          |             |               | every        | How many CPUs |            |
|          |             |               | 4 years)     | needed?       |            |
|          |             |               |              |               |            |
|          |             |               | How many     | (within a     |            |
|          |             |               | years needed | constant      |            |
|          |             |               | until CPUs   | factor)       |            |
|          |             |               | catch up     |               |            |
|          |             |               | starting at  |               |            |
|          |             |               | size 100 and |               |            |
|          |             |               | cost = 2¹⁰⁰? |               |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+------------+
| 1        | 1           | 2             | T            | 2             | T          |
|          |             |               |              |               |            |
|          |             |               | R            |               | R          |
|          |             |               |              |               |            |
|          |             |               | A            |               | A          |
|          |             |               |              |               |            |
|          |             |               | C            |               | C          |
|          |             |               |              |               |            |
|          |             |               | T            |               | T          |
|          |             |               |              |               |            |
|          |             |               | A            |               | A          |
|          |             |               |              |               |            |
|          |             |               | B            |               | B          |
|          |             |               |              |               |            |
|          |             |               | L            |               | L          |
|          |             |               |              |               |            |
|          |             |               | E            |               | E          |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+            |
| 2        | 4           | 4             |              | 4             |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+            |
| 3        | 9           | 8             |              | 8             |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+            |
| 4        | 16          | 16            |              | 16            |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+            |
| 5        | 25          | 32            |              | 32            |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+            |
| 6        | 36          | 64            |              | 64            |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+            |
| 7        | 49          | 128           |              | 128           |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+            |
| 8        | 64          | 256           |              | 256           |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+            |
| 9        | 81          | 512           |              | 512           |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+            |
| 10       | 100         | 1024          |              | 1024          |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+------------+
| 20       | 400         | 1,048,576     |              | 1,048,576     | ≥ 10⁶      |
+----------+-------------+---------------+              +---------------+------------+
| 30       | 900         | 1,073,741,824 |              | 1,073,741,824 | ≥ 10⁹      |
+----------+-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+------------+
| 100      | 10⁴         | 2¹⁰⁰          | Wait for     | 2¹⁰⁰ CPUs     | Comparable |
|          |             |               | 280 years    |               | to number  |
|          |             |               |              |               | of atoms   |
|          |             |               |              |               | in the     |
|          |             |               |              |               | universe   |
+----------+-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+------------+
| 1000     | 10⁶         | 2¹⁰⁰⁰         | Wait for     | 2¹⁰⁰⁰ CPUs    | > > than   |
|          |             |               | 3680 years   | needed        | size of    |
|          |             |               |              |               | known      |
|          |             |               |              |               | universe   |
+----------+-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+            |
| 10⁶      | 10¹²        | 2^(1,000,000) | Wait for ~40 | 2^(1,000,000) |            |
|          |             |               | million      | CPUs          |            |
|          |             |               | years        |               |            |
|          |             |               |              | Needed        |            |
+----------+-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+------------+

The fallacy/pitfall that we will “use a big enough cluster” (or other
high-performance computing environment) to solve a high-complexity
problem is addressed in the parallel column where it is shown that the
number of CPUs needed would quickly exceed the size of the universe. The
fallacy/pitfall that Moore’s law (e.g., computing power doubles every
few years) will provide enough power is addressed in the Moore’s law
column where is shown that millions of years would be needed to address
problems of any significant size, and after some point the space and
time requirements exceed the size of the known universe.

We will refer to problems, algorithms, programs and systems exhibiting
such exorbitant complexities, as intractable. The following pitfalls and
corresponding best practices need be taken into consideration:

Pitfall 2.1

From a rigorous science point of view, an AI/ML algorithm, program or
system with intractable complexity does not constitute a viable solution
to the corresponding problem.

Pitfall 2.2

Parallelization cannot make an intractable problem, algorithm or program
practical.

Pitfall 2.3

Moore’s law improvements to computing power cannot make an intractable
problem algorithm or program practical.

Best Practice 2.1

Pursue development of AI/ML algorithm, program or systems that have
tractable complexity.

Best Practice 2.2

Do not rely on parallelization to make intractable problems tractable.
Pursue tractable algorithms and factor in the tractability analysis any
parallelization.

Best Practice 2.3

Do not rely on Moore’s law improvements to make an intractable problem
algorithm or hard program practical. Pursue tractable algorithms and
factor in the tractability analysis any gains from Moore’s law.

It is very common in modern AI/ML to be able to address problems that
have worst case exponential (or other intractable) complexity and
routinely tackle, for example, analyses of datasets with >10⁶ variables
for problems with worst-case exponential cost by using a number of
strategies that we will summarize below. First we round up the
introduction to complexity properties with an overview of complexity
classes.

Reduction of Problems to Established Complexity Class

Earlier we mentioned that computational complexity of a problem can be
analyzed at the level of the most efficient algorithm known, or that
could be devised but not yet known. How is this possible? One ingenious
way to achieve this was discovered by Cook who proved a remarkable
theorem (and received a Turing award for the work) [2]. Karp, based on
Cook’s result, showed how to prove that several other problems were in
the same complexity class (and also won a Turing award for this work)
[3].

The above constitute a generalizable methodology, very widely used in
computer science and AI/ML, comprising two steps:

1.  1.

    First establish via mathematical proof that a problem class P1 has
    an intrinsic minimum complexity regardless of the algorithm or
    program that has been devised or could be devised to solve it (i.e.,
    intrinsic to the problem and independent of algorithm, in the sense
    that no Turing machine can exist that could do better). This part
    does not require the knowledge of a conventional algorithm that
    solves P1.

     

2.  2.

    Second, in order to prove that problem Pi at hand belongs to the
    same or harder complexity class as P1, it suffices to establish that
    a fast reduction (e.g., with polynomial-time complexity) exists that
    maps problems and their solutions in P1 to problems and solutions in
    Pi, such that when a problem solution to a Pi problem instance is
    found then it can be converted fast to a problem solution for P1.

     

“Fast” in this context means that: cost of the reduction + cost of
solving the P1 version of the Pi problem, will be no costlier
(asymptotically) than solving Pi. For example, if Pi has cost O (2^(X)),
a reduction with cost O (x²) satisfies the requirement since O
(2^(x) + x²) = O (2^(x)).

Step 1 has to be accomplished only once for a prototypical problem class
and is of the greatest mathematical difficulty. Step 2, which is
typically considerably easier, is done each time a new method is
introduced and is conducted once for the new method, with reference the
prototypical problem class.

Cook’s discovery provided exactly step 1 and opened the flood gates via
the reduction methods of Karp (step 2) for assigning whole problem
classes to complexity cost classes regardless of the algorithm or
problem used to solve it and regardless of whether even a single
algorithm is currently known for solving the problem.

AI/ML and computer scientists often use prototypical complexity classes
to study and categorize problems and the algorithms solving them, the
most common ones being:

- The P complexity class: contains problems that can be solved in
  polynomial time. These are considered as tractable (assuming, as is
  typically the case, that the polynomial degree is small).

- The NP complexity class: contains problems that have the property that
  a solution can be verified as correct in polynomial time.

- The NP-Complete complexity class: These are problems that are in NP
  and moreover if any of the problems in this class can be solved in
  polynomial time, then all other problems in the class can also be
  solved in polynomial time.

- NP Hard problems. Are problems that are as hard as those in NP but it
  is unknown whether they are in NP.

Several other classes exist and are subject to study and exploration (as
to what problems belong to them or what relationships exist among them).

The practical significance of the complexity classes is as follows:

- Problems in P are considered as tractable (assuming, as is typically
  the case, that the polynomial degree is small).

- Problems in NP-Complete or NP Hard classes are considered very hard
  and it is extremely unlikely that algorithms that solve such problems
  tractably in the worst case, can be created.

A fundamental property of AI/ML problem solving is that it usually
operates in problem spaces belonging to the very high
complexity/worst-case intractable classes. Many strategies have been
invented to circumvent these theoretical difficulties and guide creation
of efficient algorithms and systems, however (discussed later in the
present chapter).

A List of Key and Commonly Used Formal Properties of AI/ML (Table 2)

Many additional special-purpose or ancillary formal properties can also
be studied and established such as: whether performance estimators are
biased, statistical decision false positive and false negative errors
when fitting models, whether scoring rules or distance metrics used are
proper or improper, various measures of statistical certainty, etc. We
emphasize that the properties listed in Table 2 have immediate and
obvious relationship with, and consequences for, the common objectives
of health AI/ML. In the present volume we will refrain from study of
properties that do not have strong relevance to the success or failure
of AI/ML modeling. For example, the accuracy of a predictive model has
immediate consequences for its usefuleness. By contrast, the centrality
measures of network science models say very little about their
predictive (or causal ) value. Similarly, the use of perplexity measure
to study the degree by which a Large Language Model has learned
(essentially the grammar underlying) a text corpus, does not indicate
the clinical error severity resuting from output errors made by the
model, which may of much higher importance for health applications. 

Table 2

Commonly-considered important formal (theoretical) properties that
characterize all AI/ML algorithms, programs and systems

+:--------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  1. Representation power: Can the models produced by the method     |
| represent all problem instances of interest and their solutions?    |
|                                                                     |
|  2. Semantic clarity and transparency: Do the programs and the      |
| corresponding models exhibit clarity based on precisely understood  |
| semantics (i.e., formally defined meaning)? Are the models produced |
| by the method easy to understand (i.e., are they “transparent box”) |
| and can they be easily understood by human inspection (i.e., are    |
| they human interpretable, aka explainable)?                         |
|                                                                     |
|  3. Soundness: When the methods output a solution to a problem      |
| instance, is this solution correct? If there is a degree of error   |
| (measured on some scale of loss, risk or other scale) how large is  |
| the error and its uncertainty?                                      |
|                                                                     |
|  4. Completeness: Does the method produce correct answers to all    |
| problem instances? If only a fraction, how large is the fraction?   |
|                                                                     |
|  5. Computational complexity. What is the exact or asymptotic       |
| computational complexity of running the method to produce solutions |
| as a function of the input size?                                    |
|                                                                     |
|  For AI/ML methods that produce models as intermediate step in      |
| producing solutions, we differentiate                               |
|                                                                     |
|   (a) Computational complexity of producing problem-solving models: |
| What is the exact or asymptotic computational complexity of running |
| the method to produce models as a function of the input size (e.g., |
| number of variables, or sample size)? And                           |
|                                                                     |
|   (b) Computational complexity of executing problem-solving models: |
| What is the exact or asymptotic computational complexity of running |
| the models to produce solutions as a function of the input size     |
| (e.g., number of variables, or sample size)?                        |
|                                                                     |
|  6. Space complexity. What is the exact or asymptotic space         |
| complexity of running the method to produce solutions as a function |
| of the input size? For AI/ML methods that produce models as         |
| intermediate step in producing solutions we can differentiate:      |
|                                                                     |
|   (a) Space complexity of producing problem-solving models: What is |
| the exact or asymptotic space complexity of running the method to   |
| produce models as a function of the input size (e.g., number of     |
| variables, or sample size)? And                                     |
|                                                                     |
|   (b) Space complexity of executing problem-solving models: What is |
| the exact or asymptotic space complexity of running the models to   |
| produce solutions as a function of the input size (e.g., number of  |
| variables, or sample size)?                                         |
|                                                                     |
|  7. Additional cost functions: For example, financial costs to      |
| obtain and store input data and run analyses on a compute           |
| environment, either at model discovery or at model deployment time? |
| Compliance risks. Ethical, litigation or reputational risks, etc.   |
|                                                                     |
|  8. Sample complexity, learning curves, power-sample requirements:  |
| How does the error of the produced models vary as function of       |
| sample size of the discovery data? How much sample size is needed   |
| in order to build models with a specific degree of accuracy and     |
| statistical error uncertainty, and (separately) to establish        |
| statistically superiority to random or alternative models and       |
| performance levels?                                                 |
|                                                                     |
|  9. Probability and decision theoretic consistency: Is the ML/AI    |
| method compatible with probability and utility theory?              |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

Formal (aka theoretical) properties are “hard” technical properties
(i.e., mathematical, immutable). There exist “softer” properties (i.e.,
less technical, more transient, or even harder to establish objectively)
such as compliance to regulatory or accreditation guidance,
reporting standards, ethical principles, etc.

An additional category with special significance is that of empirical
performance properties. These are obtained using methods of empirical
evaluation (chapters “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”, “The Development Process
and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”, “Evaluation”, and “Characterizing,
Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML & AI Models in Clinical
and Organizational Application”).

Importance of theoretical and empirical properties. Taken together these
characterizations of AI/ML systems provide an invaluable framework for:

1.  (a)

     Understanding the strengths and limitations of AI/ML methods,
    models and systems;

     

2.  (b)

     Improving them;

     

3.  (c)

     Understanding, anticipating, and effectively managing the risks and
    benefits of using AI/ML; and

     

4.  (d)

     Choosing the right method for the problem at hand, among the myriad
    of available methods and systems.

     

We will see many examples of these formal, empirical and ancillary
properties in the chapters ahead, considered in context. Chapters
“Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
and Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML” describe properties
of main AI/ML methods and chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development
and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems” provides a summary
table with the main properties of all main health AI/Ml methods.

Principled Strategies to Achieve Practically Efficient Algorithms, Programs and Systems for Worst-Case Intractable Problems

Since most intractability results pertain to worst-case complete and
sound problem solving, a number of strategies can be used to achieve
tractability, by trading off computational costs with reduction in
soundness, completeness or worst-case complexity. Such common
example strategies are listed below.

1.  (a)

    Focus on portions of the problem space that admit tractable
    solutions and ignore the portions with intractable solutions. In
    problem domains where the worst case complexity diverges strongly
    form the average case complexity, such an approach is especially
    appealing. For example, in ML problems, focus on restricted data
    distributions or target function sub-classes that lead to tractable
    learning. Or focus on sparse regions of the data-generating
    processes and ignore dense (and commonly intractable) regions.

     

2.  (b)

    Exploit prior domain knowledge to constrain and thus speed-up
    problem solving. For example, in discovery problems, avoid
    generating and examining many possible solutions that are
    incompatible with prior biomedical knowledge about the credible
    solution space. This may viewed as a case of “knowledge transfer”
    from this or similar problem domains. This is also often called
    pruning, where large branches, that are guaranteed to not contain
    the correct solution, are eliminated from vast solution search
    trees.

     

3.  (c)

    Instead of an intractable complete solution, provide a tractable
    localized part of the full solution that is still of significant
    value. For example, when pursuing a causal model of some domain,
    focus on the partial causal model around some variables of interest
    (i.e., biological pathway discovery involving a phenotype instead of
    full network discovery).

     

4.  (d)

    Instead of an intractable complete solution, provide a tractable
    non-local portion of the full solution that is still of significant
    value. For example, when pursuing a causal model of some domain
    allow discovery of a portion of correct relationships of interest
    (i.e., biological causal relationship discovery involving factors
    across the data generating network instead of full network
    discovery; or recovering a correct but unoriented causal network
    instead of the oriented one).

     

5.  (e)

    Instead of producing perfectly accurate but intractable solutions
    focus on more tractable but acceptable approximations of the true
    solutions.

     

6.  (f)

    Do not solve harder problems than what is needed by your
    application. A classic example demonstrating this principle is to
    prefer discriminative models over generative ones in predictive
    modeling. In plain language, this means that we can often solve a
    hard problem (e.g., what treatment to give to a patient with a
    kidney stone?) by building simple decision functions describing only
    relevant facts and not a full computational theory of the domain
    (e.g., a full theory of the function of the kidneys from the nephron
    up, and the interaction of the kidneys with the rest of the body are
    not needed to conclude that removing the stone or breaking it up
    with ultrasounds will be sufficient for curing the patient with a
    kidney stone).

     

7.  (g)

    Perform operations on compact representations. This strategy
    involves replacing intractable large data structures with
    declarative and highly compact representations. For example, “every
    person who suffers from a mental health disorder” encompasses an
    estimated 10⁹ people globally but does not enumerate or even
    identify them. This approach also involves operating on classes of
    the problem space simultaneously rather than each member in the
    class. This is particularly evident in several forms of ML modeling
    where astronomical numbers of model structures are scored at once
    and represented compactly.

     

Best Practice 2.4

When faced with intractable problems, consider using strategies for
mitigating the computational intractability by trading off with less
important characteristics of the desired solution.

Heuristic and Ad Hoc Approaches and the Prescientific-to Scientific Evolutionary AI/ML Continuum

The term “Heuristic” AI/ML methods or systems refers to several types of
systems or strategies: First, rules of thumb that may give a good
solution sometimes but do not guarantee this. Second, functions used
inside AI search methods to accelerate finding problem solutions. Third,
ad hoc systems, i.e., that are not designed based on a formal frameworks
for AI/ML, and do not guarantee strong or safe performance in a
generalizable sense. Fourth, methods and systems applied outside their
scope of guaranteed safe, effective, or efficient use (i.e., hoping that
an acceptable solution may be produced).

To clarify these concepts consider the following examples (note: all of
the mentioned methods and systems will be thoroughly discussed in this
and subsequent chapters):

- “We need at least 10 samples per variable when fitting an ordinary
  least squares regression model” is an example of the first type of
  heuristic. Another example of the first heuristic type is “choosing
  100 genes at random from a cancer microarray dataset will yield
  predictor models with very high accuracy for diagnosis, often near the
  performance of special gene selection algorithms” (for surprised
  readers, not familiar with such data, this is because there is large
  information overlap and redundancy among genes with respect to
  clinical cancer phenotypes).

- The “Manhattan distance” as an estimate for the spatial distance
  between the current location and the goal location in a robot
  navigation problem is a heuristic than when used inside the A* search
  algorithm (see later in present chapter) allows the algorithm to find
  a path with minimum cost to the goal. This is an example of the second
  type of heuristic.

- The well-known INTERNIST-I system for medical diagnosis in internal
  medicine was an example of the third type of heuristic AI. It lacked a
  formal AI foundation both in knowledge representation and inference.
  It was shown to be highly accurate in certain tests of medical
  diagnosis problems, however [4].

- Examples of the fourth type are: (1) using Naïve Bayes (a formal ML
  method that assumes very special distributions in order to be correct)
  in distributions where the assumptions are known to not hold, hoping
  that the error will be small. (2) Using Propensity Score (PS)
  techniques for estimating causal effects, without testing the
  distributional assumption that makes PS correct (i.e., “strong
  ignorability”, which is not testable within the PS framework). (3)
  Using Shapley values, a Nobel-Prize winning economics tool devised for
  value distribution in cooperative coalitions to explain “black box” ML
  models (a completely different task, for which the method was not
  designed or proven to be correct; as we will see later in the present
  volume, it can fail in a wide variety of models). (4) Using IBM
  Watson, a system designed and tested in an information retrieval task
  (Jeopardy game) for health discovery and care (for which it had no
  known properties of correctness or safety). (5) Using Large Language
  Models (LLMs), e.g., ChatGPT and similar systems (designed for NLP and
  conversational bot applications) for general-purpose AI tasks (not
  supported by the known properties of LLMs).

For the purposes of this book, the third and fourth type are most
interesting and we will focus on them in the remainder of this section.

In earlier times in the history of health AI/ML as well as broad AI/ML,
proponents of ad hoc (heuristic type 3) systems argued that as long as
heuristic systems worked well empirically they should be perfectly
acceptable especially if more formally-constructed systems did not match
the empirical performance of heuristic systems or if constructing formal
systems or establishing their properties was exceedingly hard.
Proponents of formal systems counter-argued that this ad-hoc approach to
AI was detrimental since one should never feel safe when applying such
systems, especially in high-stakes domains. At the same time many
proponents of the formal approach engaged in practices of the fourth
type of heuristic (not testing assumptions, or using a system designed
for task A, in unrelated task B).

From a more modern scientific perspective (with substantial benefit of
hindsight) of performant and safe systems operating in high-risk domains
such as health, the above historical debate is more settled today than
in the earlier days of exploring AI. Heuristic systems and practices
represent pre-scientific approaches in the sense that a true scientific
understanding of their behavior does not exist (yet) and that with
sufficient study in the future, a comprehensive understanding of a
heuristic system of today can be obtained. In other words, the heuristic
system of today will be the well-characterized, scientific,
non-heuristic system of tomorrow.

In this book we adopt the sharp distinction:

AI/ML systems with well understood theoretical properties and empirical
performance vs. systems that lack these properties (aka Heuristic
systems).

A further distinction can be made regarding whether a system is based on
formal foundations or being ad hoc. The importance of formal systems is
that they make the transition to well-understood systems faster and
easier. In the absence of formal foundations, it is hard to derive
properties and expected behavior. If formal foundations exist, often
many of the properties are immediately inherited from the general
properties of the underlying formal framework. In any case, deriving
formal properties of methods with strong formal foundations is vastly
easier than of ad hoc methods.

In addition, there is a strong practical interplay between theoretical
properties and empirical performance. If theory predicts a certain
behavior and empirical tests do not confirm it, this means that errors
likely occurred in how the models/systems have been implemented and
debugging is warranted. Alternatively, it may suggest that we operate in
a domain with characteristics that are different from the theoretical
assumptions of our model (and we need to change modeling tools or
strategy). If model A empirically outperforms model B on a task for
which A is not built but B is theoretically ideal, this suggests that
there are implementation errors or evaluation data/methodology errors in
model B, and so on. In other words, a strong theoretical understanding
bolsters, and is enhanced by, the empirical application and validation.
What is not working well is lacking one or both of these important
components (theoretical base + empirical base). More on the interplay of
theorical properties and empirical performance can be found in chapter
“Principles of Rigorous Development and Appraisal of ML and AI Methods
and Systems”.

It is also significant to realize that there is an evolutionary path
from pre-scientific informally-conceived systems, to
partially-understood (theoretically or empirically) systems, and finally
to fully-mature and well-understood AI/ML.

In earlier related work Aliferis and Miller [5] discussed the “grey
zone” between formal systems with known properties but with untestable
or unknown preconditions for correctness in some domain, and ad hoc
systems with unknown properties across the board. Their observation was
that both classes required a degree of faith (with no guarantees) for
future success. This early work can be elaborated taking into account
the following parameters: formal or ad hoc foundation; known theoretical
properties or not; whether the known properties are testable and have
been tested vs not; known empirical performance or not; and whether
empirical performance is satisfactory and what alternatives may exist.

The following table (Table 3) distills the above multi-dimensional space
to its essential cases and describes this landscape and developmental
journey from pre-scientific systems (lacking properties, rows 1, 3) to
intermediate level systems (with partial properties, rows 2, 4, 5, 6),
to mature reliable science-backed systems (with known properties, rows
7, 8). The table also points to pitfalls and BPs of building and using
systems of the listed characteristics.

It is worth emphasizing that systems with known properties are not
automatically optimal or even suitable for solving a problem. Knowledge
of properties of various methods and approaches can be used to find the
best solution for a task, however.

Chapters “Foundations of Causal ML” and “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems” further
elaborate on how these concepts can be implemented in practice during
the practical development of performant and safe AI/ML.

Table 3

Classification of AI/ML systems based on their formal foundation and
properties. The development spectrum from pre-scientific to mature
science-backed systems

+---+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
|   | Built on      | Known         | Known         | Comments and further      |
|   | formal theory | theoretical   | empirical     | dimensions/considerations |
|   |               | properties    | performance   |                           |
+:==+:==============+:==============+:==============+:==========================+
| 1 | No            | No            | No            | • Ad hoc with unknown     |
|   |               |               |               | theoretical properties    |
|   |               |               |               | and performance.          |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • Using such systems is a |
|   |               |               |               | major pitfall and use     |
|   |               |               |               | should be avoided until   |
|   |               |               |               | they are better           |
|   |               |               |               | understood.               |
+---+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
| 2 | No            | No            | Yes           | • Ad hoc with unknown     |
|   |               |               |               | properties but known      |
|   |               |               |               | empirical performance in  |
|   |               |               |               | a number of empirical     |
|   |               |               |               | evaluations.              |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • Using such systems is a |
|   |               |               |               | major risk and needs to   |
|   |               |               |               | take into account the     |
|   |               |               |               | range of evaluation, how  |
|   |               |               |               | good the performance is,  |
|   |               |               |               | whether the evaluation    |
|   |               |               |               | matches the application   |
|   |               |               |               | domain, and whether       |
|   |               |               |               | better alternatives       |
|   |               |               |               | exist.                    |
+---+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
| 3 | Yes           | No            | No            | • Systems with formal     |
|   |               |               |               | underpinnings but with    |
|   |               |               |               | unknown                   |
|   |               |               |               | theoretical properties    |
|   |               |               |               | and empirical             |
|   |               |               |               | performance.              |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • Examples of those       |
|   |               |               |               | systems are systems built |
|   |               |               |               | on established            |
|   |               |               |               | mathematical frameworks   |
|   |               |               |               | but being poorly mapped   |
|   |               |               |               | to a biomedical problem   |
|   |               |               |               | of interest.              |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • Using such systems is a |
|   |               |               |               | major pitfall and should  |
|   |               |               |               | be avoided until they are |
|   |               |               |               | better understood.        |
+---+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
| 4 | Yes           | No            | Yes           | • Systems with some       |
|   |               |               |               | formal underpinnings:     |
|   |               |               |               | built on formal           |
|   |               |               |               | foundations but with      |
|   |               |               |               | unknown properties and    |
|   |               |               |               | known empirical           |
|   |               |               |               | performance.              |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • Examples of those       |
|   |               |               |               | systems are systems built |
|   |               |               |               | on established            |
|   |               |               |               | mathematical or           |
|   |               |               |               | computational frameworks  |
|   |               |               |               | but being poorly mapped   |
|   |               |               |               | to a biomedical problem   |
|   |               |               |               | of interest.              |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • Using such systems      |
|   |               |               |               | entails major risks and   |
|   |               |               |               | should be avoided until   |
|   |               |               |               | risks are better          |
|   |               |               |               | understood.               |
+---+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
| 5 | No            | Yes           | No            | • Systems initially       |
|   |               |               |               | starting as ad hoc that   |
|   |               |               |               | eventually evolved to     |
|   |               |               |               | having known properties   |
|   |               |               |               | but yet unknown empirical |
|   |               |               |               | performance.              |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • This case is in         |
|   |               |               |               | paractice equivalent to   |
|   |               |               |               | formal systems of type    |
|   |               |               |               | (6).                      |
+---+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
| 6 | Yes           | Yes           | No            | • Theoretically           |
|   |               |               |               | understood but poorly     |
|   |               |               |               | tested (not yet mature)   |
|   |               |               |               | formal systems.           |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • Lack of empirical       |
|   |               |               |               | performance data leaves   |
|   |               |               |               | open the possibility for  |
|   |               |               |               | misalignment of theory    |
|   |               |               |               | with the application      |
|   |               |               |               | domain. Potentially high  |
|   |               |               |               | risk of empirical failure |
|   |               |               |               | indicates the need for    |
|   |               |               |               | empirical validation      |
|   |               |               |               | before deployment.        |
+---+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
| 7 | No            | Yes           | Yes           | • Systems initially       |
|   |               |               |               | starting as ad hoc that   |
|   |               |               |               | eventually evolved to     |
|   |               |               |               | having known properties   |
|   |               |               |               | and known performance.    |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • This case is in         |
|   |               |               |               | practice equivalent to    |
|   |               |               |               | formal systems of type    |
|   |               |               |               | (8).                      |
+---+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
| 8 | Yes           | Yes           | Yes           | • Fully-realized, fully   |
|   |               |               |               | mature formal systems     |
|   |               |               |               | with known properties and |
|   |               |               |               | empirical performance.    |
|   |               |               |               |                           |
|   |               |               |               | • They can immediately    |
|   |               |               |               | inform whether they can   |
|   |               |               |               | solve the problem at hand |
|   |               |               |               | (in absolute terms and    |
|   |               |               |               | compared with             |
|   |               |               |               | alternatives).            |
+---+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------------------+

Pitfall 2.4

Believing that heuristic systems can give “something for nothing” and
that have capabilities that surpass those of well-characterized systems.
In reality heuristic systems are pre-scientific or in early development
stages.

Best Practice 2.5

As much as possible use models and systems with established properties
(theoretical + empirical). Work within the maturation process starting
from systems with unknown behaviors and no guarantees, to systems with
guaranteed properties.

Foundations of AI: Logics and Other Symbolic AI and Non symbolic Extensions

Symbolic vs. Non-Symbolic AI

Logic is a staple of science and the cornerstone of all types of
so-called symbolic AI.

- By symbolic AI we refer to AI formalisms that focus on representing
  the world with symbolic objects and logical relations, and making
  inferences using logical deductions.

- Symbolic systems typically contain deep, structured representation of
  the problem solving domain.

Examples include production systems, rule-based systems, semantic
networks, deductive reasoners, causal modeling with detailed causal
relations, and other types of systems discussed later in this chapter.

- By contrast, non symbolic AI encompasses various formal systems that
  focus on uncertain and stochastic relationships using various forms of
  inference that either rely on probability theory or can be understood
  in terms of probability.

- Non-symbolic systems are typically shallow representations of
  input-output relationships without a detailed model of the structure
  of the problem solving domain.

- Terminology Caution: Deep Learning neural networks are designated as
  such because they have many hidden node layers (as opposed to shallow
  ANNs that have few). However they are both shallow AI systems because
  they lack a rich representation of the domain and its entities (i.e.,
  they are ontologically shallow).

Examples of non-symbolic AI (in the ontological shallowness
sense) include connectionist AI that approaches AI from an artificial
neural network point of view, probabilistic AI that uses a probability
theory perspective, shallow causal models, genetic algorithms that adopt
an evolutionary search perspective, reinforcement learning,
predominantly within the data-driven ML which is the currently dominant
paradigm of AI, and most recently Large Language Models (LLMs).

There exist also formalisms that transcend and attempt to unify symbolic
and non-symbolic AI such as causal probabilistic graphs, probabilistic
logics or ANN-implemented rule systems.

See chapter “Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and
Successes of AI/ML in Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring
problems, and the role of Best Practices” for discussion of this
important class of AI/ML.

Propositional Logic (PL)

Propositional logic [1, 6] is the simplest form of logic allowing the
construction of sentences like:

[$$ {\displaystyle
\begin{array}{l}\left(\begin{array}{l}\left(\left(\mathrm{Symptom}\_\mathrm{positive}\_\mathrm{A}=\mathrm{True}\right)\wedge
\left(\mathrm{Test}\_\mathrm{positive}\_\mathrm{B}=\mathrm{False}\right)\right)\\
{}\vee \neg
\left(\mathrm{Test}\_\mathrm{positive}\_\mathrm{C}=\mathrm{True}\right)\end{array}\right)\\
{}\to \mathrm{Diagnosis}\_\mathrm{Disease}1=\mathrm{True}\end{array}}
$$]

Or in words, if the patient has symptom A and test B is negative, or if
she does not have a positive test C, then she has Disease1.

As can be seen, PL uses propositions (statements) that can take values
in {True, False}, and logical connectives (and, or, implication,
negation, equivalence, parentheses). By combining the above based on the
straightforward syntax of PL, we create complex sentences that may be
valid or not. Other than the (tautological) meaning of the truth values
{True, False}, the precise meaning (semantics) of the propositions is
embedded in them (i.e., it is not explicit in the PL language).

A PL Knowledge Base (KB) contains a set of sentences that are stated as
axioms (true propositions or valid complex sentences) by the user and
then other sentences can be constructed and proven to be valid or not
using the truth table of a PL sentence. The correspondence between the
validity of propositions and sentences in the KB and the real world is
provided by the notion of a model for that KB which is some part of the
world (e.g., a biomedical problem domain) where the KB truth assignments
hold. Syntactic operations (e.g., by a computer) on the KB prove the
validity of sentences in all models of that KB. Inferring that some
manipulation of computer symbols has automatically a valid
interpretation in the real world (originating from the validity of
axioms) is commonly referred by the expression “the computer will take
care of the syntax and the semantics will take care of themselves”.

Truth tables can be used to show that a sentence is valid or not by
examining if the sentence is true for all truth assignments of the
propositions involved (hence valid), otherwise it is not valid.
Sentences are decomposed to smaller parts in a truth table so that truth
values for the sentence can be determined. Commonly-used inference steps
are encapsulated in inference rules such as Modus Ponens,
And-elimination, And-introduction, Resolution, etc. These are used to
avoid constructing very large/complex truth tables. The computational
complexity of proving that a sentence in PL is valid is worst-case
intractable but quite manageable in small domains [1].

First Order Logic (FOL)

FOL is a vastly more powerful form of logic than PL and can represent:

- Objects (e.g., patients, genes, proteins, hospital units)

- Properties of objects (e.g., alive, up-regulated, secondary structure,
  full)

- Relations among objects and terms(e.g., patient 1 has a more severe
  disease than patient 2, gene 1 determines phenotype 1, protein 1
  catalyzes chemical reaction 2, hospital unit 1 is less utilized than
  unit 2)

- Functions (e.g., BMI of a patient P, length of a gene G, molecular
  weight of a protein P, bed capacity of a hospital unit U)

The syntax of FOL uses:

- Objects,

- Constants,

- Variables,

- Predicates used to describe relations among constants or variables,

- Functions over constants, variables or other functions

- Connectives: equivalent, implies, and, or

- Parentheses

- Negation

- Quantifiers: there exists, for all (defined over objects)

- Terms formed from constants, variables and functions over those

- Atomic sentences defined over predicates applied on terms

- Complex sentences defined using atomic sentences, connectives,
  quantifiers, negation and parentheses.

For a technical syntax specification see [1].

Higher order logics allow expression of quantifiers applied over
functions and relations (not just objects). These logics are more
powerful, but inference is much harder, thus logic-based AI
typically deals with FOL or simpler derivative formalisms.

The application of FOL (or derivatives) to build a Knowledge Base (KB)
useful for problem solving in some domain is an instance of Knowledge
engineering. It involves: (a) ontology engineering, that is identifying
and describing in FOL (or other appropriate language chosen during
ontology engineering) the ontology (objects, types of relationships) in
that problem domain; and (b) knowledge acquisition that is identifying
and describing in FOL the relevant axioms (facts) describing key aspects
of the domain, and from which inferences can be drawn to solve problems.

In the health sciences and healthcare a number of ontologies have been
created and are widely used. A most significant component of those are
the common data models used to describe entities and variables. These
are of essential value for both symbolic and data driven ML methods and
for harmonizing data and knowledge across health care providers,
studies, and scientific projects. See chapter “Data Preparation,
Transforms, Quality, and Management” for a discussion of the most
commonly used common data models and standards.

Knowledge engineering could be substituted for ordinary programming
however the fundamental advantage of Knowledge engineering is that it is
a declarative approach to programming with significant advantages
(whenever applicable) such as: ability to represent compactly facts and
complex inferences that may be very cumbersome to conventional
procedural or functional programming methods. Moreover, once the AI
knowledge engineer has constructed the knowledge base, then a myriad of
inferences can be made using the pre-existing inferential mechanisms of
FOL. In other words, no new problem solving apparatus is needed, because
it is provided by FOL. Declarative programming needs only a precise
statement of the problem.

Logical Inference

FOL has a number of sound inference procedures that differ in their
completeness. Such procedures are Generalized Modus Ponens (that can be
used in Forward-Chaining, Backward-Chaining directions), and Resolution
Refutation.

Forward chaining is an algorithm that starts from the facts and
generates consequences, whereas Backward chaining starts from what we
wish to prove and works backward to establish the necessary precedents.
The “chaining” refers to the fact that as new sentences are proven
correct, they can be used to activate new rules until no more inferences
can be made.

- As a very simple example consider a KB with:

  -------------------------- ----------------------
  Axioms:                    A, B
  Rules of the type x → y:   A → C, and C ∧ B → D
  -------------------------- ----------------------

- From this KB,

- The Forward Chaining algorithm will perform the following sequence of
  operations:
  1.  1.

      From A and A → C it will infer C and add it to the KB

       

  2.  2.

      From B, C and C ∧ B → it will infer D and add to the KB

       

  3.  3.

      Will terminate because no new inferences can be made

       

- The Backward Chaining algorithm from the same original KB, and user
  request to prove D, will:
  1.  1.

      First see that D is not an axiom

       

  2.  2.

      Identify that C ∧ B → D can be used to try and prove D

       

  3.  3.

      Will seek to prove C and B separately

       

  4.  4.

      B is an axiom so it is true

       

  5.  5.

      C is not an axiom but rule A → C can be used to prove it

       

  6.  6.

      Will seek to prove A

       

  7.  7.

      A is an axiom thus true

       

  8.  8.

      Thus (by backtracking to (5) C is true

       

  9.  9.

      Thus (by backtracking to (2) D is true

       

  10. 10.

      Terminate reporting success in proving D

       

Forward and backward chaining strategies are widely used in biomedical
symbolic AI expert systems. They are not FOL-complete however! Recall
that Goedel proved that in sufficiently complex reasoning systems (such
as FOL) there are true statements that cannot be proven from the axioms
of the system. He also proved that if there are provable sentences, then
there exists an algorithm to generate the proof. Robinson [7] discovered
such an algorithm (Resolution Refutation) which operates by introducing
the negation of a sentence we wish to prove in the knowledge base and
deriving a contradiction. Resolution Refutation is complete with respect
to what can be proven in FOL. For technical details of the algorithm
refer to [1, 7].

- The Resolution Refutation algorithm in the KB of the previous example,
  will:
  1.  1.

      Add ¬ D to the KB

       

  2.  2.

      From A and A → C it will infer C and add it to the KB

       

  3.  3.

      From C and C ∧ B → D it will infer D and add to the KB

       

  4.  4.

      From D and ¬ D it will derive a contradiction and will terminate
      declaring success in proving D

       

The above examples are hugely simplified by not addressing predicates,
variables, functions, quantification, conversion to different canonical
forms and their matching, which are all needed for the general case
algorithms operation. For technical details see [1, 6, 7]. Nilsson [7]
in particular gives a definitive technical treatment of rule-base
systems and their properties.

Logic-Derivative Formalisms and Extensions of FOL

FOL is almost never used in its pure form in biomedical AI applications.
Instead, it serves as a foundation for other more specialized and
invariably simplified formalisms. Occasionally researchers have extended
ordinary FOL to accommodate reasoning with probabilities, or time. The
following Table 4 lists important FOL derivatives and extensions.

Table 4

Types of logic-based systems (FOL derivatives)

+:--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| • Decision Trees which are very widely used both in the             |
| construction of clinical guidelines and as a language for ML        |
| (chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML    |
| Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science”).                |
|                                                                     |
| • Rule based systems for discovery or clinical care based on        |
| forward or backward chaining algorithms and extensions for          |
| reasoning under uncertainty e.g., the highly influential systems    |
| DENDRAL, META-DENDRAL and MYCIN [8, 9]                              |
|                                                                     |
| • Logic-based programming e.g., the widely-used PROLOG              |
| language [10]                                                       |
|                                                                     |
| • Non chaining rule based decision support e.g., the widely-used    |
| ARDEN SYNTAX for clinical decision support [11]                     |
|                                                                     |
| • Semantic networks/“slot-and-filler” representations, semantic     |
| WWW, and taxonomies, e.g., [12, 13]                                 |
|                                                                     |
| • Boolean networks e.g., widely used for biological pathway         |
| discovery and modeling [14]                                         |
|                                                                     |
| • Symbolic NLP systems (see chapter “Considerations for Specialized |
| Health AI and ML Modelling and Applications: NLP” for details and   |
| references)                                                         |
|                                                                     |
| • Ontologies and declarative representations e.g., BIOPORTAL [15]   |
|                                                                     |
| • Fuzzy logic e.g., [16]                                            |
|                                                                     |
| • Non monotonic logic e.g., [17]                                    |
|                                                                     |
| • Probabilistic, and temporal logics e.g., [18]                     |
|                                                                     |
| • Planning systems e.g., used for therapy planning or for           |
| industrial and operations planning purposes [7, 19]                 |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

Although FOL is not used without major modifications and simplifications
in the above, it remains the most important theoretical framework for
understanding the structure, capabilities and limitations of such
methods and systems. Chapter “Lessons Learned from Historical Failures,
Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In Healthcare and the Health
Sciences. Enduring problems, and the role of Best Practicess” discuss
present-day concerns in the AI/ML science and technology community that
a drastic departure from symbolic AI (e.g., in favor of purely
statistical and ontologically shallow input-output representations),
does not bode well for the ability of the field to successfully address
the full range and complexity of health science and health care
problems.

Non-Symbolic AI for Reasoning with Uncertainty

Numerous non-symbolic methods exist and the most important ones in
current practice are covered in detail in chapters “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
and Health Science” and “Foundations of Causal ML”. Here we will address
two methods of great importance in the modern practice of healthcare and
health science research: Decision Analysis and Bayesian networks.

Methods that have predominantly historical significance will not be
addressed, in order to preserve reader and book bandwidth and focus more
on techniques that are part of modern practices.

Decision Analysis (DA) and Maximum Expected Utility (MEU)-Based Reasoning

Decision Analysis using Maximum Expected Utility stems for the
fundamental work of Von Neumann and Morgenstern dating back to 1947.
This theory provides a model of prescriptive decision making designed to
limit the risk of a decision agent facing uncertainty. Whereas the
theory may not be universally applicable in all situations involving
biomedical decisions with uncertainty, they still describe a powerful
model with wide applicability.

The principles of MEU and DA can be readily grasped with a simple
example. Consider the hypothetical case of a patient facing the dilemma
of whether to undergo a surgery for a condition she has, or to opt for
the conservative treatment. Assume that either decision cannot be
followed by the other (e.g., a failed surgery precludes improvement by
the conservative treatment, whereas the conservative treatment exceeds
the time window when the surgery is beneficial).

Furthermore let the probability of success of surgery in such patients
be p(surgical success) = 0.9 and probability of success of non-surgical
treatment in such patients be p(nonsurgical success) = 0.6. Finally let
the quality of life (measured in a utility scale ranging in [0,1]) after
successful surgery be 0.8, after failed surgery be 0.2, after successful
conservative treatment be 1, and under failed conservative treatment be
0.5.

Utility assessment protocols designed to identify a patient’s
preferences and map them to a utility scale exist. Expected utility
defines four axioms describing a rational decision maker: completeness;
transitivity; independence of irrelevant alternatives; and continuity
[57]. The principle of MEU decision making based on these axioms,
designates the optimal decision as the one that maximizes the expected
utility over all possible decisions:

[$$ Optimal\ decision={\mathrm{argmax}}_{\mathrm{i}}\kern0.33em
\mathbf{E}\left(U\left( decisio{n}_i\right)\right) $$]

where

[$$ \mathbf{E}\left(U\left( decisio{n}_i\right)\right)=\sum
\limits_j\mathbf{E}\left(U\left( outcom{e}_{ij}\right)\right) $$]

and:

- U (decision_(i)) is the expectation of the utility of the i^(th)
  decision,

- U (outcome_(j,i)) is the patient-specified utility of the j^(th)
  outcome based on decision i and

- E (U(outcome_(j,i)) is the expected patient-specified utility of the
  j^(th) outcome based on decision i

In our hypothetical example, we can easily see that

[$$ \mathbf{E}\left(U\left( decisio{n}_{surgery}\right)\right)=0.9\ast
0.8+0.1\ast 0.2=0.74 $$]

whereas

[$$ \mathbf{E}\left(U\left(
decisio{n}_{conservative}\right)\right)=0.6\ast 1+0.4\ast 0.5=0.80 $$]

The decision that maximizes expected utility is thus the non-surgical
treatment.

In graphical form the above scenario is captured by the following
Decision Analysis Fig. 1.

[]

A decision tree chart. The optimal decision towards surgery has
probabilities of 0.9 and 0.1 for positive and negative outcomes with
utilities of values 0.8 and 0.2 respectively. Towards conservative has
probabilities 0.6 and 0.4 in utilities 1 and 0.5 for positive and
negative outcomes respectively.

We note that MEU DA, whenever applicable, is a powerful and principled
way to make decisions that maximize benefit. Pitfalls in MEU-DA based
reasoning are:

Pitfalls 2.5

Decision Analysis (DA) and Maximum Expected Utility (MEU)-based
reasoning

1.  1.

    Errors in the estimation  of probabilities for various events.

     

2.  2.

    Errors in eliciting utility estimates in a way that captures
    patients’ true preferences (including using the care providers’
    utilities rather than the patients’).

     

3.  3.

    The structure or complexity of the problem setting defies analyst’s
    ability to completely/accurately describe it.

     

4.  4.

    Developing a DA for one population and applying in another with
    different structure of the problem, different probabilities for
    action-dependent and action-independent events, or with different
    preferences.

     

The corresponding best practices are addressing these sources of errors
that can lead a decision analysis astray.

Best Practice 2.6

Decision Analysis (DA) and Maximum Expected Utility (MEU)-based
reasoning

1.  1.

    Ensure that the structure of the problem setting is
    sufficiently/accurately described by the DA tree. Omit known or
    obvious irrelevant factors.

     

2.  2.

    Elicit utility estimates in a way that captures patients’ true
    preferences using established utility-elicitation methods.

     

3.  3.

    Accurately estimate probabilities of action-dependent events and
    action-independent events.

     

4.  4.

    In most conditions, and whenever applicable, data-driven approaches
    should be preferred to subjective probability estimates. Use
    probability-consistent statistical or ML algorithms to estimate the
    probabilities.

     

5.  5.

    Ensure that the decision analysis is applied to the correct
    population.

     

6.  6.

    Conduct sensitivity analyses that reveal how much the estimated
    optimal decision is influenced by uncertainty in the specification
    of the model.

     

7.  7.

    Whenever possible, produce credible intervals/posterior probability
    distributions for the utility expectations of decisions.

     

These cover only the most salient aspects of the art and science of MEU
driven decision analysis. A more detailed introduction is given in [20]
and a comprehensive applied treatment in [21].

Reasoning with Uncertainty: Probabilistic Reasoning with Bayesian Networks

Bayesian Networks (BNs) are an AI/ML family of models that can describe
the probabilistic (or deterministic, or hybrid) relationships among
variables. They have extensive usability, range of application,
attractive properties and thus high practical value. They can support
several use cases and types of problem solving (which can be combined):

- Use 1: Overcome the limitations of intractable (brute force Bayes), or
  unduly restrictive (Naive Bayes), classifiers.

- Use 2: They are very economical to describe (i.e., they have space
  complexity that closely mirrors the distribution complexity).

- Use 3: They can be created both from expert knowledge and from data
  (or with hybrid sources).

- Use 4: They can be used for MEU DA (providing probability estimates
  for DAs or in their “influence diagram” form).

- Use 5: They can perform flexible classification and other
  sophisticated probabilistic inferences.

- Use 6: They can be thought of as probability-enhanced logical rules
  and combine forward and backward, as well as forward-backward
  inferences in a way that is probabilistically accurate.

- Use 7: They can be used (with very mild additional restrictions) to
  reason causally including: (1) Distinguishing between observing
  passively a variable’s value vs. applying interventions that cause the
  variable to take that value, and reason accordingly. (2) Reasoning
  from causes to outcomes, from outcomes to causes, and simultaneously
  in both directions over multiple and overlapping causal pathways.

- Use 8: Their causal variants can be used to discover causality, not
  just perform inferences with existing causal models.

- Use 9: They have close relationship to the Markov Boundary theory of
  optimal feature selection.

Because of these properties we touch upon various forms and derivatives
of BNs in several chapters and contexts in this volume: AI reasoning
under uncertainty (chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML
Systems”), Bayesian classifiers (chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science”), Markov Boundary based feature selection (chapter “An
Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable
in Healthcare and Health Science”) and causal discovery and modeling
(chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”).

We caution that not every graph or every probabilistic graph is a BN and
the BN properties derive from very specific requirements. Because there
is confusion in parts of the literature (where some authors derive
models that are not BNs but present them as such), we will provide here,
for clarity, an unambiguous technical description of this family of
AI/ML models.

BN Definitions

- Definition. Bayesian Network. A BN comprises (1) a directed acyclic
  graph (DAG); (2) a joint probability distribution (JPD) over variable
  set V such that each variable corresponds to a node in the DAG;
  and (3) a restriction of how the JPD relates to the DAG, known as the
  Markov Condition (MC).

- Definition. Directed Graph. directed graph is a tuple <V,E>, where V
  is a set of nodes representing variables 1-to-1, and E is a set of
  directed edges, or arrows, each one of which connects an ordered pair
  of members of V.

- Definition: Two nodes are adjacent if they are connected by an edge.
  Two edges are adjacent if they share a node.

- Definition: A path is any set of adjacent edges.

- Definition: A directed path is a path where all edges are pointing in
  the same direction.

- Definition: A directed acyclic graph (DAG) is a directed graph that
  has no cycles in it, that is, there is no directed path that contains
  the same node more than once.

- Definition: The joint probability distribution (JPD) over V is any
  proper probability distribution (i.e., every possible joint
  instantiation of variables has a probability associated with it and
  the sum of those is 1).

- Definition: Parents, children, ancestors, and descendants: In a
  directed graph, if variables X,Y share an edge X→ Y then X is called
  the parent of Y, and Y is called the child of X. If there is a
  directed path from X to Y then X is an ancestor of Y and Y is a
  descendant of X.

- Definition: Spouses: In a directed graph, the spouses of a variable Vj
  is the set comprising all variables that are parents to at least one
  of the children of Vj.

- Definition: The Markov Condition (MC) states that every variable V is
  independent of all variables that are non-descendants of V given its
  direct causes.

- Definition: If all dependencies and independencies in the data are the
  ones following from the MC, then the encoded JPD is a Faithful
  Distribution to the BN and its graph.

- Definition: Degree of a node is the number of edges connected to it.
  In a directed graph, this can be further divided into in-degree and
  out-degree, corresponding to the number of parents (edges oriented
  towards the node) and children (edges oriented away from the node)
  that the node has.

- Definition: A collider is a variable receiving incoming edges from two
  variables. For example in: X → Y ← Z, Y is the collider. A collider is
  either “shielded” or “unshielded” iff the corresponding parents of the
  collider are connected by an edge or not, respectively. Unshielded
  colliders give form to the so-called “v-structures”.

- Definition: A trek is a path that contains no colliders.

- Definition: The graphical Markov Boundary of a variable Vj is the
  union of its parents Pa(Vj), its children Ch(Vj) and the parents of
  its children Sp(Vj).

- Definition: The probabilistic Markov Boundary of a variable Vj is the
  set of variable S that renders Vj conditionally independent of all
  other variables, when we condition on S, and is minimal.

Key Properties of Bayesian Networks

Unique and Full Joint Distribution Specification. If the Markov
Condition (MC) holds, then the conditional probabilities of every
variable given its parents specifies a well-defined and unique joint
distribution over variables set V.

Any Joint Probability Distribution Can be Represented by a BN. If we
wish to model JPD J1 by a BN, we can order the variables arbitrarily,
connect with edges every variable Vj with all variables preceding it in
the ordering, and define the conditional probability of Vj given the
parents in the graph equal to the one calculated from J1. Then the
implied JPD J2 of the BN will be J2 = J1. Note: the outline
constructive proof presented here is a large sample result. Much more
sample-efficient procedures exist for small sample situations.

The Joint Distribution of a BN Can Be Factorized Based on Parents. The
joint distribution is factorized as a product of the conditional
probability distribution of every variable given is direct causes set

[$$ probability\;\left({V}_1,{V}_2,\dots .,{V}_k\right)=\prod \limits_j
probability\;\left({V}_j\;| Pa\;\left({V}_j\right)\right) $$]

(4)

Where j indexes the variables in V, and Pa (V_(j)) is the set of parents
of variable V_(j).

Because of this factorization, we only need to specify up to |V|
conditional probabilities in order to fully specific the BN (where |V|
is the number of variables. When all variables have a small number of
parents, the total number of probabilities is linear to |V|. By
comparison in a Brute Force Bayes classifier we always need specify
2^(|V|) probabilities.

Similarly whenever we need to compute the joint probability of Eq. 4,
for a particular instantiation of the variables involved, this is a
linear time operation in the number of variables.

Definition: D-separation

1.  1.

    Two variables X, Y connected by a path are d-separated (aka the path
    is “blocked”) given a set of variables S, if and only if on this
    path, there is
    1.  (a)

        A non-collider variable contained in S, or

         

    2.  (b)

        A collider such that neither it nor any of its descendants are
        contained in S.

         

     

2.  2.

    Two variables, X and Y, connected by several paths are d-separated
    given a set of variables S, if and only if in all paths connecting X
    to Y, they are d-separated by S.

     

3.  3.

    Two disjoint variable sets X and Y are d-separated by variable set S
    iff every pair <Xi,Yj > is d-separated by S, where Xi and Yj are
    members of X, Y respectively.

     

Inspection of the Graph of a BN Informs us About all Conditional
Independencies in the Data. By inspection (by eye or algorithmically) of
the causal graph (and application of d-separation) we can infer all
valid conditional independencies in the data, without analyzing the data
as follows:

- If variable sets X and Y are d-separated by variable set S then they
  will be conditionally independent given S in the JPD encoded by the
  BN.

Inspection of the Graph of a BN Encoding a Faithful Distribution,
Informs us about all Conditional Independencies and Dependencies in the
Data. A BN encoding a faithful distribution entails that all
dependencies and independencies in the JPD can be inferred by the DAG by
application of the d-separation criterion as follows:

- If variable sets X and Y are d-separated by variable set S in the BN
  graph, then they will be conditionally independent given S in the JPD
  encoded by the BN. Otherwise they will be dependent.

- Equivalently:

- Variable sets X and Y are conditionally independent given S in the JPD
  encoded by the BN, iff they are d-separated by variable set S in the
  BN graph.

Therefore in faithful distributions, the BN graph becomes a map
(so-called i-map) of dependencies and independencies in the data JPD
encoded by the BN. Conversely, by inferring dependencies and indecencies
in the data we can construct the BN’s DAG and parameterize the
conditional probabilities of every variable given its parents,
effectively recovering the unoriented causal process that generates the
data. This is a fundamental principle of operation of causal ML methods
(discussed in more detail in chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”).

A Variable in a BN is Independent of all Other Variables Given its
Graphical Markov Boundary and Equivalently a variable in a JPD is
independent of all other variables given its Probabilistic Markov
Boundary in Faithful Distributions.

Relationship of Markov Boundary and Causality. This can be used to
obtain optimal feature sets for predictive modeling when the BN is known
or is inferred from data. Because the graphical and probabilistic Markov
Boundary are identical in faithful distributions, in causal BNs, there
is a close connection of the local causal network around a variable and
its probabilistic Markov Boundary (see chapter “Foundations of Causal
ML”).

BNs Allow Flexible Inference

We will illustrate flexible inference with an example depicted in Fig.
2.

[]

6 directed network graphs. Networks 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 consists of nodes
from A to M. Network 4 consists of nodes C, B, H, pointing to F. Some of
the nodes are shaded.

In Fig. 2 part (1) we see a BN model for some problem solving domain. In
part (2) we query the BN with the question: what is the probability of F
(grey node) given that we have observed the values of variables {C, B,
H} (green nodes)? The inference algorithms propagate and synthesize
information upward (e.g., from C and B to A) and downward from A and B
to F. Notice that given B, H is irrelevant to F.

If we wish to set up a conventional classifier (of any type, Logistic
Regression, Boosting, Deep Learning, SVM, Random Forest etc., it has to
obey a fixed input-response structure depicted in (4)); in other words
in order to answer this question we need to approximate a function of
the probability (F | C, B, H) and train it from scratch for that query.
The BN (3) requires no modification however.

If we wish to answer next what is the joint probability of {F, B, H}
given that we observe {G, A, K, M}, again the same BN (5) can give us
the answer. Other predictive modeling methods however (6) will need to
be trained from scratch to estimate: probability (F, B, H | G, A, K, M).

Because the number of such queries grows exponentially to the number of
variables, it is essentially impossible to answer all the answerable
queries by a BN by training specialized classifiers. Moreover any
subdivision of the variables sets as observed, unknown, or query
variables is allowed and needs not be known a priori.

We now examine (Fig. 3) how a causal BN (see chapter “Foundations of
Causal ML” for formal definitions) can answer causal questions. Consider
the query: what is the probability of F (grey node) given that we have
observed the values of variables {B, H} (green nodes) and we have
manipulated C to take a specific value (via intervention denoted by
do(C))? The causal BN (left) knows that when we manipulate a variable,
nothing else can affect it. Thus the Arc: A→C is effectively eliminated
by the manipulation in the context of the query. Consequently,
information does not travel from C to F via A as in the case of
observing C. The predictive modeling models lacking causal semantics
(e.g., Logistic Regression, Boosting, Deep Learning, SVM, Random Forest
etc.) will propagate information from C to F thus arriving at a wrong
conclusion. Incidentally this problem cannot be fixed in the
conventional predictive modelers by eliminating C from the model, since
valid causal/information paths may exist from C to F than need be
considered even if we manipulate C (and indeed the causal BN will do
so).

[]

Two directed network graphs. 1. Has nodes from A to M. 2. Nodes C, B, H,
point to F. Node C is marked as, do of C in both.

Computational complexity for both learning BNs and for conducting
inference with them is intractable in the wort case. However highly
successful mitigation strategies have led to super-efficient average
case or restricted-purpose algorithms (see chapters “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
and Health Science”, and “Lessons Learned from Historical Failures,
Limitations and Successes of ML in Healthcare and the Health Sciences.
Enduring Problems and the Role of Best Practices” for details). Key
references for properties of BNs discussed here are [22–25].

AI Search

Search as a General Problem Solving Strategy. Conventional Search Versus AI Search

Search is a general problem solving methodology in which many (if not
most) problems can be reduced to. Somewhat similar to physical search of
an object or a location inside a physical space, AI search constructs a
state space with each state representing a possible solution or partial
solution to a problem. The search algorithms then traverse this state
space trying to discover or construct a solution. For example, in a ML
context, the state space could comprise models fit from data, such that
each model has a different structure and corresponding estimated
generalization predictivity. AI search in the ML context seeks then to
find ML models that achieve the highest or sufficient high predictivity.
In an autonomous navigation context, AI search would seek to find a
navigation path that achieves smallest traversed distance, smallest cost
of trip, or other objectives. In a scheduling context AI search may seek
to schedule patients and operating room personnel to operating rooms so
that cancelations are minimized. The diversity of problems that can be
solved with search is infinite and covers the full space of computable
functions.

General AI Search Framework: “Best” First Search (BeFS) Family and Variants

Whereas search is also accomplished outside AI, most notably with linear
and non linear optimization methods, ad hoc search algorithms, and
Operations Research algorithms, AI search has distinctive qualities:

- AI search can use state spaces that are infinite in size.

- AI search can attempt to solve problems in the hardest of complexity
  classes.

- AI search admits any computable goal, not just a small space of
  computable functions.

- AI search can operate with symbolic and non-symbolic representations.

Table 5 outlines a very general framework for AI search.

Table 5

High-level operation of general AI search:

+:--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| • The general AI search algorithm maintains a priority list of      |
| states that will be explored.                                       |
|                                                                     |
| • This list is initialized with a starting search state, and an     |
| iterative loop begins:                                              |
|                                                                     |
| • If the first state in the priority list it is not the goal state  |
| then the algorithm                                                  |
|                                                                     |
|  Creates all successor states from it and updates the list contents |
| and then prioritizes those according to a prioritizing function.    |
| Else the algorithms returns the goal state and terminates           |
|                                                                     |
| • The process will stop iterating when                              |
|                                                                     |
|  – A goal state has been found or                                   |
|                                                                     |
|  – No more states can be reached or                                 |
|                                                                     |
|  – Another termination criterion is met.                            |
|                                                                     |
|  Each state also stores the path to reach that state and the cost   |
| of that solution path. Thus when a goal state is returned, the      |
| solution path can be extracted                                      |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

This prima facie very simple procedure has immense power and flexibility
and can be instantiated in a variety of ways leading to different
behaviors and properties. For example, the following variants can be had
as follows (Table 6):

Table 6

Notable instantiations of general BeFS AI search:

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Instantiation of     | Resulting type of    | Properties           |
| prioritizing         | search               |                      |
| function             |                      |                      |
+:=====================+:=====================+:=====================+
| Ranks states in      | Depth first search   | Will terminate and   |
| priority list in     |                      | find a solution if   |
| ascending order      |                      | search space is      |
| according to order   |                      | finite and enough    |
| that states were     |                      | computation time and |
| generated (i.e.      |                      | space are allowed    |
| first in first out,  |                      |                      |
| or FIFO)             |                      | Worst case           |
|                      |                      | complexity = O       |
|                      |                      | (state space size).  |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | May not find optimal |
|                      |                      | solution             |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | For finite state     |
|                      |                      | spaces organized as  |
|                      |                      | trees of depth d and |
|                      |                      | breadth b:           |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Worst case time      |
|                      |                      | complexity = O       |
|                      |                      | (b^(d)).             |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Space complexity is  |
|                      |                      | O (m * b) where m is |
|                      |                      | the maximum depth of |
|                      |                      | a path.              |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Preferable if many   |
|                      |                      | optimal solutions    |
|                      |                      | are arranged in same |
|                      |                      | search tree          |
|                      |                      | depth level          |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Rank states in       | Breadth first search | Will find a solution |
| priority list in     |                      | and terminate if     |
| descending order     |                      | search space is      |
| according to order   |                      | finite and enough    |
| that states were     |                      | computation time and |
| generated (i.e. last |                      | space are allowed.   |
| in first out, or     |                      | May not find optimal |
| LIFO)                |                      | solution             |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Worst case           |
|                      |                      | complexity = O       |
|                      |                      | (state space size).  |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | For finite state     |
|                      |                      | spaces organized as  |
|                      |                      | trees of depth d and |
|                      |                      | breadth b:           |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Worst case space and |
|                      |                      | time Complexity = O  |
|                      |                      | (b^(d))              |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Preferable if many   |
|                      |                      | solutions are        |
|                      |                      | arranged in same     |
|                      |                      | search path          |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Rank states in       | Uniform cost search  | Will find a solution |
| priority list in     | (aka branch and      | if search space is   |
| ascending order      | bound)               | finite and enough    |
| according to cost of |                      | computation time and |
| path to each state   |                      | space are allowed.   |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Will find optimal    |
|                      |                      | solution if path     |
|                      |                      | cost is non          |
|                      |                      | decreasing           |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Worst case           |
|                      |                      | complexity = O       |
|                      |                      | (state space size).  |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | For finite state     |
|                      |                      | spaces organized as  |
|                      |                      | trees of depth d and |
|                      |                      | breadth b:           |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Worst case           |
|                      |                      | complexity = O       |
|                      |                      | (b^(d))              |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Rank states in       | Greedy Search (ie.,  | Will find a solution |
| priority list in     | most locally         | if search space is   |
| ascending order      | promising next step  | finite and enough    |
| according to         | with backtracking)   | computation time and |
| estimated cost of    |                      | space are allowed.   |
| state to goal state  |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | May not find optimal |
|                      |                      | solution             |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | For finite state     |
|                      |                      | spaces with max      |
|                      |                      | depth path m:        |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Worst case time      |
|                      |                      | complexity = O       |
|                      |                      | (b^(m))              |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | If estimates of cost |
|                      |                      | to goal are good     |
|                      |                      | then it may reach a  |
|                      |                      | solution very fast   |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Rank states in       | Hill climbing Search | May not find a       |
| ascending order      | (most locally        | solution or if it    |
| according to:        | promising next step  | finds one it may not |
|                      | without              | be optimal. It may   |
| Estimated cost of    | backtracking)        | not terminate if     |
| state to goal state. |                      | search space is      |
| Also eliminate from  |                      | infinite             |
| priority list all    |                      |                      |
| but the most locally |                      | For finite state     |
| promising next       |                      | spaces with max      |
| state.               |                      | depth path m: Worst  |
|                      |                      | case time complexity |
|                      |                      | = O (m * b) and      |
|                      |                      | space complexity     |
|                      |                      | is = 1               |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Has tendency to be   |
|                      |                      | trapped in locally   |
|                      |                      | optima that are not  |
|                      |                      | globally optimal     |
|                      |                      | solutions            |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | If, however, search  |
|                      |                      | space is convex or   |
|                      |                      | concave then it      |
|                      |                      | finds the optimal    |
|                      |                      | solution with time   |
|                      |                      | complexity = depth   |
|                      |                      | of solution and      |
|                      |                      | space                |
|                      |                      | complexity = 1. This |
|                      |                      | fact is exploited by |
|                      |                      | many mathematical    |
|                      |                      | convex optimization  |
|                      |                      | algorithms [26]      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Rank states in       | A*                   | Will find a solution |
| priority list in     |                      | if search has finite |
| ascending order      |                      | branching factor,    |
| according to: (cost  |                      | and enough           |
| of path to that      |                      | computation time and |
| state + estimated    |                      | space are allowed    |
| cost of state to     |                      |                      |
| goal state) with the |                      | Will find optimal    |
| constraint that      |                      | solution             |
| estimated cost to    |                      |                      |
| goal cannot exceed   |                      | No other search      |
| true cost.           |                      | algorithm using the  |
|                      |                      | same estimated cost  |
|                      |                      | to goal state        |
|                      |                      | function can         |
|                      |                      | outperform A*        |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | For max depth path   |
|                      |                      | m: Worst case space  |
|                      |                      | complexity = O       |
|                      |                      | (b^(m))              |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | Worst case time      |
|                      |                      | complexity is        |
|                      |                      | polynomial if the    |
|                      |                      | error of the         |
|                      |                      | heuristic cost       |
|                      |                      | estimate to goal     |
|                      |                      | state will not grow  |
|                      |                      | faster than the      |
|                      |                      | logarithm of the     |
|                      |                      | “perfect heuristic”  |
|                      |                      | h* that returns the  |
|                      |                      | true distance to the |
|                      |                      | goal                 |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

The fundamental general search algorithm and its instantiations can be
readily extended to cope with infinite size search spaces and computing
environments with limited space using depth-limited, iterative deepening
and simplified memory-bounded A* versions. For details see [1].

Other Notable AI Search Methods

In addition to the above “classical” AI search algorithms notable search
methods include Simulated Annealing, Genetic Algorithms, Ant Colony
Optimization and search procedures applicable to rule based systems and
resolution refutation.

Simulated annealing [27] is inspired by metallurgy and the annealing
process. It comprises a classic hill climbing method modified to
incorporate a randomized jump to one of nearby states so that local
optima have a larger chance (but no guarantee) of not trapping the
algorithm in suboptimal solutions.

Genetic algorithms [28, 29] are inspired by biological evolution which
they mimic. Genetic algorithms represent solutions in digital chromosome
representation on which they perform, just like evolution does on actual
organisms, random mutations and crossover operations. This is their way
to generate successor solution states. Multiple states are maintained at
each stage of the algorithms with the best-fit ones having a smaller
chance to be discarded. The algorithm has the attractive property that
an exponentially increasing portion of better performing states are
considered in each step. It can be applied in domains where the data
scientists now nothing about the domain (i.e., they are “black box
optimizers”). On the other hand, they have important limitations: they
are not guaranteed to reach an optimal solution (i.e., can be trapped in
local optima), it has been proven that they cannot learn certain classes
of functions (e.g. epistatic functions); and they are not efficient when
compared to non-randomized algorithms solving the same problems.

Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) and “Swarm intelligence” is inspired by
the foraging behavior of some ant species. These ants deposit pheromone
on the ground in order to mark some favorable path that should be
followed by other members of the colony. ACO can be used for graph
searching, scheduling problems, classification, image recognition and
other problems. For several ACOs, convergence has been proven (albeit at
an unknown number of iterations). Finally empirical results in >100
NP-hard problems has shown competitive and ocasionaly excellent
performance compared to best known algorithms [30].

Specialized search procedures include AO* (suitable for searching AND/OR
graphs used in decomposable rule based systems), MINIMAX and ALPHA-BETA
search (suitable for game tree search), and Resolution Refutation search
strategies (e.g., unit preference, set of support identification, input
resolution, linear resolution, subsumption etc.) designed to make the
resolution refutation algorithm reach a proof faster [1, 6, 7].

AI/ML Languages

Whereas statement of algorithms and theoretical analysis is typically
conducted using pseudocode, practical development depends on choice of
programming languages. A few languages are particularly suitable for
AI/ML and their properties are summarized in the next Table 7:

Table 7

Notable AI/ML Languages

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Language                         | Properties and suggested use     |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Pseudocode                       | • Comprises generally-stated     |
|                                  | data structures, code            |
|                                  | modularization (e.g., functions, |
|                                  | procedures), and control         |
|                                  | structures that are programming  |
|                                  | language independent.            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • May also contain declarative   |
|                                  | and logical statements that can  |
|                                  | be implemented in any applicable |
|                                  | programming language. For        |
|                                  | example, a universally           |
|                                  | quantified statement can be      |
|                                  | converted to a conventional      |
|                                  | loop.                            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • It is widely understood by all |
|                                  | computer scientists.             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Especially appropriate for     |
|                                  | stating algorithms and           |
|                                  | conducting theoretical analysis. |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • They can be passed to          |
|                                  | programmers that will implement  |
|                                  | them in a programming language   |
|                                  | of choice.                       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| LISP                             | • The most powerful and flexible |
|                                  | language for AI and possibly the |
|                                  | most powerful programming        |
|                                  | language ever created.           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Systems of immense complexity  |
|                                  | and capabilities can be          |
|                                  | implemented very compactly and   |
|                                  | easily.                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Particularly suitable to       |
|                                  | symbolic AI.                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Incorporates procedural,       |
|                                  | functional, and object oriented  |
|                                  | paradigms.                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Uses lists (with dynamic       |
|                                  | memory management) as primary    |
|                                  | data structures. More efficient  |
|                                  | or special purpose data          |
|                                  | structures can readily be        |
|                                  | implemented.                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Compiled and interpreted.      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • LISP programs and data are     |
|                                  | interchangeable. Programs are    |
|                                  | themselves data that can be      |
|                                  | generated or modified by         |
|                                  | programs. Programs can modify    |
|                                  | themselves or other programs at  |
|                                  | runtime or off line.             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • The language symbols can be    |
|                                  | assigned to different functions. |
|                                  | Thus the language itself can be  |
|                                  | modified by programs.            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • These immense powers may       |
|                                  | create interpretability problems |
|                                  | since programmers do not         |
|                                  | immediately know what a program  |
|                                  | will do, e.g., they have to      |
|                                  | understand how the usual         |
|                                  | language features are modified   |
|                                  | at runtime.                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Prolog                           | • Designed for symbolic AI.      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Uses backward chaining         |
|                                  | rule-based programming paradigm. |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Declarative programming.       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • (Surprisingly) is              |
|                                  | resolution-refutation complete.  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Not as widely used anymore.    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Matlab                           | • Extremely powerful language    |
|                                  | and development environment      |
|                                  | especially suitable for ML.      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Uses matrices and matrix       |
|                                  | operations as fundamental        |
|                                  | building blocks.                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Extremely optimized operations |
|                                  | can produce immensely efficient  |
|                                  | programs.                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Very rapid development.        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Interpreted and compiled.      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Can be interfaced with all     |
|                                  | major languages.                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Numerous toolboxes (libraries) |
|                                  | cover all major mathematics,     |
|                                  | machine learning, engineering,   |
|                                  | imaging, bioinformatics, etc.    |
|                                  | types of development project     |
|                                  | needs.                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • On the downside it is a        |
|                                  | commercial product that requires |
|                                  | paid educational or commercial   |
|                                  | licenses.                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| R                                | • Flexible and powerful language |
|                                  | well suited for statistical and  |
|                                  | ML development.                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Numerous open source           |
|                                  | libraries.                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • No license costs.              |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Many libraries and codes are   |
|                                  | unoptimized and may also have    |
|                                  | implementation errors.           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Does not scale as well as      |
|                                  | other languages.                 |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Python                           | • Flexible language especially   |
|                                  | well-suited to text processing   |
|                                  | and ML.                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Interpreted and compiled.      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Numerous open source, no-cost  |
|                                  | libraries.                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Varying degrees of quality of  |
|                                  | available free codes.            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| A sample of other languages      | • C, C++ and Objective C.        |
| commonly encountered in the      |                                  |
| AI/ML space                      | • Pascal and variants (e.g.      |
|                                  | Delphi).                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Pearl.                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Ruby.                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Basic and variants (e.g.,      |
|                                  | Visual Basic).                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Older languages (FORTRAN,      |
|                                  | MODULA, COBOL) are seldomly used |
|                                  | for new development.             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • Assembly language: for         |
|                                  | specialized applications where   |
|                                  | speed optimization is of         |
|                                  | paramount importance.            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • MUMPS for EHR-focused          |
|                                  | programming.                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | • SQL: very useful for           |
|                                  | relational database querying.    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Foundations of Machine Learning Theory

AI and ML as Applied Epistemology

Epistemology is the branch of philosophy concerned with knowledge: its
generation and sources, nature, its achievable scope, its justification,
the concept of belief as it relates to knowledge, and related issues
[31]. From the perspective of this volume it is worthwhile to notice
first that AI formalizes knowledge so that it can be used in applied
settings. AI can also inform what types of knowledge are computable and
what inferential procedures can be applied and with what
characteristics. ML in particular, by virtue of being able to generate
knowledge from data, on one hand obtains its justification not just by
empirical success but by epistemological principles of science. On the
other hand, ML puts to test epistemological hypotheses and theories
about how knowledge is, can, or should be generated. The following
sections provide a concise outline of the key theories that provide the
firm scientific ground on which ML is built and in particular for
fortifying its performance and generalization properties. They also
summarize a few related pitfalls and high level best practices that will
be developed further in other chapters.

ML Framed as AI search and the Role of Inductive Bias

We showed earlier in this chapter how AI search can be used to solve
hard problems. ML itself can be cast as a search endeavor [29, 32, 33].
In this framework, ML search comprises:

1.  (a)

    A model language L in which a family of ML models can be
    represented. For example, decision trees, logic rules, artificial
    neural networks, linear discriminant equations, causal graphs etc.
    Typically the model language will come with associated procedures
    that enable models to be built when data D are provided (i.e., model
    fitting procedure MF).

     

2.  (b)

    A data-generating or design procedure DD that creates
    data (typically by sampling from a population or other
    data-generating process) from which models are fit.

     

3.  (c)

    A hypothesis space S. The language L implicitly defines a space S
    comprising all models expressible in the language and that can be
    fit with MF applied on D, with each model M_(i) representing a
    location or state in S. For example, the space of all decision
    trees, neural networks, linear discriminant functions, boosted
    trees, etc. that can be built over variable set V using MF on D.

     

4.  (d)

    A search procedure MLS that navigates the space in order to find a
    model representing an acceptable solution to the ML problem as
    defined by a goal criterion. For example, a steepest ascend hill
    climbing search procedure over the space of decision trees over V
    fit by MF given data D.

     

5.  (e)

    A goal (or merit) function GM that examines a search state (i.e., a
    model M_(i)) and decides whether it is a solution, or how close to a
    solution it is (its merit function value). For example, whether
    M_(i) has acceptable predictivity, uncertainty, generalizability
    etc. or what is the merit value (e.g., difference of its properties
    to the goal ones).

     

- The tuple: < L, MF, DD, S, MLS, GM > defines the architecture of a ML
  method.

- Every ML method can be described and understood in these terms
  (although additional perspectives and analytical frameworks are also
  valuable, and in some cases necessary).

- The tuple: < L, MF, S, GM > describes what is commonly referred to as
  a ML “algorithm”, whereas MLS describes the model selection procedure
  that ideally will incorporate an error estimator procedure for the
  final (best) model(s) found. GM and its estimators from data may or
  may not be identical to the error function and its estimators (see
  chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and
  Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”).

- The tuple: < L, MF, S, MLS, GM > describes the Inductive Bias of that
  ML method.

- The inductive bias of a ML method is the preference (‘bias”) of that
  method for a class of models over other models that are not considered
  at all or are not prioritized by the method.

Notice that in practice there are two search procedures in operation:

MF is a search procedure in the space of model parameter values once a
model family and its model family parameter values (aka
“hyperparameters”) have been visited by the second (top-level, or
over-arching) search procedure MLS which searches over possible model
families and their hyper parameters.

For example, the search procedure in decision tree induction algorithm
is a greedy steepest ascent while a hyper parameter may be the minimum
number of samples allowed for accepting a new node or leaf. In an SVM
model the search procedure is quadratic programming and hyper parameters
may be the cost C and the kernel functions and their parameters. The
model selection procedure that decides over these two model families and
the right hyperparameter values for them may be grid search using a
cross validation error estimator, or other appropriate model selection
process (see chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems” for details).

The ML search framework above readily entails important properties of
ML:

1.  1.

    The choice of model language affects most major model properties
    like error, tractability, transparency/explainability, sample
    efficiency, causal compatibility, generalizability etc.

     

2.  2.

    The data generating procedure implements the principles and
    practices of data design which is a whole topic by itself (see
    chapter “Data Design for Biomedical AI/ML”). Because the whole
    operation of ML as search is so dependent on the data D, the data
    design/data generating procedure strongly interacts with the other
    components and determines the success of the ML model search.

     

3.  3.

    The search space typically has infinite size, or finite but
    astronomically large size.

     

4.  4.

    The ML search procedures MF typically have to find sparse solutions
    in the infinite/practically infinite search space. Therefore they
    are often custom-tailored or optimized for the specific ML
    algorithm.

     

5.  5.

    The MLS search procedures are designed to operate over several ML
    algorithm families and their hyper-parameters. They are typically
    much less intensive and typically informed by prior analyses in the
    problem domain of similar data, giving guidance about which
    hype-parameter ranges will likely contain the optimal values.

    Worth noting in particular with respect to the inductive bias:

     

6.  6.

    The match of the inductive bias of a ML method to the problem one
    wishes to solve (hence the data generating function to be modeled
    and the data design procedure that samples from the data generating
    function) determines the degree of success of this ML method.

     

7.  7.

    It also follows, that if a ML method does not have restrictions on
    inductive bias, it cannot learn anything useful at all, in the sense
    that it would accept any model equally as well as any other (i.e.,
    accept good and bad models alike) and in the extreme it would amount
    to random guess among all conceivable models).

     

8.  8.

    At the same time, a successful ML method must not have a too
    restrictive inductive bias because this may cause lack the ability
    to represent or find good models for the task at hand.

     

9.  9.

    Taken together (6), (7), and (8) show that a successful ML method
    must find the right level of restriction or “openness” of the
    inductive bias.

     

We note that the inductive bias of ML is a useful bias and should not be
used as a negative term (as for example, ethical, social, or statistical
estimator biases which are invariably negative).

Pitfall 2.6

Using the wrong inductive bias for the ML solution to the problem at
hand.

Pitfall 2.7

Ignoring the fit of the data generating procedure with the ML solution
to the problem at hand.

Best Practice 2.7

Pursue ML solutions with the right inductive bias for the problem at
hand.

Best Practice 2.8

Create a data generating or design procedure that matches well the
requirements of the problem at hand and works with the inductive bias to
achieve strong results.

ML as Geometrical Construction and Function Optimization

As will be elaborated in chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science” ML methods are in some important cases cast as geometrical
constructive solutions to discriminating between objects. Figure 4 below
shows a highly simplified example of diagnosing cancer patients from
healthy subjects on the basis of 2 gene expression values. The ML method
used (SVMs in the example) casts this diagnostic problem as geometric
construction of a line (in 2D space, and hyperplane in higher
dimensions) so that the cancer patients are cleanly separated from
health subjects (and subject to a maximum gap achieved between the two
classes).

[]

A scatterplot of gene y versus gene x. The clusters represent normal and
cancer patients above and below an increasing line respectively. The
distance between the 2 parallel lines on either side is marked as gap,
and 2 dots of cancer patients and 1 of normal fall on the lines.

Such geometrical formulations of ML can be analytically and
algebraically described and then operationalized using linear algebra
and optimization mathematical tools and codes. See chapter “An Appraisal
and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in
Healthcare and Health Science” for several examples and details on the
mathematical formulations and the ensuing properties.

Computational Learning Theory (COLT): PAC Learning, VC Dimension, Error Bounds

Computational Learning Theory (COLT) , formally studies under which
conditions learning is feasible and provides several bounds for the
generalization error depending on the classifier used, the definition of
error to be minimized (e.g., number of misclassifications), and other
assumptions. While theoretical results in classical statistics typically
make distributional assumptions about the data (i.e., the probability
distribution of the data belongs to a certain class of distributions),
COLT results typically make assumptions only about the class of
discriminative model considered. Notice though, that it may be the case
that an optimal discriminative model never converges to the data
generating function of the data.

COLT research has defined several mathematical models of learning. These
are formalisms for studying the convergence of the errors of a learning
method. The most widely-used formalisms are the VC (Vapnik-Chervonenkis)
and the PAC (Probabilistically Approximately Correct) analyses. A VC or
PAC analysis provides bounds on the error given a specific classifier,
the size of the training set, the error on the training set, and a set
of assumptions, e.g., in the case of PAC, that an optimal model is
learnable by that classifier. Typical PAC bounds, for example, dictate
that for a specific context (classifier, training error, etc.) the error
will be larger than epsilon with probability less than delta, for some
given epsilon or delta. Unlike bias variance decomposition, COLT bounds
are independent of the learning task. From the large field of COLT we
suggest [34–36] as accessible introductions.

The VC (Vapnik-Chervonenkis) dimension (not to be confused with the VC
model of learning above) is (informally) defined as the maximum number
of training examples that can be correctly classified by a learner for
any possible assignment of class labels. The VC dimension of the
classifier is a quantity that frequently appears in estimation bounds in
a way that all else being constant, higher VC dimension leads to
increased generalization error. Intuitively, a low complexity classifier
has low VC dimension and vice-versa. An example of VC bound follows: if
VC dimension h is smaller than l, then with probability of at least 1-n,
the generalization error of a learner will be bounded by the sum of its
empirical error (i.e., in the training data) and a confidence term
defined as:

[$$ \sqrt{\frac{h\left(\log \frac{2l}{h}+1\right)-\log
\left(n/4\right)}{l}} $$]

Where 0 < n ≤ 1. Notice how this error bound is independent of
dimensionality of the problem [37]. The number of parameters of a
classifier does not necessarily correspond to its VC dimension. In [38]
(examples are given of a classifier with a single parameter that has
infinite VC dimension and classifiers with an unbounded number of
parameters but with VC dimension of 1.

Thus, a classifier with a large number of parameters (but a low VC
dimension) can still have low error estimates and provide guarantees of
non-over-fitting. In addition, some of these bounds are non-trivial
(i.e., less than 1) even when the number of dimensions is much higher
than the number of training cases.

Such results prove unequivocally that learning is possible (when using
the right learning algortihms) in the situation common in modern health
science and healthcare data where the number of observed variables is
much higher than the number of available training sample. Many popular
classical statistical predictive modeling methods in contrast break down
in such situations.

The mentioned COLT results also justify the assertion that over-fitting
is not equivalent to a high number of parameters. Unfortunately, many of
the estimation bounds provided by COLT are not tight for the number of
samples available in common practical data analysis. In addition, COLT
results often drive the design of classifiers with interesting
theoretical properties, robust to the curse of dimensionality, and
empirically proven successful, such as Support Vector Machines
(discussed in detail chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics
of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”).

ML Theory of Feature Selection (FS)

Traditional ML theoretical frameworks (e.g., PAC and VC frameworks of
COLT) focus on generalization error as a function of the model family
used for learning, sample size and complexity of models. The theory of
feature selection is a newer branch of ML that addresses the aspect of
selecting the right features for modeling. It aims to guide the design
and proper application of principled feature selection (as opposed to
heuristic FS with unknown and suboptimal properties).

Table 8 summarizes key areas and example of results in the theory of
feature selection. In the remainder we will discuss two formal feature
selection frameworks (i.e., Kohavi-John and Markov Boundary) and will
describe certain classes of feature selection problems that are commonly
addressed.

Table 8

Summary of major topics and examples in the theory of feature selection

  Topic                                                                              Notes
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Filter-wrapper and embedded-explicit feature selection taxonomy                    Wrapper algorithms conduct a heuristic search in the space of feature subsets and evaluate them using a classifier and loss function of choice. Filters examine the data distribution and infer desirable and undesirable features independent of classifier. Embedded feature selection removes undesired features as part of fitting a model. The removal may be implicit (.e.g. regularization where features with small coefficients may stay in the model but do not influence it much) or explicit (i.e., features are dropped out of the model). See [39–41] and chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science” for details.
  Ugly duckling and no free lunch theorems                                           Proofs that the choice of feature selection must be tied to a specific class of target functions, learners and loss functions. See [32, 42] and NFLT section below.
  Bespoke characterization of individual FS or classifier models                     This body of work examines theoretically (and tests empirically) whether specific ML algorithms and feature selectors are capable of solving specific feature selection problems (e.g., [43–45])
  Kohavi-John framework of relevancy                                                 Defines what are necessary/indispensable, or useful but redundant, or useless features in a general sense (without reference to algorithms) [39].
  Markov Boundary framework of relevancy (and intersection with other forms of ML)   Defines what are necessary/indispensable, useful but redundant, and useless features in a general sense and leads to construction of specific algorithms. Also allows extensions for causality, equivalence classes, and guided experimentation [24, 41, 46, 47].

The standard feature selection problem. Consider variable set V and a
data distribution J over V, from which we sample data D. Let T be a
variable which we wish to predict as accurately as possible by fitting
models from D. The standard feature selection problem is typically
defined as [40]:

- Find the smallest set of variables S in V s.t. the predictive accuracy
  of the best classifier than can be fit for T from D, is maximized.

Kohavi-John framework for Standard predictive feature selection problem.
Kohavi and John [39] decompose the standard feature selection problem as
follows:

- A feature X is strongly relevant if removal of X alone will result in
  performance deterioration of the Optimal Bayes Classifier using the
  feature. Formally:
  - X is strongly relevant iff: X []A not perpendicular to, symbol. T |
    {V – X,T}

- A feature X is weakly relevant if it is not strongly relevant and
  there exists a subset of features, S, such that the performance of the
  Optimal Bayes Classifier fit with S is worse than the performance
  using S U {X}. Formally:
  - X is weakly relevant iff: X is not strongly relevant and ∃
    S ⊆ {V-S,T} s.t. X []A not perpendicular to, symbol. T | S.

- A feature is irrelevant if it is not strongly or weakly relevant.

The strongly relevant feature set solves the standard feature selection
problem.

Intuitively, choosing the strongly relevant features provides the
minimal set of features with maximum information content and thus solves
the standard feature selection problem since a powerful classifier in
the small sample or the Optimal Bayes Classifier in the large sample
will achieve maximum predictivity. The Kohavi-John framework does not
provide efficient algorihms for discovery of the strongly relevant
feature set, however. 

Markov Boundary framework for Standard predictive feature selection
problem. Recall from the section of Bayes Networks (BNs) that a set S is
the Markov Boundary of variable T (denoted as S = MB(T)), if S renders T
independent on every other subset of the remaining variables, given S,
and S is minimal (cannot be reduced without losing its conditional
independence property). This is the MB(T) in the probabilistic sense.
Tsamardinos and Aliferis [24] connected the Kohavi-John relevancy
concepts with BNs and Markov Boundaries as follows:

In faithful distributions there is a BN representing the distribution
and mapping the dependencies and independencies so that:

1.  1.

    The strongly relevant features to T are the members of the MB(T).

     

2.  2.

    Weakly relevant features are variables, not in MB(T), that have a
    path to T.

     

3.  3.

    Irrelevant features are not in MB(T) and do not have a path to T.

     

Thus in faithful distributions, the Markov boundary MB(T) is the
solution to the standard feature selection problem and algorithms that
discover the Markov boundary implement the Kohavi-John definition of
strong relevancy.

Local causally augmented feature selection problem and Causal Markov
Boundary. In faithful distributions with causal sufficiency (see chapter
“Foundations of Causal ML”) there is a causal BN that is consistent with
the data generating process and can be inferred from data in which:
strongly relevant features = members of MB(T), and also comprise the
solution to the local causally augmented feature selection problem of
finding:

1.  1.

    The direct causes of T.

     

2.  2.

    The direct effects of T.

     

3.  3.

    The direct causes of direct effects of T.

     

Thus in faithful distributions with causal sufficiency, the causal
graphical MB(T) set is connected with the probabilistic MB(T). Inducing
the probabilistic MB(T) then: 1. Solves the standard predictive feature
selection problem, and 2. Solves the local causally augmented feature
selection problem [24, 41].

Equivalency-augmented feature selection problem and Markov Boundary
Equivalence Class. In faithful distributions the MB(T) exists and is
unique [22]. However, in non-faithful distributions where variables or
variable sets exist that have the same information for the target
variable (i.e., target information equivalences exist in (“TIE
distributions”) and we may have more than one MB(T) [46]). The number of
Markov Boundaries can be exponential to the number of variables [46] and
in empirical tests with real life genomic data Statnikov and Aliferis
extracted tens of thousands of Markov boundaries before terminating the
experiments [48].

In TIE distributions:

1.  1.

    The Kohavi John definitions of relevancy break down since there are
    no Kohavi-John strongly relevant features any more, only weakly
    relevant and irrelevant ones. This is because if S1, S2 are both in
    the MB equivalence class {MBi(T)} then: S1 ⊥ T | S2 and S2 ⊥ T | S1.

     

2.  2.

    The 1-to-1 causal and probabilistic relationship of the
    probabilistic and graphical MB(T) breaks down. A variable can be a
    member in some MBi(T) without having a direct causal or causal
    spouse relationship with T.

     

3.  3.

    The standard predictive feature selection problem is solved by the
    smallest member in the equivalence class of MBi(T).

     

4.  4.

    The Equivalency-augmented feature selection problem is to find the
    equivalence class of all probabilistic MBi(T).

     

Chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science” provides further details of
the above 3 fundamental feature selection problem classes, organizes
them into a hierarchy of increasing difficulty, shows examples, and
presents and contrasts practical algorithms based on their ability to
solve these problems.

Theory of Algorithmic Causal Discovery and of Computational Properties of Experimental Science

The theory of causal discovery extends traditional ML theoretical
frameworks that focus on generalization error, by investigating the
feasibility, complexity, and other properties of causal discovery
algorithms from passive observational data, of experimental
interventional approaches (e.g., RCTs, biological experiments, etc.) and
hybrid experimental-observational algorithmic approaches. Pearl provides
a comprehensive modern theory of causality [49] and Spirtes et al., a
historically influential algorithmic framework for its discovery [50].
Chapter “Foundations of Causal ML” presents an extensive introduction to
the function of causal discovery algorithms from non-experimental data,
and their properties under specific assumptions. Chapter “Foundations of
Causal ML” also lists several algorithms used for causal discovery,
including more modern and scalable ones. Chapter “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
and Health Science” as well as section of “ML Framed as AI search and
the Role of Inductive Bias” of the present chapter reference theory and
algorithms at the intersection of feature selection and causality.
Moreover we mention here selected additional fundamental results that
will round the readers’ understanding of causal discovery from a theory
perspective:

Eberhardt et al. showed that under assumptions: if any number of
variables are allowed to be simultaneously and independently randomized
in any one experiment, then log2 (N) + 1 experiments are sufficient and
in the worst case necessary to determine the causal relations among
N ≥ 2 variables when no latent variables, no sample selection bias and
no feedback cycles are present [51]. Bounds are provided when
experimenters can’t intervene on more than K variables simultaneously.
These results point to fundamental limitations of RCTs and biological
experiments conducted with small number of variables manipulated at a
time, and is further discussed in chapter “Lessons Learned from
Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In Healthcare
and the Health Sciences. Enduring problems, and the role of
Best Practices”.

The same researchers showed that: by combining experimental
interventions with causal algorithms for graphical causal models under
familiar assumptions of causal induction, with perfect data, N - 1
experiments suffice to determine the causal relations among N > 2
variables when each experiment randomizes at most one variable [52].
These results require that all variables are simultaneously measured,
however.

Statnikov et al. [47] showed that in TIE distributions (i.e., with
multiple equivalent Markov Boundary sets with respect to the response
variable T), an algorithm exists that guides experimentation combined
with causal discovery from observations, so that at most k
single-variable experiments are needed to learn the local causal
neighborhood around T where k is the size of the union of all Markov
Boundaries of T.

Mayo-Wislon showed [53] that for any collection of variables V, there
exist fundamentally different causal theories over V that cannot be
distinguished unless all variables are simultaneously measured.
Underdetermination can result from piecemeal measurement, regardless of
the quantity and quality of the data.

The same investigator in [54] found that when the underlying causal
truth is sufficiently complex, there is a significant possibility that a
number of relevant causal facts are lost by trying to integrate the
results of many observational studies in a piecemeal manner.
Specifically, he shows that as the graph gets large, if the fraction of
variables that can be simultaneously measured stays the same, then the
proportion of causal facts (including e.g., who mediates what
relationships) that can be learned even with experiments, approaches 0.

Optimal Bayes Classifier

The optimal Bayes Classifier (or OBC for short) is defined by the
following formula:

[$$ argma{x}_{(i)}\;\sum \limits_jP\left(T=i\;|\; Mj\right)\ast P\left(
Mj\;|D\right) $$]

Where i indexes the values of the response variable T and j indexes
models in the hypothesis space where the classifier operates. In plain
language, the OBC calculates the posterior probability that a model has
generated the data (i.e., it is the data generating function) given the
data, for every model in the hypothesis space. It also calculates for
each of the response variable’s values, the probability for that value’s
probability given each model. The predictions are summed over all
models, weighted by the probabilities of the models given the data, and
the value with the higher value is the one that the classifier outputs.

Because the hypothesis space can be infinite or intractably large, the
calculations involved are also intractable. Also, if we calculate the
conditional probabilities using Bayes’ rule we also have to deal with
the problem of prior probability assignment over the model space
members; in case of very biased priors, the calculated posteriors will
converge slowly to the large sample correct ones. These issues place the
application of the OBC outside the realm of the practical. However, it
turns out that the error of the OBC is optimal in the large sample.
Hence the OBC is a valuable analysis tool when we consider the errors of
various learning algorithms by comparing them to the OBC error (as we
will see in chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major
ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”) [29, 32].

No Free Lunch Theorems (NFLTs)

NFLTs is a general class of theorems each one applying to optimization,
search, machine learning and clustering (in the last case referred to as
Ugly Duckling Theorem or UDT for short) [32, 42].

The crux of these theorems is that under a set of conditions intended to
describe all possible application distributions, there is no preferred
algorithm, and that by implication the right algorithm should be chosen
for the right task, since there is no dominant algorithm irrespective of
task. This particular interpretation is commonsensical and useful. It is
also stating in different terms essentially the notion that a
well-matched inductive bias to the problem at hand will led to better
solutions.

This is especially important for clustering algorithms and the UDT. The
UDT entails that in the absence of external information, there is no
reason to consider two patterns P1 and P2 more or less similar to each
other than P3. Over all possible functions associated with such patterns
(and the features that define them) any grouping is as good as any
other. This implies that similarity/distance functions that define the
behavior of clustering algorithms must be tailored to specific use
contexts of the resulting clusters (which in turn entails a restriction
on the class of functions modeled).

The problems with common use of clustering are three-fold: (a) Per the
UDT, clustering by algorithm X is as good as random clustering over all
possible uses of the clusters. Unless we select or construct a
distance/similarity function designed to solve the specific problem at
hand, clustering will not provide any useful information. (b) There is
no useful unbiased clustering. Researchers who present clustering
results as “unbiased” (meaning “hypothesis free” - a practice very
common in modern biology research and literature) fail to realize that
any practical clustering algorithm has an inductive bias implemented as
a distance function and as a grouping/search strategy. And as we saw, in
the absence of (a well-chosen) inductive bias little can be
accomplished. (c) Finally clustering should not be used, for predictive
modeling [55]. Clustering algorithms can only know something about a
classification problem, e.g. of response T as T+ or T-, if and only if
we design a similarity function that distinguishes between T+ and T- and
embed it in the clustering algorithm. But this function is precisely a
predictive modeling classifier, rendering the whole
clustering-for-prediction endeavor, redundant.

In chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML
Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science” we give examples of
the above as well as recommendations for goal-specific clustering.

Pitfall 2.8

Probably more than other theoretical results, the NFLT for ML has the
largest risk to be misunderstood and misapplied.

In summary form the NFLT for ML states that all learning methods have on
average the same performance over all possible applications, as a
mathematical consequence of 3 conditions:

1.  (a)

    The algorithm performance will be judged over all theoretically
    possible target functions that can conceivably generate data.

     

2.  (b)

    The prior over these target functions is uniform.

     

3.  (c)

    Off Training Set Error (OTSE) will be used to judge performance [32,
    42].

     

This result has been misinterpreted to suggest that we could use models
that have low instead of high accuracy according to unbiased error
estimators and do as well as when choosing the high accuracy models. In
this (mis)interpretation random classification is as good overall as
classification using sophisticated analytics and modeling. The
mathematics of the NFLT derivation are impeccable but the results are
problematic because of the flaws of the 3 underlying assumptions:

1.  (a)

    In real life a tiny set of data generating functions among infinite
    ones are the ones that generate the data. Nature is highly selective
    to its distributions.

     

2.  (b)

    The prior distribution over these data generating functions is
    highly skewed.

    Taken together assumptions (a) and (b) of the NFLT, are
    mathematically equivalent with a label random reshuffle procedure
    (see chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical
    Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”).
    This procedure distorts the relationship between inputs and response
    variable and creates a distribution of target functions that on
    average have zero signal. Because on average there is no signal,
    this target function space is on average random and thus
    unpredictable. Therefore no learning algorithm exists that can do
    better than random and NFLT, naturally, finds and states as much. If
    such an algorithm existed then the distribution would be predictable
    and thus non-random. The NFLT for ML then just says that when there
    is no signal (on average), every algorithm will fail (i.e., will be
    as good as the random decision rule on average) and thus all
    algorithms will be equally useless (on average).

     

3.  (c)

    In addition, by OTSE excluding the input patters that have been seen
    by the algorithm during training, an artificially low biased
    performance estimate is obtained for future applications. By
    contrast statistical theory and all branches of statistical ML and
    of science adopt for purposes of validation OSE (Off Sample Error)
    which is just a random sample from the data generating function.

     

In the present volume we specifically discussed at some length the
dangers in over-interpreting the NFLT for ML because of published claims
that the theorem somehow entails that choosing the models with best
cross validation error (or best independent validation error, or best
reproducibility of error) are just as good as choosing the model with
worst reproducibility or independent validation error [42].

Best Practice 2.9

Cross validation and independent data validation, as well as their
cousin reproducibility, are robust pillars of good science and good ML
practice and are not, in reality, challenged by the NFLT.

Best Practice 2.10

Clustering should not be used for predictive modeling.

Best Practice 2.11

A very useful form of clustering is post-hoc extraction of subtypes from
accurate predictor models.

Universal Function Approximators (UFAs) and Analysis of Expressive Power

UFAs are ML algorithms that can represent any function that may have
generated the data. UAF theorems establish that certain ML algorithms
have UAF capability [29].

Pitfall 2.9

If a ML algorithm cannot represent a function class, this outright shows
the inability or sub- optimality of this algorithm to solve problems
that depend on modeling a data generating function that is not
expressible in that algorithm’s modeling language.

For example, clustering (i.e., grouping objects or variables into groups
according to similarity or distance criteria) does not have the
expressive power to represent the causal relationships among a set of
variables or entities. Thus the whole family of clustering algorithms is
immediately unsuitable for learning causal relationships. Similarly,
simple perceptron ANNs cannot represent non-linear decision functions
and that places numerous practical modeling goals and applications
outside their reach.

By contrast, Decision Trees can represent any function over discrete
variables. Similarly, ANNs can represent any function (discrete or
continuous) to arbitrary accuracy by a network with at least three
layers [29]. BNs can represent any joint probability distribution as we
show in the present chapter. AI search can be set up to operate on model
languages that are sufficiently expressive to represent any function as
well. Genetic Algorithms, being essentially search procedures share this
property.

Pitfall 2.10

UAF theorems should not be over-interpreted. While it is comforting that
e.g., algorithm A can represent any function in the function family F
(i.e., the model space and corresponding inductive bias are expressive
enough), learning also requires effective (space and time-tractable,
sample efficient, non-overfitting etc.) model search and evaluation in
that space.

For example, Decision Trees (DTs) do not have practical procedures to
search and learn every function in the model space expressible as a DT,
since practical (tractable) DT induction involves highly incomplete
search of the hypothesis space. Similarly, ANNs can represent any
function however, the number of units needed and the time needed for
training are intractable and the procedures used to search in the space
of ANN parameters are not guaranteed to find the right parameter values.

Generative vs. Discriminative Models

Generative models are typically considered the ones that can model the
full joint distribution of the variables in an application domain.
Discriminative models, by contrast, are ones that only model a decision
function that is sufficient to problem of interest in that domain.
Consider as example the SVM hyperplane model in Fig. 4. This model
solves the diagnostic problem stated perfectly without modeling the
probability distribution of the variables involved.

The optimal choice of generative vs. discriminative model entirely
depends on the application domain. For example, for general predictive
modeling as well as other pattern recognition such as text
categorization, the use of discriminative models confers practical
advantages and better performing models than generative models, in many
datasets. For causal modeling, simulation, natural language
understanding, density estimation, or language generation, generative
models are necessary or advantageous. We also wish to clarify a
terminology confusion (especially in non-technical literature) between
generative modeling at large vs “Generative AI”. The latter refers to a
small number of specific classes of algorithms that generate data (e.g.,
Generative Adversarial Networks, Large Language Models) with established
or unknown properties. Generative modeling on the other hand includes
all methods that model the data generating distribution and in typical
usage the term refers to algorithms that have guarantees for correct
modeling of the data generating distribution (e.g., BNs, Logistic
Regression, Density estimator algorithms).

Best Practice 2.12

The choice of generative vs. discriminative modeling affects quality of
modeling results and has to be carefully tied to the problem domain
characteristics. All else being equal discriminative models confer
efficiency (computational and sample) advantages.

Bias-Variance Decomposition of Model Error (BVDE)

The concept of BVDE is one that originates from statistical machine
learning but has broad applicability across ML and all of data science.
It is pervasively useful, yet not as widely known as it deserves among
non-technical audiences, so we will present it here in some detail. A
detailed treatment can be found in [56]. While the whole idea of BVDE is
that other than noise in measurements (which is intrinsic in the data
and independent of modeling decisions) or inherent stochasticity of the
data generating function (which is intrinsic in the data generating
process and independent of modeling decisions), the remaining modeling
error of any ML (or for that matter any statistical or quantitative data
science) model has two components: a component due to the inductive bias
mismatch with the problem vs. the data at hand; and another component
due to sample variation in small sample settings.

In the terminology of BVDE, the error due to inductive bias mismatch is
referred to as “bias” with “high bias” indicating a severe mismatch,
toward simplicity (aka small complexity, or small capacity) of the model
language (and related search and fitting procedures) with respect to the
data generating function. The error due to sampling variation is
referred to as “variance” with variance increasing as sample size
decreases. More precisely, the bias is the error (in the sample limit,
relative to the data generating function) of the best possible model
that can be fitted within the class of models considered. The variance
is the error of the best model (in the small sample, within the class of
models considered) relative to the error of the best model that can be
fitted in the large sample within the class of models considered. The
bias then is a function of the learner used and the data generating
function; the variance, for a fixed data generating function, is a
function of the learner and the sample size.

Implications for modeling: When the modeling bias is fixed one can
reduce total model error by increasing the sample size (reduce
variance), and when the sample is fixed one can reduce total error by
optimizing the bias. More importantly, when both sources of error are
under analyst control, BVDE explains that there is an ideal point of
balance of error due to bias and error due to variance. The optimal
error will be found when these two sources of error are balanced for a
particular modeling setting. Moreover high bias models have smaller
variance (i.e., are more stable in low samples) but on average over many
samples will approximate the target function worse. Low bias models have
higher variance, hence are unstable in small samples but on average(!)
approximate the target function better. We now delve into BVDE with a
concrete example.

Figure 5 depicts a two-dimensional data set, based on one input variable
x, plotted along the horizontal axis and response y along the vertical.
The black points represent the observed data points and the blue line f
depicts the true generating function, which in this example is:

[$$ f(x)=\Big\{\kern0.5em {\displaystyle \begin{array}{l}\kern2.6em
{x}^2\kern2em when\;x&lt;-3\\ {}81-{x}^2\kern2em when-3\le x\le 3\\
{}\kern3.2em {x}^2\kern2em when\;x&gt;3\end{array}} $$]

The black lines represent quadratic models fit to random samples from
this data.

[]

A graph of y versus x represents the bias-variance tradeoff. 2 lines
form a concave upward trend. A line follows a W-pattern, with data
points along the line.

Consider the expected generalization error from this procedure when
predicting the point at (say) x = 0. The error has three components.
First, the observed dependent variable can differ from the true value of
the generating function, that is measurement noise. Visually, noise is
the difference between the black points and the blue line. The second
component, variance, is the variability of the model due to the specific
sample, which is visually represented by the spread of the predictions
from the different models (black lines) at x = 0. In this example, with
only two models, this ranges from 35 to 45. Finally, the third component
is bias, which is the difference between the expectation of the
prediction (expectation is taken over the different models built on the
different samples) and the true value of the dependent variable (the
blue line at x = 0). In this example, the expectation of the prediction
from different models appears to be approximately 40, while the true
value is 81.

The generalization error expressed as MSE at any x can be written as:

[$$
\mathbf{E}\left[{\left(y-\hat{f}(x)\right)}^2\right]=\mathbf{E}\left[{\left(y-f(x)\right)}^2\right]+\mathbf{E}\left[{\left(f-E\hat{f}(x)\right)}^2\right]+\mathbf{E}\left[{\left(\hat{f}(x)-E\hat{f}(x)\right)}^2\right]
$$]

The three terms correspond to noise, bias and variance of [$$ \hat{f}
$$].

Figure 6 shows the bias (orange), variance (blue) and mean squared error
(MSE) (gray) of models of increasing complexity on a test set. Model
complexity is controlled by the degree of x the model is allowed to use
and how far the optimizer can optimize the training MSE. Complexity
increases from left to right. As the model complexity increases,
variance increases while bias decreases. For improved readability, bias,
variance and MSE are scaled to the same range in the figure. MSE is thus
a weighted sum of bias (squared) and variance. The optimal fit is
achieved where MSE is minimal (in the middle of the complexity range).
Lower complexity leads to underfitting, which is characterized by lower
variance and higher bias, while increased complexity leads to
overfitting, which is characterized by higher variance and lower bias
(compared to the bias and variance at the optimal complexity).

[]

A multiple line graph of the scaled bias, variance, M S E versus
complexity. The lines are bias, variance, and M S E. The line bias
follows a concave-down decreasing trend. The other two lines are in
proximity and ascend after an initial stable trend.

These concepts are critical in helping analysts create models with
maximum predictivity (see chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General
Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices
in Machine Learning and AI”).

Essential Concepts of Mathematical Statistics Applicable to ML

Mathematical Statistics is the subfield of Statistics that studies the
theoretical foundations of statistics. At the same time, many of the
concepts and tools of mathematical statistics are useful across data
science broadly and for ML more specifically. Table 9 provides examples
of important areas and analytical tools developed within this field that
have value for understanding, advancing, and practicing ML [58].

Table 9

Key concepts and areas of mathematical statistics useful for ML

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Area                             | Subject matter and importance    |
|                                  | for ML                           |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Special probability              | E.g., Uniform, Bernoulli,        |
| distributions and density        | Binomial, Hypergeometric,        |
| functions                        | Poisson, Multinomial, etc.       |
|                                  | distributions; Uniform, Normal,  |
|                                  | Exponential, Chi-Square, Beta,   |
|                                  | etc. density functions           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Uses:                            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Design and analysis of        |
|                                  | modeling methods by tailoring    |
|                                  | them to data characteristics     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Instrumental in inference by  |
|                                  | describing sampling              |
|                                  | distributions                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Also valuable in              |
|                                  | understanding model errors and   |
|                                  | other aspects of modeling        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Sampling distributions           | E.g., Distribution of the mean,  |
|                                  | Chi-square, t distribution, F    |
|                                  | distribution                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Uses:                            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Measuring the uncertainty of  |
|                                  | parameters of models, model      |
|                                  | predictions                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Hypothesis testing of whether |
|                                  | a sample or model statistic      |
|                                  | value comes by sampling from a   |
|                                  | null hypothesis distribution     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Estimating the uncertainty of |
|                                  | model parameters, structure, and |
|                                  | predictions                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Estimation and estimators        | E.g., Properties of estimators   |
|                                  | such as unbiasedness,            |
|                                  | efficiency, consistency,         |
|                                  | robustness                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Uses:                            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Estimators for model          |
|                                  | construction                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Estimators for model error    |
|                                  | and other properties             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Embedding estimators in model |
|                                  | selection and construction       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Hypothesis testing               | E.g., Losses and risk for        |
|                                  | testing statistical hypotheses.  |
|                                  | Neyman-Pearson Lemma. Power      |
|                                  | functions of tests. Control of   |
|                                  | false positives and false        |
|                                  | negatives in statistical         |
|                                  | hypothesis testing decisions     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Uses:                            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Deciding whether model        |
|                                  | properties and function are due  |
|                                  | to random sampling variation or  |
|                                  | reliable and generalizable       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Deciding on minimum data      |
|                                  | sample size needed for analysis  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Reducing errors when large    |
|                                  | number of hypotheses are tested  |
|                                  | when data mining and conducting  |
|                                  | hypothesis-free discovery        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Techniques and results from mathematical statistics (and its
applications) are present throughput the chapters of the present volume.

Conclusions

The successful design of problem-solving AI/ML models and systems can be
guided by and evaluated according to well specified technical
properties. Systems that lack properties are pre-scientific and used
heuristically, whereas systems with well-established properties and
guarantees provide more solid ground for reliably solving health science
and healthcare problems. The nature of the properties listed matches
well the practical applications of AI/ML. Properties disconnected from
practical implications are not subject of study in the present volume.

AI has both symbolic and non-symbolic methods as well as hybrid
variants. Foundational methods in the symbolic category are logics and
logic-based systems such as rule based systems, semantic networks,
planning systems, NLP parsers and certain AI programming languages. In
the non-symbolic category, ML, probabilistic, connectionist,
decision-theoretic formalisms, systems and languages dominate.

Among health AI methods capable of reasoning with uncertainty, Bayes
Nets and Decision Analysis stand out for their ability to address a
variety of uses cases and problem classes.

A major distinction is between shallow systems that essentially are
equivalent to function relating outputs to inputs (e.g., most of ML
predictive modeling), and systems with rich ontologies and elaborate
models of the physical world in the application domain. Non-symbolic AI
systems tend to fall in the former category, whereas symbolic ones, in
the latter.

The framework of AI search is especially powerful both as a
problem-solving technology but also as an analytical tool that helps us
understand and architect successful methods and systems. AI search cuts
across the symbolic vs. non-symbolic, shallow vs. rich, and the
data-driven (Ml) vs. knowledge driven distinctions.

ML has solid and extensive theoretical foundations that include:
Computational Learning Theory, ML as AI search, ML as geometrical
construction and function optimization, COLT (PAC learning, VC
dimension), Theory of feature selection, Theory of causal discovery,
Optimal Bayes Classifier, No Free Lunch Theorems, Universal Function
Approximation, Generative vs. Discriminative models; Bias-Variance
Decomposition of error, and an extensive set of tools borrowed from the
field of mathematical statistics.

Key Concepts and Messages Chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML
Systems”

- The critical importance of knowing or deriving the properties of AI/ML
  models and systems.

- The main technical properties of AI/ML systems.

- Tractable vs. intractable problems and computer solutions to them.

- The various forms of Logic-based (symbolic) AI.

- Non-symbolic AI, reasoning under uncertainty and its primary
  formalisms.

- AI search.

- Foundations of Machine Learning Theory

Pitfalls and Best Practices Chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML
Systems”

Pitfall 2.1. From a rigorous science point of view an AI/ML algorithm,
program or system with intractable complexity does not constitute a
viable solution to the corresponding problem.

Pitfall 2.2. Parallelization cannot make an intractable problem,
algorithm or program practical.

Pitfall 2.3. Moore’s law improvements to computing power cannot make an
intractable problem algorithm or hard program practical.

Pitfall 2.4. Believing that heuristic systems can give “something for
nothing” and that have capabilities that surpass those of formal
systems. In reality heuristic systems are pre-scientific or in early
development stages.

Pitfall 2.5 in Decision Analysis (DA) and Maximum Expected Utility
(MEU)-based reasoning

1.  1.

    Errors in the estimation of probabilities for various events.

     

2.  2.

    Errors in eliciting utility estimates in a way that captures
    patients’ true preferences (including using the care providers’
    utilities rather than the patients’).

     

3.  3.

    The structure or complexity of the problem setting defies analyst’s
    ability to completely/accurately describe it.

     

4.  4.

    Developing a DA for one population and applying in another with
    different structure of the problem, different probabilities for
    action-dependent and action-independent events, or with different
    preferences.

     

Pitfall 2.6. Using the wrong inductive bias for the ML solution to the
problem at hand.

Pitfall 2.7. Ignoring the fit of the data generating procedure with the
ML solution to the problem at hand.

Pitfall 2.8. Probably more than other theoretical results, the NFLT for
ML has the largest risk to be misunderstood and misapplied.

Pitfall 2.9. If a ML algorithm cannot represent a function class, this
outright shows the inability or sub- optimality of this algorithm to
solve problems that depend on modeling a data generating function that
is not expressible in that algorithm’s modeling language.

Pitfall 2.10. UAF theorems should not be over-interpreted. While it is
comforting that e.g., algorithm A can represent any function in the
function family F (i.e., the model space and corresponding inductive
bias are expressive enough), learning also requires effective (space and
time-tractable, sample efficient, non-overfitting etc.) model search and
evaluation in that space.

Best Practices Discussed in Chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML
Systems”

Best Practice 2.1. Pursue development of AI/ML algorithm, program or
systems that have tractable complexity.

Best Practice 2.2. Do not rely on parallelization to make intractable
problems tractable. Pursue tractable algorithms and factor in the
tractability analysis any parallelization.

Best Practice 2.3. Do not rely on Moore’s law improvements to make an
intractable problem algorithm or hard program practical. Pursue
tractable algorithms and factor in the tractability analysis any gains
from Moore’s law.

Best Practice 2.4. When faced with intractable problems, consider using
strategies for mitigating the computational intractability by trading
off with less important characteristics of the desired solution.

Best Practice 2.5. As much as possible, use models and systems with
formal and established properties (theoretical + empirical). Work within
the maturation process starting from systems with unknown behaviors and
no guarantees, to systems with guaranteed properties.

Best Practice 2.6. Decision Analysis (DA) and Maximum Expected Utility
(MEU)-based reasoning

1.  1.

    Ensure that the structure of the problem setting is
    sufficiently/accurately described by the DA tree. Omit known or
    obvious irrelevant factors.

     

2.  2.

    Elicit utility estimates in a way that captures patients’ true
    preferences using established utility-elicitation methods.

     

3.  3.

    Accurately estimate probabilities of action-dependent events and
    action-independent events.

     

4.  4.

    In most conditions, and whenever applicable, data-driven approaches
    should be preferred to subjective probability estimates. Use
    probability-consistent statistical or ML algorithms to estimate the
    probabilities.

     

5.  5.

    Ensure that the decision analysis is applied to the correct
    population.

     

6.  6.

    Conduct sensitivity analyses that reveal how much the estimated
    optimal decision is influenced by uncertainty in the specification
    of the model.

     

7.  7.

    Whenever possible, produce credible intervals/posterior probability
    distributions for the utility expectations of decisions.

     

Best Practice 2.7. Pursue ML solutions with the right inductive bias for
the problem at hand.

Best Practice 2.8. Create a data generating or design procedure that
matches well the requirements of the problem at hand and works with the
inductive bias to achieve strong results.

Best Practice 2.9. Cross validation and independent data validation, as
well as their cousin reproducibility, are robust pillars of good science
and good ML practice and are not in reality challenged by the NFLT.

Best Practice 2.10. Clustering should not be used for predictive
modeling.

Best Practice 2.11. A very useful form of clustering is post-hoc
extraction of subtypes from accurate predictor models.

Best Practice 2.12. The choice of generative vs. discriminative modeling
affects quality of modeling results and has to be carefully tied to the
problem domain characteristics. All else being equal discriminative
models confer efficiency (computational and sample) advantages.

Discussion Topics and Assignments, Chapter “Foundations and Properties
of AI/ML Systems”

1.  1.

    Revisit questions (10–13) of chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI)
    and Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the
    Need for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” from the
    perspective of which properties of the proposed systems are known.

     

2.  2.

    Use Table 3 to classify the proposed systems in questions (10–13) of
    chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) for
    Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need for Best Practices Enabling
    Trust in AI and ML”

     

3.  3.

    Which of the following are heuristic systems (and in what category
    of the classification of Table 3 in this chapter:
    1.  (a)

        INTERNIST-I

         

    2.  (b)

        MYCIN

         

    3.  (c)

        QMR-BN

         

    4.  (d)

        A classical regression model for which we do not know if data is
        normally distributed. Compare to a classical regression model
        for which we know that data is not normally distributed. 

         

    5.  (e)

        A Large Language Model implementing an EHR “ChatBot” tool
        answering queries about the patients’ medical history.

         

    6.  (f)

        IBM Watson Health

         

     

4.  4.

    Based on your findings in question 3, how would you go about next
    steps toward putting these systems into practice from a perspective
    of accuracy and safety?

     

5.  5.

    Discuss: are BNs deep or shallow representations?

     

6.  6.

    Consider a population with age distribution as in the table below:
      Age →   0–10   11–20   21–30   31–40   41–50   51–60   61–70   >70
      ------- ------ ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- -----
      % →     20     20      10      10      10      15      10      5

    1.  (a)

        What would be a good 2-way clustering (grouping) of individuals
        in this population?

         

    2.  (b)

        For a pediatrician: what would be a good 2-way clustering
        (grouping) of individuals in this population?

         

    3.  (c)

        For a gerontologist: what would be a good 2-way clustering
        (grouping) of individuals in this population?

         

    4.  (d)

        For an obstetrician: what would be a good 2-way clustering
        (grouping) of individuals in this population?

         

    5.  (e)

        What can you conclude about the value of a priori clustering
        without any reference to use of the produced groups?

         

     

7.  7.

    Occam’s Razor is the epistemological principle that says that given
    two explanations that fit the data equally well, we should choose
    the simplest one. Analyze this proposition from a BVDE viewpoint.

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Russell SJ. Artificial intelligence a modern approach. Pearson
    Education, Inc; 2010.

2.  2.

    Cook S. The complexity of theorem proving procedures. In:
    Proceedings of the Third Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
    Computing; 1971. p. 151–8.

3.  3.

    Karp RM. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In: Miller RE,
    Thatcher JW, editors. Complexity of computer computations. New York:
    Plenum; 1972. p. 85–103.

4.  4.

    Miller RA. A history of the INTERNIST-1 and quick medical reference
    (QMR) computer-assisted diagnosis projects, with lessons learned.
    Yearb Med Inform. 2010;19(01):121–36.

5.  5.

    Aliferis CF, Miller RA. On the heuristic nature of medical
    decision-support systems. Methods Inf Med. 1995;34(1–2):5–14.

6.  6.

    Rich, E. and Knight, K., Artificial Intelligence. 1991. Ed.

7.  7.

    Nilsson NJ. Principles of artificial intelligence. Springer Science
    & Business Media; 1982.

8.  8.

    Buchanan BG, Shortliffe EH. Rule based expert systems: the mycin
    experiments of the Stanford heuristic programming project (the
    Addison-Wesley series in artificial intelligence). Addison-Wesley
    Longman Publishing Co., Inc.; 1984.

9.  9.

    Buchanan BG, Feigenbaum EA. DENDRAL and meta-DENDRAL: their
    applications dimension. Artif Intell. 1978;11(1–2):5–24.

10. 10.

    Clocksin WF, Mellish CS. Programming in PROLOG. Springer Science &
    Business Media; 2003.

11. 11.

    Hripcsak G, Clayton P, Pryor T, Haug P, Wigertz O, Van der Lei J.
    The Arden syntax for medical logic modules. In proceedings.
    Symposium on computer applications in medical care; 1990. p. 200–4.

12. 12.

    Machado CM, Rebholz-Schuhmann D, Freitas AT, Couto FM. The semantic
    web in translational medicine: current applications and future
    directions. Brief Bioinform. 2015;16(1):89–103.

13. 13.

    McCray A. The UMLS semantic network. In: Proceedings. Symposium on
    computer applications in medical care; 1989, November. p. 503–7.

14. 14.

    Shmulevich I, Dougherty ER. Probabilistic Boolean networks: the
    modeling and control of gene regulatory networks. Society for
    Industrial and Applied Mathematics; 2010.

15. 15.

    Noy NF, Shah NH, Whetzel PL, Dai B, Dorf M, Griffith N, Jonquet C,
    Rubin DL, Storey MA, Chute CG, Musen MA. BioPortal: ontologies and
    integrated data resources at the click of a mouse. Nucleic Acids
    Res. 2009;37(suppl_2):W170–3.

16. 16.

    Torres A, Nieto JJ. Fuzzy logic in medicine and bioinformatics. J
    Biomed Biotechnol. 2006;2006:1–7.

17. 17.

    McDermott D, Doyle J. Non-monotonic logic I. Artif Intell.
    1980;13(1–2):41–72.

18. 18.

    Haddawy P. A logic of time, chance, and action for representing
    plans. Artif Intell. 1996;80(2):243–308.

19. 19.

    Langlotz CP, Fagan LM, Tu SW, Sikic BI, Shortliffe EH. A therapy
    planning architecture that combines decision theory and artificial
    intelligence techniques. Comput Biomed Res. 1987;20(3):279–303.

20. 20.

    Pauker SG, Kassirer JP. Decision analysis. In: Medical uses of
    statistics. CRC Press; 2019. p. 159–79.

21. 21.

    Sox HC, Blatt MA, Marton KI, Higgins MC. Medical decision making.
    ACP Press; 2007.

22. 22.

    Pearl J. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of
    plausible inference. Morgan kaufmann; 1988.

23. 23.

    Neapolitan RE. Probabilistic reasoning in expert systems: theory and
    algorithms. John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 1990.

24. 24.

    Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF. Towards principled feature selection:
    relevancy, filters and wrappers. In: International workshop on
    artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR; 2003. p. 300–7.

25. 25.

    Cooper GF. The computational complexity of probabilistic inference
    using Bayesian belief networks. Artif Intell. 1990;42(2–3):393–405.

26. 26.

    Boyd S, Boyd SP, Vandenberghe L. Convex optimization. Cambridge
    university press; 2004.

27. 27.

    Rutenbar RA. Simulated annealing algorithms: an overview. IEEE
    Circuit Devices Magazine. 1989;5(1):19–26.

28. 28.

    Katoch S, Chauhan SS, Kumar V. A review on genetic algorithm: past,
    present, and future. Multimed Tools Appl. 2021;80:8091–126.

29. 29.

    Mitchell TM. Machine learning, vol. 1, No. 9. New York: McGraw-hill;
    1997.

30. 30.

    Dorigo M, Birattari M, Stutzle T. Ant colony optimization. IEEE
    Comput Intell Mag. 2006;1(4):28–39.

31. 31.

    Audi R. Epistemology: a contemporary introduction to the theory of
    knowledge. Routledge; 2010.

32. 32.

    Duda RO, Hart PE, Stork DG. Pattern classification. New York: John
    Wiley & Sons. Inc.; 2000. p. 5.

33. 33.

    Weiss SM, Kulikowski CA. Computer systems that learn: classification
    and prediction methods from statistics, neural nets, machine
    learning, and expert systems. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.; 1991.

34. 34.

    Anthony M, Biggs NL. Computational learning theory: an introduction.
    Cambridge University Press; 1992.

35. 35.

    Kearns MJ, Vazirani U. An introduction to computational learning
    theory. MIT press; 1994.

36. 36.

    Langford J. Tutorial on practical prediction theory for
    classification. J Mach Learn Res. 2005;6(Mar):273–306.

37. 37.

    Schölkopf C, Burges JC, Smola AJ. Advances in kernel methods—support
    vector learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 1999.

38. 38.

    Herbrich R. Learning kernel classifiers: theory and algorithms,
    (2002). Cambridge: MA, USA MIT Press; 2002.

39. 39.

    Kohavi R, John GH. Wrappers for feature subset selection. Artif
    Intell. 1997;97(1-2):273–324. Prediction (Vol. 2, pp. 1-758). New
    York: springer.

40. 40.

    Guyon I, Elisseeff A. An introduction to variable and feature
    selection. J Mach Learn Res. 2003;3(Mar):1157–82.

41. 41.

    Guyon I, Aliferis C. Causal feature selection. In: Computational
    methods of feature selection. Chapman and Hall/CRC; 2007. p. 79–102.

42. 42.

    Wolpert DH. What the no free lunch theorems really mean; how to
    improve search algorithms, vol. 7. Santa Fe Institute; 2012. p.
    1–13.

43. 43.

    Hardin D, Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF. A theoretical characterization
    of linear SVM-based feature selection. In: Proceedings of the
    twenty-first international conference on machine learning; 2004. p.
    48.

44. 44.

    Statnikov A, Hardin D, Aliferis C. Using SVM weight-based methods to
    identify causally relevant and non-causally relevant variables.
    Signs. 2006;1(4):474–84.

45. 45.

    Zou H. The adaptive lasso and its oracle properties. J Am Stat
    Assoc. 2006;101(476):1418–29.

46. 46.

    Statnikov A, Lemeir J, Aliferis CF. Algorithms for discovery of
    multiple Markov boundaries. J Mach Learn Res. 2013;14(1):499–566.

47. 47.

    Statnikov A, Ma S, Henaff M, Lytkin N, Efstathiadis E, Peskin ER,
    Aliferis CF. Ultra-scalable and efficient methods for hybrid
    observational and experimental local causal pathway discovery. J
    Mach Learn Res. 2015;16(1):3219–67.

48. 48.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF. Analysis and computational dissection of
    molecular signature multiplicity. PLoS Comput Biol.
    2010;6(5):e1000790.

49. 49.

    Pearl J. Causality. Cambridge university press; 2009.

50. 50.

    Spirtes P, Glymour CN, Scheines R, Heckerman D. Causation,
    prediction, and search. MIT press; 2000.

51. 51.

    Eberhardt F, Glymour C, Scheines R. On the number of experiments
    sufficient and in the worst case necessary to identify all causal
    relations among N variables. In: Bacchus F, Jaakkola T, editors.
    Proceedings of the 21st conference on uncertainty in artificial
    intelligence (UAI); 2005. p. 178–84.

52. 52.

    Eberhardt F, Glymour C, Scheines R. N-1 experiments suffice to
    determine the causal relations among N variables. In: Holmes D, Jain
    L, editors. Innovations in machine learning, theory and applications
    series: studies in fuzziness and soft computing, vol. 194.
    Springer-Verlag; 2006. See also Technical Report CMU-PHIL-161
    (2005).

53. 53.

    Mayo-Wilson C. The problem of piecemeal induction. Philos Sci.
    2011;78(5):864–74.

54. 54.

    Mayo-Wilson C. The Limits of Piecemeal Causal Inference. Br J Philos
    Sci. 2014;65(2):213–49.

55. 55.

    Dupuy A, Simon RM. Critical review of published microarray studies
    for cancer outcome and guidelines on statistical analysis and
    reporting. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99(2):147–57.

56. 56.

    Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman JH, Friedman JH. The elements of
    statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction,
    vol. 2. New York: springer; 2009. p. 1–758.

57. 57.

    Von Neumann J. and Morgenstern O. 2007. Theory of games and economic
    behavior. In: Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton
    university press. Original in Wald, A., 1947. Theory of games and
    economic behavior.

58. 58.

    Wackerly D. Mendenhall W. and Scheaffer, RL. 2014. Mathematical
    statistics with applications. Cengage Learning.

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_3

An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science

Gyorgy Simon¹ and Constantin Aliferis¹  

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

This chapter provides an outline of most major biomedical ML methods in
a manner suitable for both readers who have not delved into ML before,
and readers who may already know about some or all of these methods. The
former will find here a useful introduction and review. The latter will
find additional insights as we critically revisit the key concepts and
add summary guidance on whether and when each technique is applicable
(or not) in healthcare and health science problem solving. Toward that
end, for each technique, we introduce a “Method Label”, akin to a drug
label, which provides distilled information about the techniques at a
glance. The method labels present the primary and secondary uses of each
technique, provide context of use, describe the principles of operation,
and summarize important theoretical and empirical properties.

Keywords

Method labelPredictive modelingFeature selectionExploratory analysis

Introduction

A vast number of machine learning techniques has been proposed for
solving a rich set of problems. As we discussed in the Introduction,
many of the clinical problems fall into a few categories, some of which
are more heavily researched than others. We call these categories
analytic tasks and, in this chapter, we consider six tasks, which fall
into two broader categories: predictive modeling and exploratory
analysis.

Figure 1 depicts the lay of the land for predictive and exploratory
analysis tabulating the most common techniques. We will address causal
modeling separately in chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”.

[]

A block flow diagram of the predictive modeling and exploratory
analysis. The predictive modeling is classified into regression,
classification, and time-to-event. The exploratory analysis is
classified into density estimation, outlier detection, and clustering.

In predictive modeling, the goal is to assign values to one or more
variables, called outcomes (aka response, or dependent variables), using
the known values of other variables (aka predictor variables,
independent variables, or features). Somewhat abusing ordinary language,
“predictive” in the context of “ML predictive modeling”, does not
necessarily imply forecasting future events. Any pattern recognition
falls under the category including future forecasting, prognosis,
diagnosis and recognizing past events (e.g., retroactive diagnosis).
Also, “predictor” and “predictor variable” are often used
interchangeably although from context it may be clear whether a
predictor refers to a variable (feature) or a full model.

In contrast, exploratory analysis aims to model the relationships among
many variables, none of which is designated as an outcome or predictor
variable. For example, predicting patients’ risk of mortality (outcome)
based on current diagnoses and laboratory results (predictor variables)
is a predictive modeling task because variables corresponding to
mortality are designated as outcome, variables corresponding to
diagnoses and laboratory results are designated as predictors, and we
predict the future unknown value of an outcome using known values of the
predictor variables. Conversely, understanding a patient population in
terms of common comorbidities that co-occur with diabetes is an
exploratory analysis task, because there is no particular outcome to
predict.

Predictive Modeling Tasks

Within predictive modeling, we distinguish between several tasks based
on the outcome type. In the rest of this chapter, we focus on three of
them: classification, regression and time-to-event modeling. These are
the outcome types and corresponding tasks most frequently encountered in
biomedical ML.

Continuous outcomes. Continuous outcomes are measured on a continuous
scale. Continuous variables can be ratios (variables that do not have a
well-defined 0 point) or intervals (which have a well-defined 0 point).
For example, lengths are intervals and a length of zero indicates that
the object does not have length. Whether we measure length in inches,
centimeters, or miles, 0 length is the same. Conversely, temperature is
a ratio, because 0 °F or 0 °C does not mean that the object has no
temperature. Furthermore, 0 temperature depends on the scale we use: 0°F
and 0°C do not designate the same temperature.

Another relevant distinction from a modeling perspective is the
distribution of the continuous variable. Commonly used distributions
include Gaussian, Poisson, exponential, negative binomial, etc.
Prediction problems with a continuous outcome are referred to as
regression problems.

Categorical variables take a value from a set of finite distinct values.
For example, color (red, amber, green), grade (A, B, C, F), or risk
category (low, medium, high) are categorical variables. Binary (also
known as binomial) variables are categorical variables that have exactly
two levels (they can take one of two values); while multinomial
variables have more than two levels.

Categorical variables with multiple levels can be further classified as
nominal or ordinal variables. In case of ordinal variables, the levels
are ordered (e.g. good, better, best), while for nominal variables, the
levels are not ordered (e.g. colors). Prediction problems with
categorical outcomes are referred to as classification problems. If the
outcome is binary, we have binary classification; if the outcome is
multinomial, we have multi-class classification (aka n-ary or
polychotomous classification).

Time-to-event outcomes. The measurement of interest is the time between
a particular time point (known as index date or index time) and an event
of interest. The quintessential example is survival, where the measure
of interest is the time between the start of the study (index date) and
death (the event of interest). The predictive modeling task that
predicts time-to-event outcomes is referred to as time-to-event modeling
or survival analysis (when the outcome is survival).

Sequence outcomes. Sequences are ordered sets of observations and when
the outcome of interest is a sequence, we have a sequence prediction
problem. Examples include genomic sequence (ordered set of nucleotides)
prediction, text synthesis or translation (predicting an ordered set of
words), or trajectory mining (predicting future sequences of e.g.,
disease states).

Structured outcomes. The outcome of the predictive model can also be a
complex structure such as a graph or the actual structure of an entity
(e.g. protein structure prediction). For techniques to discover causal
structure, see the chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”.

Exploratory Analysis Tasks

Density estimation. The goal of density estimation (also encompassing
discrete probability functions) is to infer the (often
multi-dimensional) probability distribution underlying observed data.
The simplest form of density estimation is unidimensional scaled
histograms. For example, one might be interested in describing the
probability distribution of blood glucose in a population. Density
estimation can also be performed on multi-dimensional data and
techniques exist for both low and high-dimensional data. Density
estimation has several natural uses, including discovery of multiple
modes of data, clustering and outlier detection.

Clustering. Clustering creates a grouping of the observations in a data
set such that observations that belong to the same group (cluster) are
more similar to each other than to observations that belong to a
different group. Clustering can be used, for example, for subpopulation
discovery, where well-separated groups of observations can represent
subpopulations at different states of health or groups of patients with
different disease etiology.

Clustering can be achieved based on many principles, one of which is
based on data density. In that case, clusters are high-density regions
in the data, separated from each other by low-density regions.

Outlier detection. Outliers are observations that are dissimilar to most
other observations. Outliers may either fall into low-density regions,
or they may behave very differently from model-based expectations
(model-based outlier). For example, in a hospitalized population,
outliers can be patients who have an unusually long hospital length of
stay (LoS), say, above 9 days; or alternatively, they may have a LoS of
less than 9 days, but unusually long for the disease that they got
admitted for. The first example is clearly patients who fall into a
low-density region (very few patients in a patient population stay
hospitalized for more than 9 days), while the latter patients are in a
low-density region among patients who got admitted with the same
disease.

Temporal Characteristics of the Data

A further categorization of methods is based on the temporal
characteristics of the data. It is very common for healthcare data to be
temporal, thus several AI/ML as well as classical statistical techniques
have been developed specifically to take advantage of various temporal
characteristics.

Cross-sectional data. This data captures the state of a sample from a
population at a specific point in time. The state information often
contains temporal information about the past implicitly in the
definitions of variables - but not explicitly modeled. The implicit
temporal information is typically abstracted to different time scales
and granularities. The vast majority of the machine learning techniques
expect cross-sectional data.

Cross-sectional data can also be used for predictive modeling in which
the outcome occurs at a future time relative to the the index date of
the predictor variables. For example, when modeling the 7-year risk of
diabetes, the outcome, diabetes, must occur or not within 7 years, but
the predictor variables they have been evaluated at a particular point
in time (the index date) and changes to them over the 7 years are not of
interest.

Longitudinal data. Measurements for a patient population is taken
repeatedly over time. Measurements are not necessarily taken at the same
time for everyone and not all measurements are taken each time.
Routinely collected clinical test data, falls into this category. At
most encounters with the health system, some aspect of a patient’s
health is measured and recorded. Most patients have more than one
encounter and at each encounter, different measurements (e.g., lab
tests) can be taken.

Time-series data. Similarly to longitudinal data, in time series data,
several measurements are taken over time, but unlike longitudinal data,
time-series data focuses on a single sampling unit. If we aim to model
the glucose trajectory of a single individual over a long period of
time, then we are solving a time-series modeling problem; if we aim to
model the glucose control of a population of patients over time, then we
have a longitudinal data modeling problem.

Figure 1 tabulates some of the techniques from this chapter. The columns
correspond to the various analytic tasks, while the rows correspond to
the temporal characteristics of the methods. Naturally, several methods
can be used for multiple tasks (with appropriate modifications) and with
data sets having multiple temporal characteristics. We either put the
methods into the categories where they are most prominent (e.g. SVM into
classification), or into shared categories (e.g. many techniques that
are used for classification can also be used for regression).

Method Labels

In the following sections, we are going to describe the major machine
learning methods in terms of their primary use, additional secondary
uses, key operating principles, operating characteristics and
properties, and provide a context for their use that helps assess their
appropriateness for different modeling tasks. We also mention when and
why the use of a method is not recommended.

For each method (or family of methods), we are going to present highly
digested and operationally-oriented information in what we call a Method
Label. A Method Label is similar to a drug label, presenting the most
vital information about a method at-a-glance.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Format of method labels                                             |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         | This entry describes the main    |
|                                  | purpose of the model.            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | What kind of tasks can it solve? |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Within that task, are there      |
|                                  | specific problems that this      |
|                                  | method is best suited for?       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | For example, linear regression   |
|                                  | solves predictive analytic       |
|                                  | problems with continuous         |
|                                  | outcomes.                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   | In practice, when is this method |
|                                  | used? This can be a subset of    |
|                                  | the intended use or a superset   |
|                                  | of the intended use.             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | For example, ordinary least      |
|                                  | square regression is designed    |
|                                  | for Gaussian outcomes, but is    |
|                                  | often used for a wide range of   |
|                                  | continuous outcomes.             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    | This entry describes potential   |
|                                  | situations where the method can  |
|                                  | also be used.                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | This may not be the primary      |
|                                  | intended use of the methods; or  |
|                                  | this may not be the model that   |
|                                  | is most appropriate for the use  |
|                                  | case.                            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | For example, SVM can be used for |
|                                  | regression, although its primary |
|                                  | use is classification.           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.1.4.1. This entry      |
|                                  | lists negative consequences of   |
|                                  | using this method under certain  |
|                                  | conditions.                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | For example, SVM when used for   |
|                                  | causal problems, leads to wrong  |
|                                  | causal effect estimates.         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           | A short description of how the   |
|                                  | method works.                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | For example, linear regression   |
|                                  | is approximating a regression    |
|                                  | using maximum likelihood         |
|                                  | estimates of the regression      |
|                                  | parameters.                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       | This entry describes any known   |
| Empirical evidence               | theoretical properties the       |
|                                  | method may have and the          |
|                                  | assumptions linked to them, as   |
|                                  | well as empirical evidence for   |
|                                  | the method performance.          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.1.4.1.This entry |
|                                  | provides prescriptive practice   |
|                                  | recommendations about when and   |
|                                  | how to use or not the method.    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       | Key literature related to the    |
|                                  | above.                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Readers that cannot delve into technical details can still benefit
greatly by the information provided in the Method Labels.

Chapter Layout

We begin (in section “Foundational Methods”) with describing the
foundational methods for predictive modeling of cross-sectional data.
Section “Ensemble Methods” is devoted to ensemble methods which use
foundational techniques from “Foundational Methods” to addresses issues
related to model stability and performance; and section “Regularization”
is devoted to regularization, which addresses high dimensionality, or
more broadly, constrains the model complexity. The subsequent three
sections address feature selection and dimensionality reduction,
time-to-event outcomes, and longitudinal data, respectively. We close
the chapter with a brief mention of a few more methods that the reader
should be aware of. As the reader will observe we weave classical and
modern statistical methods with mainstream ML methods since this
reflects modern ML practice and there are significant mathematical,
conceptual and computational commonalities between the fields.

Foundational Methods

Foundational methods in the chapter will refer to first-order methods
that:

1.  (a)

    Are of high theoretical and/or practical value on their own, or

     

2.  (b)

    Are of high theoretical and/or practical value in conjunction with
    other higher-order methods.

     

Ordinary Least Square (OLS) Regression

OLS regression was invented by Sir Francis Galton in 1875 as he
described the relationship of the weight of sweet pea seeds and the
weight of the seeds from their mother plants. This experiment also gave
rise to the correlation coefficient: Karl Pearson, Galton’s biographer,
developed the mathematical formulation for the Pearson correlation
coefficient in 1896 [1].

Given a matrix X of predictor variables (independent variables) and
outcome (dependent) variable y, the ordinary linear regression model is

[$$ y\sim Normal\left( X\beta, {\sigma}^2\right) $$]

where β is a vector of coefficients. The outcome is assumed to be
normally distributed with mean Xβ and variance σ². In other words, the
outcome has a deterministic component X_(i)β for the i^(th) observation,
and a random component, which is Gaussian noise with mean 0 and variance
σ². The objective is to find the coefficient vector β, which makes the
observations y the most likely, that is to maximize the Gaussian log
likelihood

[$$ \mathscr{l}\left(\beta
\right)=\mathrm{const}-{\sum}_i\frac{{\left({y}_i-{X}_i\beta
\right)}^2}{2{\sigma}^2}, $$]

where i iterates over the observations. The coefficient vector β that
maximizes the log likelihood is the same vector that minimizes the least
square error ∑_(i)(y_(i) − X_(i)β)², hence the name Ordinary Least
Square regression.

As a least square estimator, OLS is “BLUE” (best linear unbiased
estimator) [2]. The coefficient estimates are normally distributed,
allowing for a Wald-type test for their significance. The least square
problem is convex, thus when a solution exists, it is the global
solution.

Assumptions. The assumptions follow from the model: (1) for all
observations, the noise component has constant variance (σ²). Having
uniform variance across the observations is referred to as
homoscedasticity. (2) The errors of the observations are independent.
(3) Observations are identically distributed. (4) The mean of the
observations is a linear combination of the predictor variables. The
effect of the predictors on the outcome is thus linear and additive.

Expressive capability. OLS, in its native form, is only able to express
linear and additive effects. By explicitly including transformations of
the original variables, the linear effect assumption can be relaxed.
Explicitly including interactions terms of the predictor variables can
relax the additivity assumption. OLS has no ability to automatically
discover interactions or nonlinearities, so these need be hand-crafted
by the data scientist.

Dependent and outcome variable types. Ordinary linear regression assumes
that the observations (rows of X) are independently sampled and thus it
is more appropriate for dependent variables that can be represented as
regular tabular data and a continuous outcome variable that follows a
Gaussian distribution.

Sample size requirement. Ordinary linear regression is not appropriate
for high-dimensional data, where the number of predictor variables is
similar to the number of observations or exceeds them. As a rule of
thumb, 10 observations per predictor variable is recommended. This is
one of the least sample-intensive techniques, thus when the number of
observations is low and the number of predictor variables is low,
ordinary linear regression may be the most appropriate modeling
technique.

Main use and its context. OLS is intended to solve regression problems
with Gaussian outcomes. Guarantees about the solution hold true only for
this use case.

Intepretability. For a covariate (predictor variables) X_(i) with
coefficient β_(i), every unit increase in X_(i) is associated with an
increase of β_(i) in the outcome, if all other predictor variables are
fixed.

As a result, OLS is highly interpretable, and also fit for use with
causal estimation once the causal structure is known (see chapter
“Foundations of Causal ML”).

We recommend using OLS as a “default” algorithm in low dimensional data
unless a generalized linear regression model with a different linkage is
more appropriate (see GLM). Building an OLS model, even if its
performance is expected to be inferior to more advanced regression
techniques, is recommended, because the cost of building an OLS model is
minimal, the model is highly interpretable, and it can reveal data
problems, biases, design problems and potentially other issues. As we
will see the potentially higher predictive performance from other
methods needs to be evaluated from the perspective of trading
interpretability for performance, and in some applications, higher
interpretability can balance out some performance deficit.

Optimality. The coefficients found by maximizing the likelihood are
unbiased. Also the log likelihood function is convex, thus the global
maximum is easy to find.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: ordinary least squares regression                     |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Regression problems           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Continuous, preferably        |
|                                  | Gaussian outcomes                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Cross-sectional data          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • First choice, most common     |
|                                  | regression method in low         |
|                                  | dimensional data                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • When highly interpretable     |
|                                  | model is required                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • May achieve acceptable        |
|                                  | performance for some             |
|                                  | non-Gaussian continuous outcomes |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.2.1.1. In              |
|                                  | high-dimensional data,           |
|                                  | coefficients may be biased or    |
|                                  | cannot be estimated              |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.1.2. OLS is          |
|                                  | negatively affected by high      |
|                                  | collinearity                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Least square estimation (or   |
|                                  | equivalently, maximizing the     |
|                                  | Gaussian log likelihood)         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • OLS is a consistent,          |
| empirical evidence               | efficient estimator of the       |
|                                  | coefficients                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • The coefficients are          |
|                                  | asymptotically normally          |
|                                  | distributed                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Minimizing the least squares  |
|                                  | is a convex optimization         |
|                                  | problem. If a solution exists,   |
|                                  | numerical solvers will find the  |
|                                  | global solution.                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Highly interpretable and      |
|                                  | causally consistent models       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Vast literature in health     |
|                                  | sciences documenting successful  |
|                                  | applications                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Because it is a simple model, |
|                                  | risk of overfitting in low       |
|                                  | sample is lower than complex     |
|                                  | models                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • By the same token it can fail |
|                                  | to capture highly non-linear     |
|                                  | data generating functions        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.2.1.1. Unless a  |
|                                  | generalized linear model is more |
|                                  | appropriate, OLS is a good       |
|                                  | default technique.               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.1.2. Building  |
|                                  | an OLS, even if it is known not  |
|                                  | to produce optimal predictive    |
|                                  | performance, can reveal data     |
|                                  | problems, biases, etc.           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Numerous good textbooks       |
|                                  | describe OLS regression. Below   |
|                                  | is one example. Tabachnick &     |
|                                  | Fidell. Using Multivariate       |
|                                  | Statistics. Pearson, 2019        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Generalized Linear Models (GLM)

Generalized linear models (GLM) were first introduced by Nelder and
Wedderburn in 1972. GLM was born out of the desire to model a broader
range of outcome types than Gaussian outcomes and was enabled by
advancements in statistical computing [3]. The defining characteristic
of GLMs is that the data generating functions is not linear and a link
function linearizes the relationship between an outcome and the
predictor variables, where the outcome is distributed by an exponential
family distribution. A fully specified GLM has the following components:

1.  1.

    The distribution of y

     

2.  2.

    A linear predictor η = Xβ

     

3.  3.

    The link function g(μ) that links the expectation of E(y) = μ to the
    linear predictor: η = g(μ); or equivalently, μ = g⁻¹(η).

     

As an example, let us consider logistic regression, linear regression
for outcomes with binomial distribution. The distribution of y_(i) is
Bernoulli with parameter η_(i), and the link function is

[$$ \mathrm{logit}\left({y}_i\right)=\log\ \frac{\Pr
\left({y}_i\right)}{1-\Pr \left({y}_i\right)}={X}_i\beta . $$]

The objective is to find the coefficient vector β that maximizes the
likelihood of observing y, which in case of the logistic regression is
the binomial likelihood.

GLMs are frequently used for modeling outcomes that follow other
exponential family distributions, including multinomial, Poisson, and
negative binomial [4].

Expressive capability. The link function does not change the model’s
expressive capability; the relationship between η and the predictor
variables is linear, the only difference from OLS is that the linear
predictor is transformed through the link function so that GLM can model
specific families of non-linear functions.

Dependent and outcome variable types. GLM are best suited for
cross-sectional data (with independent and identically distributed
observations), but the outcome types have to be distributed in
accordance with the link function.

Prediction task. GLM can solve classification problems (logistic and
multinomial link) and regression problems where the continuous outcome
can be distributed following any of the exponential family
distributions.

Theoretical properties. The GLM is a maximum likelihood estimator for
the exponential family distributions. Some instances of GLM, such as an
overdispersed GLM, does not correspond to an actual exponential family
distribution. In such cases, a variance function can be specified and
GLM becomes a quasi-likelihood estimator [5]. Both estimators (maximum
likelihood and quasi-likelihood) are consistent and efficient. They
yield coefficient estimates that are normally distributed and thus the
Wald test can be used for testing their significance. Both the
likelihood and quasi-likelihood are convex, thus when a solution exists,
it is a global solution and solvers can typically find it efficiently.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: generalized linear models                             |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Predictive modeling with      |
|                                  | outcomes that follow a           |
|                                  | distribution from the            |
|                                  | exponential family (i.e.,        |
|                                  | relationship of outcome and      |
|                                  | predictor variables can be       |
|                                  | non-linear)                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Most common applications are  |
|                                  | classification (logistic         |
|                                  | regression), estimating count    |
|                                  | outcomes (Poisson regression)    |
|                                  | and exponential outcomes         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Cross-sectional data          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • First-pass/comparator         |
|                                  | classifier in low dimensional    |
|                                  | problems with limited need for   |
|                                  | input interaction modeling       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Highly interpretable model    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Applicable also to deviations |
|                                  | from the exponential family,     |
|                                  | most typically where the sample  |
|                                  | variance is higher than          |
|                                  | theoretically expected under the |
|                                  | corresponding exponential family |
|                                  | distribution (over-dispersion)   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Logistic regression may offer |
|                                  | acceptable performance in        |
|                                  | classification problems, where   |
|                                  | the linear additive assumption   |
|                                  | is mildly violated               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.2.2.1. In              |
|                                  | high-dimensional data,           |
|                                  | coefficients may not be          |
|                                  | estimatable                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.2.2. Tendency to     |
|                                  | overfit in the presence of high  |
|                                  | collinearity                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • When the outcome follows an   |
|                                  | exponential family distribution, |
|                                  | GLM is a maximum likelihood      |
|                                  | estimator                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • When the outcome does not     |
|                                  | follow an exponential family     |
|                                  | distribution, GLM can be a       |
|                                  | quasi-likelihood estimator       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • GLM provides consistent,      |
| empirical evidence               | efficient estimates of           |
|                                  | coefficients                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • The coefficients are          |
|                                  | asymptotically normally          |
|                                  | distributed                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Minimizing the likelihood or  |
|                                  | quasi-likelihood is a convex     |
|                                  | optimization problem. If a       |
|                                  | solution exists, numerical       |
|                                  | solvers will find the global     |
|                                  | solution efficiently.            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Highly interpretable models   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • GLM can have high performance |
|                                  | even when the assumptions are    |
|                                  | violated. Chapter “Lessons       |
|                                  | Learned from Historical          |
|                                  | Failures, Limitations and        |
|                                  | Successes of AI/ML in Healthcare |
|                                  | and the Health Sciences.         |
|                                  | Enduring Problems, and the Role  |
|                                  | of BPs” discusses comparisons    |
|                                  | between logistic regression and  |
|                                  | more modern ML techniques        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.2.2.1. Use GLM   |
|                                  | as first pass, or main           |
|                                  | comparator classifier            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.2.2. Building  |
|                                  | a GLM, even if it is known not   |
|                                  | to produce optimal predictive    |
|                                  | performance, can reveal data     |
|                                  | problems, biases, etc.           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Walter Stroup. Generalized    |
|                                  | Mixed Linear Models, CRC Press,  |
|                                  | 2003                             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • P. McCullagh, JA Nelder.      |
|                                  | Generalized Linear Models, CRC   |
|                                  | Press, 1989                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Ordinal Regression Models

There are two main strategies for modeling ordinal outcomes using GLMs.
The first one is cumulative logits and the second one is proportional
odds [6].

Consider an ordinal outcome variable with J levels, 1 < 2 < … < J. Under
the cumulative logits strategy, J-1 logistic regression models are fit.
The j^(th) model is a classifier distinguishing y ≤ j verus y > j. Under
the proportional odds strategy, again, J-1 models are built, but these
models share all coefficients except for the intercept. The j^(th) model
is

[$$ \mathrm{logit}\left(y\le j\right)={\alpha}_j+ X\beta, $$]

where α_(j) is the level-specific intercept and β are the slopes shared
across the J-1 models.

Notice, that the cumulative logits model can use any binary component
classifier; while the proportional odds GLM is a special case of
multi-task learning.

Key reference: Agresti A. Categorical Data Anlaysis, second edition.
Chapter 7.2. Wiley Interscience, 2002.

Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)

For main milestones in the development of ANNs see chapter “Lessons
Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML in
Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of
BPs”. In this section, we focus on the general form of ANNs for
cross-sectional data. Image and language model applications are
discussed in Chapters “Considerations for Specialized Health AI and ML
Modelling and Applications: NLP” and “Considerations for Specialized
Health AI and ML Modelling and Applications: Imaging—Through the
perspective of Dermatology”.

Artificial neural networks (or neural networks, NN, for short) can be
thought of as regression models stacked on top of each other, and each
regression model is thus called a layer. Each of these layers are
multiple regression models, meaning they have potentially multivariate
inputs as well as multivariate outputs. The outputs from each layer, are
transformed using nonlinear functions, called the activation functions,
and then passed to the subsequent layer as their input. The final layer
(aka the output layer) provides the network’s output(s).

Figure 2 shows an example NN with two hidden (aka encoding) and an
output layer. The output from this network is

[$$
\hat{y}={f}_3\left({b}_3+{W}_3{f}_2\left({b}_2+{W}_2{f}_1\left({b}_1+{W}_1X\right)\right)\right),
$$]

where the f_(i)(·) is the activation function, b_(i) are the biases (or
bias vectors) and W_(i) are the weights (weight matrices) of connections
coming into layer i. In layer i, the input is multiplied by W_(i), the
biases b_(i) are added and the result is passed through the activation
function f_(i)(), producing the output from layer i. The input to the
first layer is X, and the output from the topmost layer, the third layer
in this example, is the outcome [$$ \hat{y} $$]. Common activation
functions include the sigmoid function (logit function), ReLU (rectified
linear unit), and softmax.

[]

A flowchart represents X followed by encoding layers 1 and 2 and an
output layer through W 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The output received is
the Y cap.

Expressive power. NNs are universal function approximators, they can
express any relationship between the predictors and the output without
distributional restrictions. This includes non-linear relationships as
well as interactions.

Predictor and outcome types. The basic form of NNs introduced here is
most appropriate for cross-sectional data without any special structure.
However, when the data has special structure, corresponding network
architectures have been proposed for many of them. For example,
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [7] have been proposed for image
data, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [8]and Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) [9] for sequence data, Transformers [10] for language models,
Graph Neural Networks [11] for graph data, etc. We discuss some of these
architectures in chapters “Considerations for Specialized Health AI and
ML Modelling and Applications: NLP” and “Considerations for Specialized
Health AI and ML Modelling and Applications: Imaging—Through the
perspective of Dermatology”.

Sample size. The sample size required for NNs can be very large. The
deeper the network (the more layers it has), the more parameters it has
and the larger the required sample size. Many practical applications of
deep learning use millions of parameters. Although the traditional
statistical rule of the thumb, that the number of required observations
is approximately 10 times the number of parameters, does not hold for
deep learning—they can operate on data with fewer samples—the required
sample size is still very large.

The largest GPT-3 language model, which has 175 billion parameters, was
trained on 45 TB of text data taking 355 GPU-years [12]. Certain
structures (most notably convolution) and regularization can alleviate
the sample size requirement to some degree.

Interpretability. The key to NNs is to automatically transform the
original data space into a new representation that is more amenable to
the predictive modeling task at hand. A side effect of this automatic
transformation is that the meaning of the original space is lost and the
meaning of the resulting variables are often unknown. Thus, NNs are
considered black-box (uninterpretable). One way to interpret them is by
“local approximation” of the NN using an interpretable model, such as a
multivariate regression model, fitted over input-output pairs sampled
from the NN model.

NNs in Less Data-Rich Environments

Two significant shortcomings of NN is the sample size requirement and
the training cost. Several strategies exist aiming to alleviate these
shortcomings.

Transfer learning. Training neural networks, especially highly
performant, large networks, is very expensive not only in terms of CPU
time but also in terms of required sample. Large pre-trained generic
models (so-called foundational models) are available in many application
areas, including language processing and computer vision. These generic
models transform the input space (say written English text) into a
representation that is more amenable to carrying out language modeling
tasks than the original representation. To solve a specific
language-related task, such as distinguishing patients with and without
dementia, a foundational language model (with many pre-trained encoding
layers) can become extended by a task-specific layer so that the new
model performs the actual classification task. Only the task-specific
layer needs to be trained.

Incorporating domain knowledge. Another avenue to reduce training cost
is to incorporate domain knowledge as follows: when synthetic data for a
domain can be generated, NNs can be pre-trained using synthetic data to
learn a representation of the application. Then this pre-trained model
can be further refined using real data to solve specific problems in
that domain. Beside pre-training, several other methods exist, which
include augmenting the input space of a NN with output from physical
models (e.g. climate models) or ascribing meaning to hidden nodes and
constraining the connections among such hidden nodes based on what is
possible in the real world. See [13] for a survey of incorporating
domain knowledge into machine learning models.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: artificial neural networks (including deep learning)  |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Solving predictive modeling   |
|                                  | problems. Classification,        |
|                                  | including classification with    |
|                                  | very many classes, is most       |
|                                  | common, but it can also solve    |
|                                  | regression and time-to-event     |
|                                  | problems                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • In data-rich environments,    |
|                                  | ANNs can produce highly          |
|                                  | performant models                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • ANNs are recommended when     |
|                                  | sample size is very high and a   |
|                                  | very complex function needs be   |
|                                  | modeled                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Neural networks work best for |
|                                  | specific applications, with      |
|                                  | network architectures            |
|                                  | specifically designed for that   |
|                                  | application. Such applications   |
|                                  | include image analysis, text and |
|                                  | audio modeling, text synthesis,  |
|                                  | etc.                             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Modeling distributions using  |
|                                  | GANs and auto-encoder variants   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.2.4.1. ANNs can fail   |
|                                  | when sample size is not large    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.4.2. ANNs are        |
|                                  | innately black-box models. Their |
|                                  | use in applications where        |
|                                  | transparency is important may be |
|                                  | problematic                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.4.3. ANNs do not     |
|                                  | reduce the number of features    |
|                                  | needed for prediction and this   |
|                                  | may be an important requirement  |
|                                  | in many biomedical problems.     |
|                                  | However, using strong feature    |
|                                  | selectors before running the ANN |
|                                  | modeling may be a good           |
|                                  | combination for some problems    |
|                                  | (but can be detrimental in       |
|                                  | others)                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.4.4. Training cost   |
|                                  | is high due to (a) large cost of |
|                                  | training a single model, and (b) |
|                                  | large number of models that need |
|                                  | be trained to explore the        |
|                                  | immense hyperparameter space     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.4.5. ANNs do not     |
|                                  | have either formal or            |
|                                  | empirically competitive causal   |
|                                  | structure discovery capabilities |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.4.6. Even when a     |
|                                  | causal structure is known,       |
|                                  | estimating causal effects with   |
|                                  | ANNs leads to biased results     |
|                                  | because the ANN is not designed  |
|                                  | to condition on known            |
|                                  | confounders and may introduce    |
|                                  | other effect estimation biases   |
|                                  | (e.g., due to blocking mediator  |
|                                  | paths and opening M-structure    |
|                                  | paths)                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Minimizing a penalized loss   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Linear combinations of inputs |
|                                  | transformed through a non-linear |
|                                  | activation function              |
|                                  | layer-by-layer yields a          |
|                                  | non-linear model                 |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • ANNs with at least two hidden |
| empirical evidence               | (encoding) layer and unbounded   |
|                                  | number of units, can be          |
|                                  | universal function approximators |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • NNs are most commonly solved  |
|                                  | using gradient optimizers.       |
|                                  | Because the objective function   |
|                                  | of NNs can be arbitrarily        |
|                                  | complex with multiple local      |
|                                  | optima, the optimizers may fail  |
|                                  | to reach the globally optimal    |
|                                  | solution                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • In several biomedical         |
|                                  | problems deep learning and other |
|                                  | ANN learners have exhibited      |
|                                  | superior accuracy (especially in |
|                                  | image recognition). There is     |
|                                  | also significant evidence that   |
|                                  | in several clinical domains not  |
|                                  | involving images they do not     |
|                                  | outperform vanilla logistic      |
|                                  | regression (see Chapter “Lessons |
|                                  | Learned from Historical          |
|                                  | Failures, Limitations and        |
|                                  | Successes of AI/ML in Healthcare |
|                                  | and the Health Sciences.         |
|                                  | Enduring Problems, and the Role  |
|                                  | of BPs”)                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.2.4.1. Deep      |
|                                  | learning is most recommended for |
|                                  | predictive modeling in large     |
|                                  | imaging datasets. Other domains  |
|                                  | may also be good candidates. In  |
|                                  | all cases additional             |
|                                  | (alternative and comparator)     |
|                                  | methods should be explored at    |
|                                  | this time within the same error  |
|                                  | estimation protocols (see        |
|                                  | chapter “The Development Process |
|                                  | and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade  |
|                                  | and Other Safety and             |
|                                  | Performance-Sensitive AI/ML      |
|                                  | Models”)                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.4.2. At this   |
|                                  | time ANNs are not suitable for   |
|                                  | causal discovery and modeling.   |
|                                  | Formal causal methods should be  |
|                                  | preferred (chapter “Foundations  |
|                                  | of Causal ML”)                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.4.3. ANNs are  |
|                                  | not suitable for problems where  |
|                                  | explainability and transparency  |
|                                  | are required, or when large      |
|                                  | reduction of the feature space   |
|                                  | is important to model            |
|                                  | application                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Goodfellow I, Bengio Y,       |
|                                  | Courville A. Deep Learning. MIT  |
|                                  | Press, 2016                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Discussion and references in  |
|                                  | Chapter “Lessons Learned from    |
|                                  | Historical Failures, Limitations |
|                                  | and Successes of AI/ML in        |
|                                  | Healthcare and the Health        |
|                                  | Sciences. Enduring Problems, and |
|                                  | the Role of BPs”                 |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Support Vector Machines

Support Vector Machines (SVMs) is a family of methods that can be used
for classification, regression, outlier detection, clustering, feature
selection and a special form of learning called transductive learning
[14–16]. SVMs use two key principles (1) regularization and (2) kernel
projection.

SVM regularization: SVMs cast the classification or regression problems
as a non-linear quadratic optimization problem where the solution to
predictive modeling is formed as a “data fit loss + parameter penalty”
mathematical objective function. Intuitively and as depicted in Fig. 3,
each object used for training and subsequent model application is
represented as a vector of measurements in a space of relevant
dimensions (variable inputs). We will discuss regularization in the
general (non-SVM) setting in section “Regularization”.

[]

An X-Y axis scatterplot represents the S V M and classification problem.
A diagonal line and 2 dotted lines on its sides follow an increasing
trend. A cluster of stars on the left of the diagonal line is the
negative instance, and a cluster of plots on the right is the positive
instance.

Binary classification is formulated in SVMs as a geometrical problem of
finding a hyperplane (i.e., the generalization of a straight line from 2
dimensions to n dimensions) such that all the instances above the
hyperplane belong to one class and all subjects below the hyperplane to
the other. Translating this geometrical problem into linear algebra
constraints is a straightforward algebraic exercise. Every variable has
a weight and collectively these weights determine the hyperplane
decision function.

To ensure a model with good generalization performance and resistance to
over fitting, the SVM learning procedure requires two elements: (a) That
the hyperplane must be such that the number of misclassified instances
is minimized (the “data fit loss” part of the objective function to be
minimized). (b) A generalization-enforcing constraint, the so-called
“regularizer”, that is the total sum of squared weights of all
variables, must also be minimized. Specifically, the regularizer must be
minimized subject to the locations and labels of training data fed into
the algorithm. This is an instance of quadratic program non-linear
optimization function that can be solved exactly and very fast.

[$$ \mathit{\operatorname{Minimize}}\kern0.5em
\frac{1}{2}{\sum}_{i=1}^n{w}_i^2\kern0.75em \mathrm{subject}\
\mathrm{to}\kern0.75em
{y}_i\left(\overrightarrow{w}\overrightarrow{x_i}+b\right)-1\ge
0\kern1.25em \mathrm{for}\ i=1,\dots, N $$]

A “soft margin” formulation of the learning problem in SVMs allows for
handling noisy data (and to some degree non-linearities). The primary
method for modeling non-linear decision functions is kernel projection
which works pictorially as follows (Fig. 4).

[]

A dual scatterplot graph of X 2 versus X 1. The positive plots are
surrounded by negative plots. It is converted to a 3-D graph through
kernel functions. Both the plots follow a bell-shaped pattern on a grid.
The top portion is made up of positive plots, while the bottom is made
up of negative ones.

In a non-linearly separable problem, there is no straight line
(hyperplane) that accurately separates the two classes. The SVM (and
other kernel techniques) use a mapping function that transforms the
original variables (x¹, x_(2,) in Fig. 4) into SVM-constructed features,
such that there exists a straight line (hyperplane) that separates the
data in the new space. Once the solution is found in the mapped space,
it is reverse-transformed to the original input variable space. Once
projected back to the original input space the solution is a non-linear
decision surface. Because the mapping function is very expensive to
compute, special kernel functions are used that allow solving the SVM
optimization without incurring the expense of calculating the full
mapping. In mathematical terms the above take the following form:

[$$
f(x)=\mathit{\operatorname{sign}}\left(\overrightarrow{w}\overrightarrow{x}+b\right)
$$]

[$$
\overrightarrow{w}={\sum}_{i=1}^N{\alpha}_i{y}_i\overrightarrow{x_i}.
$$]

When data is mapped into higher-dimensional features space [$$ \varPhi
\left(\overrightarrow{x}\right) $$],

[$$ f(x)=\mathit{\operatorname{sign}}\left(\overrightarrow{w}\varPhi
\left(\overrightarrow{x}\right)+b\right) $$]

[$$ \overrightarrow{w}={\sum}_{i=1}^N{\alpha}_i{y}_i\varPhi
\left(\overrightarrow{x_i}\right) $$]

Combining them into a classifier yields

[$$
f(x)=\mathit{\operatorname{sign}}\left({\sum}_{i=1}^N{\alpha}_i{y}_i\varPhi
\left(\overrightarrow{x_i}\right)\circ \varPhi
\left(\overrightarrow{x}\right)+b\right)=\mathit{\operatorname{sign}}\left({\sum}_{i=1}^N{\alpha}_i{y}_i\mathrm{K}\left(\overrightarrow{{\mathrm{x}}_{\mathrm{i}}},\overrightarrow{x}\right)+b\right).
$$]

The above computations are extremely quick to execute and are solved
effectively allowing the SVM to explore an astronomical-size space of
non-linear interaction effects in quadratic running time and without
over-fitting. Let’s demonstrate the remarkable computational and sample
efficiency that the kernel projection affords using an example where we
will compare the number of parameters that need to be estimated and the
sample size needed for a relatively simple non-linear SVM with
polynomial kernel degrees of 3 or 5 and number of variables to be
modeled ranging from 2 to 100. We will compare with the sample needed
and interactions effects that need be constructed and estimated by the
corresponding regression model under a conservative requirement of 5
sample instances per parameter.

As can be seen from Table 1. (adapted from [15] for a dataset with 100
variables with up to fifth degree polynomial interaction effects,
classical regression would need >96 million parameters to be explicitly
constructed and > 482 million sample size in order to estimate the
model’s parameters. By comparison the SVM algorithm explores the same
space in time quadratic to the number of variables (i.e., in practice in
seconds in a regular personal computer). Moreover, the SVM
generalization error is independent of the number of variables and is
bounded by a function of the number of support vectors which is smaller
or equal to the available sample size (see chapter “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems” for more details).

Table 1

Comparison of non-linear SVM vs classical regression in terms of number
of parameters. N denotes the (often very small) sample size available in
practice

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Number of   | Polynomial  | Number of   | Number of   | Required    |
| variables   | degree      | parameters  | parameters  | sample by   |
|             |             | in the SVM  | in the      | Regression  |
|             |             | model       | Regression  |             |
|             |             |             | model       |             |
+:============+:============+:============+:============+:============+
| 2           | 3           | ≤N          | 10          | 50          |
+-------------+-------------+             +-------------+-------------+
| 10          | 3           |             | 286         | 1430        |
+-------------+-------------+             +-------------+-------------+
| 10          | 5           |             | 3003        | 15,015      |
+-------------+-------------+             +-------------+-------------+
| 100         | 3           |             | 176,851     | 884,255     |
+-------------+-------------+             +-------------+-------------+
| 100         | 5           |             | 96,560,646  | 482,803,230 |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

One way to think of the effects of regularization is that by forcing
weights to be as small as possible, all variables that are not relevant
or are superfluous to the predictive modeling will tend to have zero or
near zero weights and are effectively “filtered” out of the model.
Equivalently, the minimization of weights entails that the separation
between classes is geometrically maximized and statistical machine
learning theory shows that this often leads to more generalizable
models. In yet another view, regularization entails that the target
function is smooth, in the sense that small differences in the input
variables result in small changes to the response variable’s values.

Additional aspects of SVMs include: primary and dual formulations of the
learning problem (suitable for low dimensionality/high sample, or high
dimensionality/small sample situations respectively), using only dot
product representations of the data, Structural Risk Minimization (i.e.,
the model complexity classes are neatly organized in embedding classes
so that model selection can be orderly and efficient), and known bounds
of error. These bounds are not dependent on the number of input
variables but only on the support vectors (which are at most equal to
the sample size N) thus demonstrating the power of SVMs to self-regulate
their complexity and avoid overfitting (see also chapter “Overfitting,
Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance
Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and AI” for
comprehensive discussion of overfitting and underfitting). SVM scores
can be converted to probabilities in a post-hoc manner and can also be
used to perform feature selection for other classifiers. While SVMs
output scores and not probabilities, these scores can be converted to
calibrated probabilities [15].

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: support vector machines                               |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Solving classification and    |
|                                  | feature selection problems       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • SVMs can produce highly       |
|                                  | performant models in low sample  |
|                                  | size/large dimensionality        |
|                                  | settings                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Dominant performance in       |
|                                  | certain domains (e.g., gene      |
|                                  | expression and other omics and   |
|                                  | multi-modal based classifiers,   |
|                                  | text classification)             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • SVMs are suitable for         |
|                                  | clinical data, omic data, text   |
|                                  | and other unstructured data as   |
|                                  | well as combinations             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Especially suited to          |
|                                  | non-linear, noisy and small      |
|                                  | sample data.                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Can be combined with other    |
|                                  | classifiers and feature          |
|                                  | selectors to form strong         |
|                                  | analysis stacks and protocols    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Are very fast to train and to |
|                                  | run model inferences             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Applicable, but not as first  |
|                                  | choice, to regression,           |
|                                  | clustering, and outlier          |
|                                  | detection                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.2.5.1. SVMs are        |
|                                  | unsuitable for causal discovery. |
|                                  | The features they select are not |
|                                  | interpretable causally. SVM      |
|                                  | variable weights are not         |
|                                  | causally valid even if true      |
|                                  | causal features only are         |
|                                  | included in the model            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.5.2. Linear SVMs are |
|                                  | easily interpretable. Non-linear |
|                                  | SVMs require additional steps    |
|                                  | for explanation and are innately |
|                                  | “black box” models               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.5.3. Error bounds    |
|                                  | are loose and typically cannot   |
|                                  | be used to guide model selection |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Maximum margin (gap)          |
|                                  | classifiers with hard or soft    |
|                                  | margins.                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Regularization                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Quadratic Programming         |
|                                  | formulation of learning problem  |
|                                  | guarantees optimal solution in   |
|                                  | tractable time                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Kernel projection enables     |
|                                  | fast exploration of immense      |
|                                  | spaces of non-linearities        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Structured risk minimization  |
|                                  | ensures that kernel              |
|                                  | hyper-parameters relate          |
|                                  | monotonically to error           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Can model practically any     |
| empirical evidence               | function                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Known error bounds            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Extremely sample and          |
|                                  | computationally efficient        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Overfitting resistant         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Best of class performance in  |
|                                  | several domains                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.2.5.1. Primary   |
|                                  | choice for omics, text           |
|                                  | classification, and combined     |
|                                  | clinical/molecular/text tasks    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.5.2. Secondary |
|                                  | choice for feature selection     |
|                                  | (with Markov boundary methods    |
|                                  | being first choice). In very     |
|                                  | small sample situations where    |
|                                  | Markov boundary methods may      |
|                                  | suffer, SVM feature selection    |
|                                  | can be first choice              |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.5.3. SVM       |
|                                  | weights features or models       |
|                                  | should not be interpreted        |
|                                  | causally                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.5.4. Explain   |
|                                  | SVMs by converting them to       |
|                                  | interpretable models via         |
|                                  | meta-learning or other           |
|                                  | approaches; and convert scores   |
|                                  | to probabilities when needed     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Statnikov A, Aliferis CF,     |
|                                  | Hardin DP, Guyon I. A gentle     |
|                                  | introduction to support vector   |
|                                  | machines. In: Biomedicine:       |
|                                  | Theory and methods (Vol. 1).     |
|                                  | World scientific. 2011           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Statnikov,A, Aliferis, CF,    |
|                                  | Hardin DP, Guyon I. A gentle     |
|                                  | introduction to support vector   |
|                                  | machines.In: Biomedicine: Case   |
|                                  | studies and benchmarks (Vol. 2). |
|                                  | World scientific. 2012           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Vapnik V. the nature of       |
|                                  | statistical learning theory.     |
|                                  | SpringerScience & Business       |
|                                  | Media. 2013                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Aphinyanaphongs, Y.,          |
|                                  | Tsamardinos, I., Statnikov, A.,  |
|                                  | Hardin, D. and Aliferis, C.F.,   |
|                                  | 2005. Text categorization models |
|                                  | for high-quality article         |
|                                  | retrieval in internal medicine.  |
|                                  | Journal of the American medical  |
|                                  | informatics association, 12(2),  |
|                                  | pp.207–216                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Statnikov, A., Aliferis,      |
|                                  | C.F., Tsamardinos, I., Hardin,   |
|                                  | D. and levy, S., 2005. A         |
|                                  | comprehensive evaluation of      |
|                                  | multicategory classification     |
|                                  | methods for microarray gene      |
|                                  | expression cancer diagnosis.     |
|                                  | Bioinformatics, 21(5),           |
|                                  | pp.631–643                       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Naïve Bayesian Classifier (NBC) and Bayesian Networks (BNs)

BNs and the theoretical Optimal Bayes Classifier (OBC) are covered in
the AI reasoning under uncertainty, and in the machine leaning theory
sections of chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”.
Causal BNs are instrumental for causal discovery and modeling. They are
covered in Chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”. The Markov Boundary
feature selection methods have their origins in BN theory and are
covered in the previous chapters and in feature selection section
“Feature Selection and Dimensionality Reduction” of the present chapter.
We thus defined here the Naïve Bayes (NB) classifier and then provide a
unified method label that spans NB and BN classification techniques.

Naïve Bayes (NB)

NB is a highly restricted simplification of the complete (brute force)
application of Bayes’ Theorem in classification.

For an observation vector x_(i) and corresponding outcome y_(i), which
takes values from one of the values c₁, c₂, …, c_(m), the predicted
probability that the outcome has value c_(j) can be computed through the
Bayes formula

[$$ \Pr \left({y}_i={c}_j|{x}_i\right)=\frac{\Pr
\left({x}_i|{y}_i={c}_j\right)\Pr \left({y}_i={c}_j\right)}{\Pr
\left({x}_i\right)}. $$]

where Pr(x_(i)) = ∑_(j) Pr (x_(i)| y_(i) = c_(j)) Pr (y_(i) = c_(j)).
Suppose we constructed a probability table for Pr(x_(i)| y_(i)), for
binary x_(i) it would be a table of size exponential to the number of
predictor variables. This would also lead to difficulties in estimating
the large sample probabilities from a small sample dataset, because the
dataset size would have to be large enough to contain sufficient number
of observations to estimate every single x_(i) combination, however low
the probability. To reduce this burden, Naïve Bayes classifier makes the
assumption that the predictor variables are conditionally independent of
each other given the outcome value. This simplifies the computation of
Pr(x_(i)| y_(i)) to

[$$ \Pr \left({x}_i|{y}_i\right)={\prod}_k\Pr
\left({x}_{ik}|{y}_i\right) $$]

where x_(ik) is the k^(th) element (component) of the vector x_(i).
Under the Naïve Bayes assumption, we only need to estimate Pr(x_(ik)|
y_(i)) for each each variable x_(k), which reduces the sample size and
compute time required for the estimation from exponential to linear in
the number of variables.

The problem with NB is that by adopting unrealistic assumptions of
conditional independence, it introduces serious errors in distributions
where features are not independent given the target class.

Also, if we allow outcomes to not be mutually exclusive (e.g. a patient
may have serval diseases simultaneously), then we need to incorporate
2^(|m|) values in the outcome variable which exponentially increases (to
the number m of outcome values, e.g., diagnostic categories) the number
of probabilities that need be estimated and stored. Hence it is common
to see the added NB assumption of mutually exclusive and exhaustive
values of the target variable. Of course in medical domains this
assumption is very commonly violated as well.

In summary, the problems with brute force Bayes is that of
intractability, and of high error in the estimates of joint
instantiation (because invariably the real-life sample size is never
enough to estimate an exponential number of parameters). The problems
with NB is that assumptions rarely hold in numerous biomedical domains.

In early years of AI/ML and before the advent of BNs (that can decompose
the joint distribution and store only the smallest number of
probabilities needed to accurately represent it), NB was used widely.
All modern benchmarks suggest however that NB is no longer a competitive
classifier (unless we can tolerate large departures from predictive
optimality in order to save storage space). Finally, it is worth noting
the work of [17] that show that under specific target functions and loss
functions, NB can perform well even though its nominal assumptions are
violated. These types of distributions are rare in biomedicine however,
and better alternatives exist.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: Naïve Bayes (NB), Bayesian Networks (BNs), causal     |
| BNs (CBNs) and Markov Boundary methods                              |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Classification, causal        |
|                                  | structure discovery, feature     |
|                                  | selection                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Classification under a range  |
|                                  | of sufficient assumptions that   |
|                                  | guarantee asymptotic             |
|                                  | correctness: Naïve Bayes (NB)    |
|                                  | have highly restrictive          |
|                                  | assumptions, while BNs (see      |
|                                  | chapter “Foundations and         |
|                                  | Properties of AI/ML Systems”)    |
|                                  | have no restrictions on          |
|                                  | functions and distributions they |
|                                  | can model                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Flexible classification       |
|                                  | (chapter “Foundations and        |
|                                  | Properties of AI/ML Systems”)    |
|                                  | where at model deployment time   |
|                                  | the inputs can be any subset of  |
|                                  | variables and the output can     |
|                                  | also be any subset of variables  |
|                                  | (while the rest are unobserved)  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Causal structure discovery    |
|                                  | (under specific broad            |
|                                  | assumptions—chapter “Foundations |
|                                  | of Causal ML”)                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Causal effect estimation      |
|                                  | (under specific broad            |
|                                  | assumptions—chapter “Foundations |
|                                  | of Causal ML”)                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Modeling equivalence classes  |
|                                  | of full or local models (see     |
|                                  | chapter “Foundations of Causal   |
|                                  | ML” and “Foundations and         |
|                                  | Properties of AI/ML Systems”)    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Closely related to Markov     |
|                                  | boundary feature selection       |
|                                  | algorithms (see section on       |
|                                  | “Feature Selection and           |
|                                  | Dimensionality Reduction”)       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Optimal Bayes classifier      |
|                                  | (OBC) (see chapter “Foundations  |
|                                  | and Properties of AI/ML          |
|                                  | Systems”): can be used for       |
|                                  | theoretical analysis of          |
|                                  | optimality of the large-sample   |
|                                  | error of any classifier          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • NB is often used as a minimum |
|                                  | baseline comparator in benchmark |
|                                  | studies                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Modeling the full joint       |
|                                  | distribution of data with BNs    |
|                                  | (e.g., for simulation or         |
|                                  | re-simulation purposes)          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Guiding experiments with      |
|                                  | hybrid causal discovery and      |
|                                  | active experimentation           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.2.6.1. Using NB simply |
|                                  | because it is computationally    |
|                                  | fast and has small storage       |
|                                  | requirements without paying      |
|                                  | attention to whether data        |
|                                  | properties match assumptions may |
|                                  | lead to high error               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.6.2. Not every       |
|                                  | probabilistic graphical model is |
|                                  | a BN (see chapter “Foundations   |
|                                  | and Properties of AI/ML          |
|                                  | Systems”)                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.6.3.Not every BN is  |
|                                  | causal and not every BN learning |
|                                  | algorithm guarantees valid       |
|                                  | causal discovery                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.6.4. Bad or          |
|                                  | uninformed assignment of priors  |
|                                  | may lead Bayesian algorithms     |
|                                  | astray                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.6.5. Discovery       |
|                                  | algorithms for BNs and CBNs vary |
|                                  | widely in output quality and     |
|                                  | efficiency                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.6.6. BNs and CBNs    |
|                                  | properties hold in the large     |
|                                  | sample. In small samples results |
|                                  | may be suboptimal                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.6.7. Approximating   |
|                                  | OBC with Bayesian model          |
|                                  | averaging with a small number of |
|                                  | models, maybe far from the       |
|                                  | theoretically ideal OBC          |
|                                  | performance                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.6.8. BN predictive   |
|                                  | inference with unconstrained     |
|                                  | models is computationally        |
|                                  | intractable in the worst case    |
|                                  | although average case algorithms |
|                                  | exist with good performance      |
|                                  | chapter “Lessons Learned from    |
|                                  | Historical Failures, Limitations |
|                                  | and Successes of AI/ML in        |
|                                  | Healthcare and the Health        |
|                                  | Sciences. Enduring Problems, and |
|                                  | the Role of BPs”)                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.6.9. Discrete BNs    |
|                                  | are better developed in practice |
|                                  | than continuous-function BNs     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Application of Bayes’ theorem |
|                                  | combined with various            |
|                                  | assumptions about the data,      |
|                                  | heuristic model search           |
|                                  | procedures, and algorithms       |
|                                  | designed to infer from data the  |
|                                  | most likely model that generated |
|                                  | it or estimate model-averaged    |
|                                  | predictions over a set of models |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Causal discovery in addition  |
|                                  | relies on distributional         |
|                                  | assumptions such as the causal   |
|                                  | Markov condition (CMC), the      |
|                                  | faithfulness condition (FC) and  |
|                                  | causal sufficiency (CS)          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Newer algorithms can discover |
|                                  | local or partial models, and     |
|                                  | overcome violations of CS and FC |
|                                  | and worst case complexity        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • All Bayesian classifiers have |
| empirical evidence               | well understood properties       |
|                                  | ensuring valid predictions,      |
|                                  | reliable causal structure        |
|                                  | discovery and unbiased causal    |
|                                  | effect estimation when the       |
|                                  | assumptions hold                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Closely tied to Markov        |
|                                  | boundary and causal feature      |
|                                  | selection                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • CBNs are the backbone of      |
|                                  | learning causal models in a      |
|                                  | sound and scalable manner (see   |
|                                  | chapter “Foundations of Causal   |
|                                  | ML”)                             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Large body of validation in   |
|                                  | causal discovery. Large body of  |
|                                  | applications and benchmarks for  |
|                                  | classification and feature       |
|                                  | selection                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.2.6.1. NB has    |
|                                  | limited utility in modern health |
|                                  | applications and is not a        |
|                                  | recommended method in usual      |
|                                  | circumstances                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.6.2. Use BNs   |
|                                  | when flexible classification is  |
|                                  | needed                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.6.3. Use CBNs  |
|                                  | when causal structure discovery  |
|                                  | and causal effect estimation are |
|                                  | needed                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.6.4. Use when  |
|                                  | modeling equivalence classes of  |
|                                  | full or local causal or Markov   |
|                                  | boundary models is needed        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.6.5. Markov    |
|                                  | boundary (identified via         |
|                                  | specialized algorithms) is       |
|                                  | typically the feature selection  |
|                                  | method of choice                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.6.6. Use for   |
|                                  | modeling full joint              |
|                                  | distributions (e.g., for         |
|                                  | simulation or re-simulation      |
|                                  | purposes) while also preserving  |
|                                  | causal structure                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.6.7. Use for   |
|                                  | guiding experiments in the       |
|                                  | presence of information          |
|                                  | equivalences                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • See references (and           |
|                                  | discussions thereof) in chapters |
|                                  | “Foundations and Properties of   |
|                                  | AI/ML Systems,” “Foundations of  |
|                                  | Causal ML,” “Principles of       |
|                                  | Rigorous Development and of      |
|                                  | Appraisal of ML and AI Methods   |
|                                  | and Systems,” “The Development   |
|                                  | Process and Lifecycle of         |
|                                  | Clinical Grade and Other Safety  |
|                                  | and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML  |
|                                  | Models,” and “Lessons Learned    |
|                                  | from Historical Failures,        |
|                                  | Limitations and Successes of     |
|                                  | AI/ML in Healthcare and the      |
|                                  | Health Sciences. Enduring        |
|                                  | Problems, and the Role of BPs”   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

K-Nearest Neighbor

The k nearest neighbor (k-NN) classifier and regression was introduced
in 1951 [18]. K-NN is categorized as a “lazy” classifier/regressor, in
the sense that it does not actually construct an explicit model from the
data. Decisions are made based on the training data set rather than by a
model trained on the data set. Specifically, the class of an instance is
the (weighted) majority class of its k nearest neighbors, where k is a
user-supplied hyperparameter. In case of k-NN regression, the estimated
value of an instance is the (possibly weighted) average of the values of
the k nearest neighbors.

The critical component of the k-NN classifier/regressor is the
similarity function used to determine the k nearest neighbors. Defining
an appropriate similarity functions is non-trivial, and is particularly
difficult when (i) the data is high-dimensional or (ii) the importance
of the variables varies greatly. The similarity function can be often
learned from data. The problem of learning a similarity function from
data is known as the distance metric learning.

When we consider the applicability of a method, we usually think about
sample size or the form of the decision boundary between the positive
and negative classes in a classification problem. In the case of k-NN,
we may need to consider the local density of positive and negative
instances. If a clear (low-density) separation exists between the
positive and negative classes, kNN can be successful, regardless of the
shape of the decision boundary; if a clear separation does not exist,
kNN will likely not perform well (Fig. 5).

[]

A set of 2 scatterplot graphs of X 2 versus X 1. Graph A consists of 3
clusters of positive plots surrounded by negative ones. Graph B consists
of three clusters of positive. The negative plots are all over the
graph.

As we said earlier, kNN classifiers do not build an explicit model,
instead, they have to determine the k nearest neighbors at
classification time. This makes “training” the model cheap (there is no
training), but the actual model application can become expensive.
Additionally, this makes the classification less robust, as the
classification of a new instance depends on the training sample,
especially for small k. Increasing k can reduce the dependence on the
specific training sample and can also improve robustness in the presence
of noise, however, it makes the classification less local, which is the
essence of kNN modeling.

The success of kNN classification depends on the amount of noise in the
training sample, the choice of k (which again depends on the noise in
the training sample), and a distance function that defines the
neighborhood of the instances to be classified. Large-sample analysis of
k-NN shows that in the sample limit with k=1 the error is at most double
that of the optimal Bayes Classifier, whereas with larger k it can
approximate the optimal Bayes Classifier [19].

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN)                              |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Classification and regression |
|                                  | problems                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Classification or regression  |
|                                  | based on similarity between      |
|                                  | instances. Its use is most       |
|                                  | appropriate when a similarity    |
|                                  | function can be easily           |
|                                  | constructed                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Density estimation            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.2.7.1 kNN asymptotic   |
|                                  | error is strongly influenced by  |
|                                  | the choice of k                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.7.2 kNN error        |
|                                  | convergence to the large sample  |
|                                  | error as a function of sample    |
|                                  | size is not well characterized   |
|                                  | [19]                             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.7.3 in high          |
|                                  | dimensional problems the         |
|                                  | distance metric values become    |
|                                  | similar for all instance pairs   |
|                                  | and this affects accuracy        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.7.4 kNN application  |
|                                  | is computationally intensive     |
|                                  | unless special data structures   |
|                                  | are used                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.7.5 needs to store   |
|                                  | the entire training data set     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.7.6 kNN will produce |
|                                  | poor results when the wrong      |
|                                  | similarity function is used.     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Prediction is based on the    |
|                                  | local density of the k nearest   |
|                                  | neighbors of the problem         |
|                                  | instance                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • kNN is non-parametric         |
| empirical evidence               |                                  |
|                                  |  • It can handle arbitrary       |
|                                  | decision boundaries              |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • In the sample limit, the      |
|                                  | error of the 1-NN classifier     |
|                                  | (k = 1), is no more than twice   |
|                                  | the error of the Optimal Bayes   |
|                                  | Classifier [18]                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Typical similarity functions  |
|                                  | used in kNN do not perform well  |
|                                  | in high-dimensional problems     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Usually underperforms most    |
|                                  | modern classifiers in most       |
|                                  | applications                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.2.7.1. Use as    |
|                                  | comparator not as primary        |
|                                  | classifier.                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.7.2. Optimize  |
|                                  | k with model selection.          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.7.3. Use       |
|                                  | adaptive kNN for high            |
|                                  | dimensional data.                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.7.4. Explore   |
|                                  | via model selection the right    |
|                                  | distance metric for the data at  |
|                                  | hand                             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Several textbooks, including  |
|                                  | [19–21]                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Cover, T. and Hart, P., 1967. |
|                                  | Nearest neighbor pattern         |
|                                  | classification. IEEE             |
|                                  | transactions on information      |
|                                  | theory, 13(1), pp.21–27          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Decision Tree Learning

A decision tree is a predictive model that can be used for
classification or regression. Figure 6 depicts an example decision tree
for classification built over discrete variables.

[]

A flowchart of the demographic variable classified into lab text j and
imagining result k. The lab test j is divided into biopsy result n and
probability equals 0.80. Imagining result k is divided into probability
equals 0.20 and 0.65. The biopsy result is divided into probability
equals 0.96 and 0.05.

Learning a decision tree from data is called decision tree induction.
Induction algorithms partition the input space into a number of
hyperrectangles such that the hyperrectangles are statistically
homogeneous for one or the other target class. For example, in Fig. 6,
the leaf with probability of a positive outcome =0.80 corresponds to
patients with Demographic variable i = False and Lab Test j = Positive.

Induction of the optimal decision tree is NP-hard [20]. Algorithms used
in practice are computationally efficient by trading off tree optimality
with time complexity. Commonly used algorithms (e.g., ID3 [21]) work on
the principle of recursive partitioning. Starting with the entire data
set, a splitting attribute is selected as root of the tree, and the
dataset is split into multiple partitions based on the value of the
splitting attribute such that the partitions are maximally enriched in
instances of one class or another (equivalently, they have optimal
predictivity up to that point). Then each partition is further split
using the same strategy recursively until no more partitioning is
possible (i.e., the algorithm runs out of sample or informative
features). The various decision tree induction algorithms differ in the
way the splitting criterion is selected, the stopping criterion, and the
way they handle categorical, multi-level categorical and continuous
attributes. Often, DT induction algorithms do not have a global
objective function, they operate greedily and offer no guarantees of
optimality.

Main Properties of Decision Trees

1.  1.

    Expressive power:
    1.  (a)

        DTs can model any discrete function.

         

    2.  (b)

        Predictions in discrete space are made at the leaf nodes and
        each node corresponds to a hyperrectangle. Therefore, the
        decision boundary is complex, non-parametric, and the sides of
        the hyperrectangles are parallel with the coordinate system that
        spans the input space.

         

     

2.  2.

    Logic-based and concept-learning interpretation of DTs. Each path
    from the root of the tree to each leaf represents a conjunction
    (logical AND) of conditions. A tree thus can be translated into a
    set of conjunctive sentences, that collectively define the target as
    a logical concept. Therefore there is a close correspondence of DTs
    with logic and concept learning.

    E.g., in the tree of Fig. 6 the Concept “(most likely) Positive
    Outcome” is defined by the DT as:

    (Positive Outcome = True) iff:

    (((Demographic variable i = False) AND (Lab Test j = Positive)) OR

    ((Demographic variable i = False) AND (Lab Test j = Negative) AND
    (Biopsy Result n = Negative)) OR

    ((Demographic variable i = True) AND (Imaging Result k = Positive)))

     

3.  3.

    Rule set interpretation of DTs. A DT can also be thought of as a
    collection of rules of the type: “if the variables on a path have
    the observed instantiations depicted by the tree, then the decision
    is determined by the corresponding leaf’s probability”. Hence a DT
    is a system of rules, each one sufficient (when applicable) to
    establish a decision.

    E.g., in the tree of Fig. 6 the Concept “Positive Outcome” is
    defined by the DT as:

    RULE 1

    IF ((Demographic variable i = False) AND (Lab Test j = Positive))
    THEN

    Outcome = Positive with probability 0.80

    RULE 2

    IF ((Demographic variable i = False) AND (Lab Test j = Negative) AND
    (Biopsy Result n = Negative)) THEN Outcome = Positive with
    probability 0.96

    RULE 3

    IF ((Demographic variable i = True) AND (Imaging Result k =
    Positive))

    THEN Outcome = Positive with probability 0.65

    RULE 4

    IF ((Demographic variable i = False) AND (Lab Test j = Negative) AND
    (Biopsy Result n = Positive)) THEN Outcome = Positive with
    probability 0.05

    RULE 5

    IF ((Demographic variable i = True) AND (Imaging Result k =
    Negative))

    THEN Outcome = Positive with probability 0.20.
    - The rules corresponding to a decision tree, are individually
      correct when they match problem instances, hence fully modular
      (i.e., one rules does not affect the other and can be applied in
      isolation).

    - Moreover the rules do not need be chained: each inference made by
      the tree on a patient is the result of applying the applicable
      rule.

    - The rules are mutually exclusive.

    - Finally the order of the variables in each path/rule, does not
      matter after the tree is constructed, and can be applied in any
      order. The order of variables during the DT construction from
      data, however, is very important for the quality of the DT
      induced.

    Notice that such rule sets are trivial to understand. By comparison
    rule-based systems where the rules have to be chained in complex
    forward/backward sequences have logic that cannot be understood
    easily by examining individual rules.

     

4.  4.

    Subpopulation discovery/clustering interpretation of DTs. Each path
    of a DT describes a subpopulation that has a defined probability for
    the target variables and the group members are homogeneous in their
    probability for the target and in their values for the features
    along the path. Thus a DT provides a grouping/clustering of the
    feature space/individual observations that is tied to the outcome.
    In our running example:

    GROUP 1: everyone who has:

    ((Demographic variable i = False) AND (Lab Test j = Positive))

    GROUP 2: everyone who has:

    ((Demographic variable i = False) AND (Lab Test j = Negative) AND
    (Biopsy Result n = Negative))

    Etc. for the other paths.

    From the tree:

    Group1 will have 0.80 probability of Outcome = Positive

    Group2 will have 0.96 probability of Outcome = Positive

    Etc. for the other groups.

    Because DTs can be understood in several ways (rules, concepts,
    groups) and in a modular manner they are an exemplary model of
    interpretable and explainable ML (as long as DTs are of modest
    size).

     

5.  5.

    A key problem with interpretability is subtree replication.
    Especially in the presence of noise, the exact same subtrees can
    appear under multiple nodes across the tree, which creates
    redundancy, hindering interpretation.

     

6.  6.

    Decision trees are susceptible to overfitting. During tree
    induction, some method of protection against overfitting needs to be
    applied. Such methods include empirical testing on a validation set,
    regularizers (e.g., maximum allowed number of instances in a leaf,
    or maximum allowed tree depth, maximum allowed model complexity as
    part of the stopping criterion). Some of these can be enforced
    during learning, or after a tree is created.

     

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: Decision Trees                                        |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Classification with maximum   |
|                                  | interpretability                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • As component of ensemble and  |
|                                  | boosted algorithms               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • DTs are highly interpretable: |
|                                  | a decision tree can be           |
|                                  | translated into a set of rules.  |
|                                  | Interpretation is the main       |
|                                  | reason to use a decision tree    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • DTs are non-parametric,       |
|                                  | non-additive models that can     |
|                                  | represent linear and nonlinear   |
|                                  | relationships.                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • DTs are commonly used as a    |
|                                  | base learner in an ensemble      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Baseline comparator           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Regression problems           |
|                                  | (regression trees)               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Explaining black box ML       |
|                                  | models by converting them to     |
|                                  | functionally equivalent DTs      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.2.8.1. A single DT on  |
|                                  | its own typically does not have  |
|                                  | very high performance            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.8.2. DTs depending   |
|                                  | on how they are used can be      |
|                                  | unstable (which makes them a     |
|                                  | good choice for bagging)         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.8.3. DTs if not      |
|                                  | regularized have a tendency for  |
|                                  | overfitting                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.8.4. High            |
|                                  | dimensionality is a problem when |
|                                  | feature selection has not been   |
|                                  | pre-applied                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Recursive partitioning of the |
|                                  | data. The inductive algorithm    |
|                                  | may build a DT following a       |
|                                  | partitioning strategy, or may    |
|                                  | follow other procedures (e.g.    |
|                                  | genetic algorithms or other      |
|                                  | search). Once a DT is built,     |
|                                  | however, it encodes a            |
|                                  | partitioning of the data         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • DT induction is NP-hard.      |
| empirical evidence               | Greedy algorithms are used,      |
|                                  | which provide no guarantees of   |
|                                  | optimality                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Unless regularization and     |
|                                  | feature selection are applied,   |
|                                  | they have a tendency to overfit  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • DTs are highly interpretable  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • In an ensemble learning       |
|                                  | context, DTs can handle very     |
|                                  | high dimensionality, noise, and  |
|                                  | can identify interaction terms   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.2.8.1. Use DT    |
|                                  | for interpretable modeling alone |
|                                  | or in conjunction with other     |
|                                  | methods                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.8.2. Use for   |
|                                  | target variable-specific         |
|                                  | subpopulation discovery          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.8.3. Use as    |
|                                  | baseline comparator method       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.8.4. Use in    |
|                                  | ensembling (boosting or bagging  |
|                                  | (Random Forest)) algorithms      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       | Quinlan, J. R. C4.5: Programs    |
|                                  | for Machine Learning. Morgan     |
|                                  | Kaufmann Publishers, 1993        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Several textbooks e.g. [19–21]   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Clustering

The family of clustering techniques deals with grouping objects into
meaningful categories (e.g., subjects into disease groups or
treatment-response groups). Typically, the produced clusters contain
objects that are similar to one another but dissimilar to objects in
other clusters [19, 20]. As has been shown mathematically, there is no
single measure of similarity that is suitable for all types of analyses
nor is clustering the most powerful method for all types of analysis
even when applicable. Thus this generally useful set of methods is known
to be often abused or misused [22]. We demonstrate these dangers with
the following two figures.

Figures 7 and 8 show that it is not possible for a clustering algorithm
to anticipate predictive use of the clusters if the clustering algorithm
does not have information about the labels (or other assumptions that
amount to such information).

[]

An illustration of a cluster of distributed data points.

[]

A set of 3 illustrations of a cluster of dual data points. The data
points are separated by a concave upward line in A, a right diagonal
line in B, and a vertical line in C.

Best Practice 3.2.9

Do not use unsupervised clustering to produce groups that you intend to
use predictively. Use predictive modeling, instead. Once accurate and
interpretable classifiers have been built, subpopulations or other
useful clusters can be extracted (see section on Decision Trees for a
detailed example).

Clarifying Misconceptions About Unsupervised/Supervised Learning, Similarity/Distance-Based Learning, and Clustering

1.  (a)

    As explained in chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model
    Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in
    Machine Learning and AI” a common way that unsupervised clustering
    apparently yields decent predictive performance (e.g., in some parts
    of the high-throughput based genomics literature), is because a
    pre-selection of features was performed on the data based on how
    strongly the features correlated with the outcome. The analysts in
    these cases inductively biased the clustering toward classification
    of the desired response variable. This inductive bias is not enough
    to lead a clustering algorithm to optimal accuracy levels, however.
    Moreover, if such feature pre-selection is not done in a nested
    cross-validated manner (see chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and
    General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best
    Practices in Machine Learning and AI”) the resulting classification
    accuracy estimates will be highly biased (in the error estimation
    sense) and generalization will suffer.

     

2.  (b)

    Because clustering is often defined in terms of similarity, it may
    be tempting to think that all similarity-based classification is
    predictively flawed. In reality, powerful classifiers exist that use
    distance and similarity functions (e.g., KNN, SVMs, etc. see section
    in the present chapter) however they are supervised (i.e., they
    approximate a particular target function that generates the data)
    which allows them (along with the rest of their design) to be
    capable of accurate predictive modeling.

     

3.  (c)

    Conversely, and to re-iterate the point previously made, because
    good similarity-based predictive modeling exists, that does not mean
    that an unsupervised method, such as clustering, can be successful
    for predictive modeling.

     

4.  (d)

    Finally, users of learning methods such as BNs and Causal
    Probabilistic Graphical Models (CPGMs) do not specify a target
    response variable and some may confuse them with unsupervised
    methods. In reality, because they model the joint probability
    distribution (and underlying causal generating function for CPGMs)
    they are supervised learners for all variables which can then be
    used as potential target responses at model execution time (see also
    chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, section on
    flexible modeling with BNs).

     

Importance of Feature Selection for Similarity-Based Classification

If the features containing all information about the response variable
are not included in the training data, then the predictive accuracy of
similarity-based (and any other sufficiently powerful classifier family)
will be compromised relative to the best classifier that can be built
with this data. Compromised performance may also happen because of using
feature selectors that allow large numbers of redundant or irrelevant
features. This can overwhelm classifiers that, for example, lack
sufficiently strong regularization or other anti-overfitting measures.
In high dimensional spaces it is critical to apply sound feature
selection algorithms so that choice of features enhances rather than
hinders classification.

The following table summarizes essential properties of clustering
algorithms.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: clustering                                            |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Group data for exploratory    |
|                                  | analysis, summarization and      |
|                                  | visualization purposes           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Summarize, visualize and      |
|                                  | explore data (e.g., outliers,    |
|                                  | apparent distribution mixtures,  |
|                                  | etc.)                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Often used inappropriately    |
|                                  | for causal discovery and         |
|                                  | classification purposes          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Non-recommended Uses and         | Pitfall 3.2.9.1. Clustering      |
| Pitfalls                         | variables should not be used to  |
|                                  | infer that they are causally     |
|                                  | related (a common mistake in     |
|                                  | genomics literature)             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.9.2. Clustering      |
|                                  | individuals should not be used   |
|                                  | to build classifiers (also a     |
|                                  | common mistake in genomics       |
|                                  | literature)                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.2.9.3. Choice of       |
|                                  | similarity metric, algorithm,    |
|                                  | and parameters inductively       |
|                                  | biases results toward specific   |
|                                  | groupings. There is no such      |
|                                  | thing as “unbiased” clustering   |
|                                  | analysis                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Typically unsupervised method |
|                                  | (i.e., clustering algorithms do  |
|                                  | not have access to response      |
|                                  | variable values)                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Group together data instances |
|                                  | that are similar and apart       |
|                                  | dissimilar instances             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • In other versions, cluster    |
|                                  | variables or cluster             |
|                                  | simultaneously variables and     |
|                                  | instances                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Use similarity metrics and    |
|                                  | algorithms that employ those to  |
|                                  | create clusters                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Clusters can be overlapping   |
|                                  | or mutually exclusive (soft vs   |
|                                  | hard clustering)                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Clusters can be               |
|                                  | hierarchically organized or      |
|                                  | distinct                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Across all possible uses all  |
| Empirical evidence               | clustering algorithms are on     |
|                                  | average equivalent (“Ugly Duck   |
|                                  | Theorem”)                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Clustering lucks the          |
|                                  | inductive bias, information      |
|                                  | capacity and the computational   |
|                                  | complexity to be compatible with |
|                                  | causal discovery                 |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.2.9.1. Do no use |
|                                  | clustering to discover causal    |
|                                  | structure                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.9.2. Do not    |
|                                  | use clustering to create         |
|                                  | accurate classifiers             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.9.3. Tailor    |
|                                  | the use of clustering algorithm  |
|                                  | and metric to the problem at     |
|                                  | hand                             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.9.4. Derive    |
|                                  | predictive subgroups from        |
|                                  | properly-built and validated     |
|                                  | classifiers (Decision Trees are  |
|                                  | particularly good candidates—See |
|                                  | “Decision Tree Learning”)        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.9.5. Perform   |
|                                  | sensitivity analysis to study    |
|                                  | the impact of the choice of      |
|                                  | parameters, metrics and          |
|                                  | algorithms                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.9.6. Repeat    |
|                                  | and summarize multiple runs of   |
|                                  | randomized clustering algorithms |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.2.9.7. Either    |
|                                  | start from causal and predictive |
|                                  | algorithms and use clustering to |
|                                  | summarize, visualize, etc. their |
|                                  | results, or start from           |
|                                  | clustering analysis in           |
|                                  | preliminary data to inform the   |
|                                  | design and analysis with focused |
|                                  | techniques                       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Dupuy, A. and Simon, R.M.,    |
|                                  | 2007. Critical review of         |
|                                  | published microarray studies for |
|                                  | cancer outcome and guidelines on |
|                                  | statistical analysis and         |
|                                  | reporting. Journal of the        |
|                                  | National Cancer Institute,       |
|                                  | 99(2), pp.147–157.               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Several textbooks [19–21]     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Ensemble Methods

So far, a single predictive model has been trained on a training data
set and the prediction from this model is the final prediction. In
ensemble learning, an ensemble, i.e., a set of models, is trained on the
training data and their output is combined into a final prediction.
Figure 9. illustrates the ensemble learning process. A set of m models,
called base learners, L¹, …, L_(m) are trained on their corresponding
data sets X¹, …, X_(m). The data set X_(i) can be the data set X itself
or a sample from it. Predictions from the m base learners are combined
using the meta learner L^(*). The meta learner can be as simple as
majority voting or as complex as a neural network. The different
ensemble learning methods depend on (i) how they generate the data set
X_(i) from X, (ii) the base learners they use and (iii) the meta
learner.

[]

A flowchart of the ensemble learning. The dataset X is divided into X 1,
X 2, X m minus 1, and X m. They are followed by L 1, L 2, L m minus 1,
and L m, respectively. They lead to L to the power asterisk.

The key motivation for using ensembles is improving predictive
performance. This is achieved in four possibly overlapping ways. First,
if we assume that the base learners make mistakes independently, as long
as the base learners achieve better (lower) than random error rate, the
ensemble will have a lower error rate than the individual base learners.
In practice, the base learners do not make errors independently, but the
ensemble still tends to achieve better performance than the base
learners. Second, the ensemble learning framework allows us to combine
models of different characteristics, potentially allowing for
compensating for biases inherent in some of the methods. Third,
ensembles of various types of base learners can expand the base
learners’ expressive capabilities: the ensemble can express much more
complex relationships than base learners. Fourth, the ensemble may
reduce the variance of a collection of models built on small samples.

Model Stacking

Model stacking is essentially the generic form of ensemble learning. The
data sets X_(i) can be the original data set (X), a bootstrap resample
of X, or a subsample of X. For high-dimensional data sets, X_(i) can be
a random projection of X, which helps most when X consists of highly
redundant features. For low dimensional X, X_(i) can consist of random
linear combinations of the features in X. The base learners can be of
any type and no uniformity is required: the ensemble can contain
different types of models. Finally, the meta learner can be any
sufficiently powerful ML algorithm; as of late, a common choice is
neural networks.

Expressive ability. The relationship that ensembles can model between
the inputs and the output depends on the base learners’ expressive
ability. In practice, model stacking can increase the base learners’
expressive ability.

Example. We show a stack of logistic regression models, where both the
base learners and the meta learner are logistic regression models. The
ensemble is applied to the problem depicted in Fig. 10.

[]

A dual scatterplot of the X 2 versus X 1. The plots are clustered on the
corners, separated by dotted, broken, and straight lines, forming an
irregular plus sign at the center.

This is a two-class classification problem using a two-dimensional data
set with strong interactions (almost an exclusive OR). The two colors
(orange and blue) represent the two classes. The ensemble consists of 10
logistic regression models, each trained on a random subsample of the
original data X. The meta learner is also a logistic regression model.
The solid line in the figure is the contour line corresponding to 20%
probability of positive, the dotted line to 50%, and the dashed line to
80% probability of positive class. Although the individual logistic
regression models cannot solve this problem, the ensemble can.

Note on the difference between stacked linear regression and neural
networks. This example of stacked logistic regressions appears similar
to a 2-layer neural network with sigmoid activation, however, in a
2-layer neural network the “logistic regression models” on the first
layer are optimized together with the second layer, while in stacked
regression, the first layer models are constructed first (on random
subsamples) with the actual output as the dependent variable, their
coefficients are fixed, and only then is the second layer model (the
meta learner) constructed. While the second layer logistic regression is
being fitted, the coefficients of the first layer are not modified.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: model stacking                                        |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Classification or regression  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • This is a generic form of     |
|                                  | ensemble learning                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • There are four main reasons   |
|                                  | for using ensemble learning:     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |   – Ensembling can reduce error  |
|                                  | by taking advantage of           |
|                                  | independent errors of the base   |
|                                  | learners                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |   – Base learners have different |
|                                  | inductive biases                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |   – The ensemble can expand the  |
|                                  | base learners’ hypothesis spaces |
|                                  | by combining their spaces        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |   – The ensemble may reduce      |
|                                  | variance of base learners        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Other types of learning (not  |
|                                  | only classification or           |
|                                  | regression) can be ensembled     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.3.1.1.                 |
|                                  | Interpretability suffers         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.3.1.2. Increased       |
|                                  | computational cost               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.3.1.3. Potentially     |
|                                  | additional data may be needed    |
|                                  | for training the ensemble        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Multiple base learners are    |
|                                  | built and then a meta learner is |
|                                  | trained on the output of the     |
|                                  | base learners and the actual     |
|                                  | outcome. The prediction from the |
|                                  | meta learner is the prediction   |
|                                  | of the ensemble                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Stacking draws its formal     |
| empirical evidence               | foundations from fundamentals of |
|                                  | ML theory plus the theory of     |
|                                  | weak learner boosting and        |
|                                  | bagging                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Several stacking algorithms   |
|                                  | exhibit best of class            |
|                                  | performance in various domains.  |
|                                  | [23, 24] individual algorithms   |
|                                  | (e.g., Adaboost, random forests) |
|                                  | have distinct characteristics    |
|                                  | (described below)                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.3.1.1. Consider  |
|                                  | stacking as a high priority      |
|                                  | choice of algorithm when high    |
|                                  | performance is needed, base      |
|                                  | algorithms do not perform well,  |
|                                  | and interpretability is not a    |
|                                  | strong requirement               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Wolpert (1992). “Stacked      |
|                                  | Generalization”. Neural          |
|                                  | Networks.                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | 5 (2): 241–259                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Breiman, Leo (1996). “Stacked |
|                                  | regressions”. Machine Learning.  |
|                                  | 24: 49–64.                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Textbooks [20]                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Bagging

Bagging, also known as bootstrap aggregation, forms the data sets for
the base learners as a bootstrap resample (i.e., sample with
replacement) of the original dataset. The base learner can be any
learning algorithm and the “meta learner” is simply majority voting (or
average in the continuous outcome case).

The key benefit of bagging is reducing the variance of the base learner.
If a classifier’s predictions are sensitive to minor perturbations in
the data, this means that the generalization error is negatively
affected by the variance of the base learning. Bagging can help reduce
random fluctuations across possible training samples. If the base
learner is robust to small perturbations, then the generalization error
is caused mainly by bias in the base learner, and bagging cannot
help. Thus, bagging is most useful in conjunction with base learners
that have high variance (such as decision trees).

Figure 11 illustrates bagging. The left panel shows a one-dimensional
data set, where the horizontal axis shows the data (“x”) and the
vertical axis is simply a jitter-plot visualization (i.e., the y axis
spreads randomly the corresponding x points so that data points on the x
axis are not plotted on top of each other). Red points represent the
positive class and black points the negative class. The true decision
boundary for the positive class is x < = −2 or x > 2; this is shown as
two dashed lines. We constructed 200 decision stumps (decision tree with
depth 1, with a single binary split of the input dimension) on bootstrap
samples of this data set. Such stumps can accurately learn the target
function in x ≥ 2 or in x ≤ −2. The right panel shows 200 decision
boundaries from these 200 decision trees as dotted gray lines. The
horizontal axis is the data dimension (“x”) and the vertical axis is the
probability (from the trees) of an instance with the corresponding x
value belonging to the positive class. The blue line corresponds to the
bagged prediction using the previously constructed 200 trees.

[]

A set of 2 graphs. A, A scatterplot of jitter versus X. One of the plots
is clustered at the center while the other 2 are on the sides, separated
by vertical lines. B, A line graph of the probability of positive class
versus x. The line follows a parallel trend, descends, moves flat,
rises, and moves flat.

Bagging can also help increase the expressive capability of the base
learner. Fig. 11 demonstrates that by bagging weak learners, improved
accuracy can be achieved in a simple example. Bagging decision stumps,
for example can form a decision boundary that can only be achieved by
deeper (more than one-level) trees without bagging. Also it can be seen
in Fig. 11 that the bagged classifier smooths the decision surface.

Bagging a set of models is more resilient to overfitting than
overfitting any single model. Overfitting that arises as a result of a
predictor aligning with an outcome randomly (i.e. in a specific sample),
is not likely to happen in a different sample. Therefore, only one (or
very few) trees are affected by this particular random alignment. Other
random alignments can also occur in other samples, and they will tend to
average out. Thus overfitting is still much possible on the individual
model level, but less so at the level of bag of models.

Random Forests

A Random Forest (RF) is an ensemble classification method using decision
trees as the base learning algorithm combining the following four ideas:
(a) bagging decision trees, (b) random feature projection, (c) off
training sample error estimation, and (d) model complexity restrictions.

The RF generates X_(i), the data set on which the ith tree is grown by
bootstrapping once at the start of modeling. The features are randomized
at each tree’s node expansion step. Feature randomization increases the
independence among the trees in the forest, while bagging aims to reduce
the variance of the predictions by each tree. The predictions from the
tree in the forest are combined using majority voting or averaging (for
continuous outcomes).

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: fandom forest                                         |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Classification                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • RFs achieve high predictive   |
|                                  | performance                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Regression, time-to-Event     |
|                                  | (Random Survival Forest)         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.3.3.1. As with all     |
|                                  | ensemble techniques              |
|                                  | interpretability suffers         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.3.3.2. If not          |
|                                  | restricting the size of trees    |
|                                  | RFs can overfit                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Bagging trees                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Random projection of the      |
|                                  | features                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Off-training sample error     |
|                                  | estimation                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Model complexity restrictions |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Overfitting is controlled     |
| Empirical evidence               |                                  |
|                                  |  • In practice, RFs can handle   |
|                                  | very high dimensional problems   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Excellent empirical           |
|                                  | performance observed in          |
|                                  | benchmarks across biomedical     |
|                                  | domains [25]                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.3.3.1. Use as    |
|                                  | primary or high priority choice  |
|                                  | when high predictivity is        |
|                                  | required and interpretability is |
|                                  | not of high importance           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.3.3.2. Do not    |
|                                  | rely on internal error           |
|                                  | estimation but use an            |
|                                  | independent unbiased error       |
|                                  | estimator                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.3.3.3. When      |
|                                  | feature selection is important,  |
|                                  | combine with an external feature |
|                                  | selection algorithm              |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.3.3.4. Control   |
|                                  | DT size using as starting point  |
|                                  | the recommendations of the       |
|                                  | inventor in original publication |
|                                  | [24]                             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Breiman L (2001). "Random     |
|                                  | Forests". Machine Learning. 45   |
|                                  | (1): 5–32                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Hastie, Friedman, Tibshirani. |
|                                  | Elements of statistical learning |
|                                  | second edition, Chpater 15.      |
|                                  | 2009, springer                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Tan, Steinbach, Karpatne,     |
|                                  | Kumar. Introduction to data      |
|                                  | mining, second edition. Chapter  |
|                                  | 4.10.6., 2018, Pearson           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Boosting

Boosting creates an ensemble of base models sequentially, where the ith
base model is aimed at correcting errors made by the ensemble of the
previous i-1 base models. The resulting ensemble is an additive model,
where the final prediction is the sum of the predictions from the base
models. The data set X_(i) for the ith model can be the data set X
itself, a bootstrap resampled version of X, or a weighted version of X
to emphasize difficult-to-classify instances.

Consider a boosted ensemble of m models. The prediction for an instance
X_(i) is

[$$ {y}_i=f\left({\sum}_{j=1}^m{m}_j\left({X}_i\right)\right) $$]

where f(·) is the link function and m_(j)(·) is jth model. Similarly to
GLM, f() is identity for gaussian outcomes, logit/expit for binomial
outcomes, exp for counts and survival outcomes, etc. The ensemble is
built up iteratively, following a gradient descent procedure

[$$ {M}_{j+1}={M}_j+\gamma \frac{\partial l}{\partial {M}_j}, $$]

where M_(j) is the ensemble after the jth iteration, l is the log
likelihood of M_(j), and γ is the learning rate. For the exponential
family of distributions, including the Gaussian, binomial (and
multinomial) and Poisson (survival) outcomes, the derivative of the log
likelihood is the residual. Thus the (j + 1)^(st) model is the model
fitted to the residual of the ensemble M_(j). This leads to a very
straightforward interpretation that the subsequent model is built to the
errors (residual) of the ensemble M_(j) thus the (j + 1)^(st) base model
aims to correct the mistakes made by the previous j base models.

Gradient boosting can overfit, but typically only slowly to the number
of modeling iterations. The number of base models in a boosted model
(the number of iterations to perform) is a hyperparameter h. It has been
observed that models consisting of substantially more base models than
optimal still overfit only minimally. A potential reason for this is
that when a model reaches overfitting, adding further base models has
very minimal impact. However, boosting will eventually overfit, so
overfitting should be controlled by h.

Gradient Boosting Machines (GBM) are a special case of boosting, where
the base learners are decision trees, often decision stumps (1
level-deep trees). Similar to bagging, boosting can also expand the base
model’s expressive capability.

AdaBoost is another special case of boosting which relates to the
generic gradient boosting the same way as Fisher scoring (or Newton
Raphson) optimization algorithm relate to gradient descent. AdaBoost is
specifically designed for binomial (multinomial) outcomes.

The (j + 1)^(st) model is added to the ensemble using

[$$ {M}_{j+1}={M}_j+\gamma {\left(\frac{\partial^2l}{\partial
{M}_j^2}\right)}^{-1}\frac{\partial l}{\partial {M}_j}, $$]

where [$$ \frac{\partial^2l}{\partial {M}_j^2} $$] is a diagonal matrix
containing the second derivatives of the log likelihood l. For binomial
outcomes, the second derivative is p(1-p), where [$$ {p}_i=
expit\left({M}_j\left({X}_i\right)\right)=\frac{\exp
\left({M}_j\left({X}_i\right)\right)}{1+\exp
\left({M}_j\left({X}_i\right)\right)} $$].

AdaBoost is implemented by weighing the i^(th) training instance by
(p_(i)(1 − p_(i)))⁻¹ and using the residuals r_(i) = y_(i) − p_(i) as
the dependent variable.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: gradient boosting machines (GBM)                      |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Classification                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of se                    |  • GBMs offer high predictive    |
|                                  | performance                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Interpretability is limited   |
|                                  | to variable importance           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Exponential family            |
|                                  | distributions, including         |
|                                  | time-to-event                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfal 3.3.4.1. As with all      |
|                                  | ensemble techniques              |
|                                  | interpretability suffers         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfal 3.3.4.2 If not            |
|                                  | controlling the complexity       |
|                                  | parameter it can overfit         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Gradient Boosting with        |
|                                  | decision stumps as base learners |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Gradient descent (GBM) or     |
|                                  | Fisher-scoring (AdaBoost) in     |
|                                  | model space                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Can be thought of as          |
|                                  | successively reducing the        |
|                                  | residual errors from previous    |
|                                  | cycles of modeling.              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Very expressive               |
| empirical evidence               |                                  |
|                                  |  • Overfitting can be controlled |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Can handle very high          |
|                                  | dimensional data                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • For AdaBoost, theoretical     |
|                                  | (but loose) error bounds are     |
|                                  | proven.                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Certain boosting algorithms   |
|                                  | (e.g., Adaboost) have            |
|                                  | sensitivity to noise             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Top performer in several      |
|                                  | types problems/data              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practices 3.3.4.1. Use as   |
|                                  | primary or high priority choice  |
|                                  | when high predictivity is        |
|                                  | required and interpretability is |
|                                  | not of high importance           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practices 3.3.4.2. When     |
|                                  | feature selection is important,  |
|                                  | combine with an external feature |
|                                  | selection algorithm              |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practices 3.3.4.3. Control  |
|                                  | overftting by restricting number |
|                                  | of iterations (number of trees)  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practices 3.3.4.4. If data  |
|                                  | is noisy, prefer noise-robust    |
|                                  | variants.                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practices 3.3.4.5. Select   |
|                                  | appropriate link function for    |
|                                  | exponential family outcomes      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Schapire, R.E., 1990. The     |
|                                  | strength of weak learnability.   |
|                                  | Machine learning, 5, pp.197–227  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Freund, Y., 1999, July. An    |
|                                  | adaptive version of the boost by |
|                                  | majority algorithm. In           |
|                                  | proceedings of the twelfth       |
|                                  | annual conference on             |
|                                  | computational learning theory    |
|                                  | (pp. 102–113)                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • G. Ridgeway (1999). “The      |
|                                  | state of boosting,” Computing    |
|                                  | Science and Statistics           |
|                                  | 31:172–181                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Long, P.M. and Servedio,      |
|                                  | R.A., 2008, July. Random         |
|                                  | classification noise defeats all |
|                                  | convex potential boosters. In    |
|                                  | proceedings of the 25th          |
|                                  | international conference on      |
|                                  | machine learning (pp. 608–615)   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Regularization

A problem is considered high-dimensional when the number of predictors
is comparable to or exceeds the number of observations. When the number
of predictors equals the number of observations, an OLS regression fit
can be an exact fit, with 0 training error. Such a model will be most
likely overfitted. When we consider other types of models, with the
number of predictors very close to or exceeding the number of
observations, overfitting becomes highly likely. We start our discussion
with an explanation of regularization, a general solution to the
high-dimensionality problem, and next, we discuss ways in which
regularization can be added to various modeling techniques.

Regularization from a Bias/Variance Perspective

The material builds on the BVDE in chapter “Foundations and Properties
of AI/ML Systems”. When a model is overfitting and has high variance and
low bias, it can be advantageous to increase bias provided that it
reduces variance. One way to achieve this is to reduce complexity and
another way, the subject of this section, is regularization [26].

We previously saw how SVMs perform regularization and that the resulting
RFE-SVM feature selector is one of the strongest feature selectors
(second in performance to Markov Boundary methods in empirical
performance across various domains). See section “Support Vector
Machines” for SVM regularization, and section “Feature Selection and
Dimensionality Reduction” for feature selectors. See also chapter
“Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of
AI/ML In Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the
Role of Best Practices” when feature should be interpreted causally or
not.

Next we examine the Elastic net family of regularizers which we will
call Maximum Likelihood (ML) Regularizers.

Let l(β) denote the log likelihood function, with β representing the
model parameters. Model fitting without regularization solves

[$$ {\max}_{\beta }l\left(\beta \right). $$]

ML regularization adds a penalty term P(β)

[$$ {\max}_{\beta }\ l\left(\beta \right)-\lambda P\left(\beta \right),
$$]

where λ controls the amount of regularization. Different ML
regularization methods differ in the form of P(). Table 2. shows the
most common regularization terms.

Table 2.

Common penalty (regularization) terms

  Name             Penalty term                                                                                                       Remark
  ---------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Lasso            ||β||₁ = ∑_(j) ∣ β_(j)∣                                                                                            Can set the coefficient β_(j) to exactly 0
  Ridge            [$$ {\left|\left|\beta \right|\right|}_2^2={\sum}_j{\beta}_j^2 $$]                                                  
  Elastic net      [$$ \left(1-\alpha \right){\left|\left|\beta \right|\right|}_2^2+\alpha {\left|\left|\beta \right|\right|}_1 $$]   Balance between Ridge and Lasso
  Adaptive Lasso   ∑_(j)w_(j) ∣ β_(j)∣                                                                                                w_(j) reduces the penalty on important variables. A common choice is [$$ \frac{1}{\beta_j^{\ast }}, $$], where [$$ {\beta}_j^{\ast } $$] is the OLS estimate.

Ll regularization modifies the coefficients by pulling them away from
maximum likelihood estimate. The maximum likelihood estimate is
unbiased, thus regularization introduces bias, in hope of reducing
variance. The various ML regularization methods differ in the way they
modify the coefficients. Lasso is shrinking the coefficients towards 0
and it has the ability to set some of the coefficients exactly to 0.
This allows Lasso to be used as a feature selector. Therefore, Lasso
penalty is in principle most useful when some of the features are not
truly related to the outcome. In contrast, Ridge penalty simply shrinks
coefficients towards zero without actually setting them to 0. Elastic
net allows to blend these two penalties together.

Adaptive lasso [27] also addresses the situation where some of the
variables are not related to the outcome. However, by weighing the
penalty on the individual coefficients, it aims to shrink important
variables less and eliminate variables that are not related to the
outcome (shrink their coefficients all the way to 0). The property that
the adaptive lasso can set non-zero coefficients to variables that are
relevant with probability approaching one is called the oracle
property. Feature selection is discussed in more detail in the section
"Feature Selection".

The procedure for the adaptive lasso proceeds in two steps. First, a
regular lasso model is constructed. In the second step, an adaptive
lasso model is constructed, with the weights being the inverse of the
coefficients from the first lasso.

We will discuss overfitting in chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and
General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best
Practices in Machine Learning and AI”. There are many reasons for
overfitting, including high dimensionality, with many irrelevant
features and highly correlated features in a problem with moderate
dimensionality. In the former case, lasso or adaptive lasso is most
appropriate: lasso will discard some of the features. In the latter
case, Lasso and Ridge will have different effect. When overfitting
occurs as a result of high collinearity, the OLS estimator tends to set
the coefficients of collinear variables to very high positive and
similarly high negative values. Lasso will select one of the correlated
features and set the coefficients of the others to zero, while Ridge
will set the coefficients to similar values across the correlated
features. Ridge prevents the coefficient from taking the extremely high
values.

Bias and correctness. Since the penalties aim to trade bias for
variance, the estimates are likely biased. Lasso has feature selection
ability, however, it is not guaranteed to find the correct support (the
exact set of variables that are predictive of the outcome). Adaptive
lasso in theory finds the correct support and may help reduce or even
eliminate the bias.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: penalized regression                                  |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Predictive modeling with      |
|                                  | exponential family outcomes      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • High-dimensional data         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Data with collinear variables |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Lasso can be used for         |
|                                  | variable selection               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.4.1.1. The models      |
|                                  | assume linearity and additivity. |
|                                  | They are not appropriate if      |
|                                  | these assumptions are violated   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.4.1.2. Does not have   |
|                                  | the same interpretability as     |
|                                  | unregularized regression models. |
|                                  | Specifically cannot be used to   |
|                                  | estimate effects of an exposure  |
|                                  | on outcomes controlling for      |
|                                  | confounders given to the model   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.4.1.3. The theory of   |
|                                  | optimality of the ML regularized |
|                                  | regression does not address the  |
|                                  | selection of strongly vs weakly  |
|                                  | relevant vs irrelevant features  |
|                                  | which is essential to feature    |
|                                  | selection                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.4.1.4. Extensive       |
|                                  | benchmark results show weak      |
|                                  | empirical feature selection      |
|                                  | performance across many          |
|                                  | datasets, loss functions and     |
|                                  | comparator algorithms            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Regression models             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Biases the coefficient        |
|                                  | estimates to reduce variance     |
|                                  | (bias-variance tradeoff)         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical Properties and       |  • They tend to give biased      |
| empirical evidence               | estimates (on purpose)           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • BVDE give theoretical support |
|                                  | to the means of operation        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • “Oracle property” (as defined |
|                                  | by [27])                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.4.1.1. Penalized |
|                                  | regression can operate in high   |
|                                  | dimensional datasets that        |
|                                  | classic regression cannot handle |
|                                  | at all                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.4.1.2. Use as    |
|                                  | comparator method along with     |
|                                  | others as appropriate for the    |
|                                  | application domain               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.4.1.3. May be    |
|                                  | useful for feature selection,    |
|                                  | but not as first-choice methods  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.4.1.4. When      |
|                                  | non-linear regularized models    |
|                                  | are needed, consider link        |
|                                  | functions that model the         |
|                                  | non-linearity as well as kernel  |
|                                  | SVMs, kernel regression          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       | Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R.,      |
|                                  | Friedman, J.H. and Friedman,     |
|                                  | J.H., 2009. The elements of      |
|                                  | statistical learning: Data       |
|                                  | mining, inference, and           |
|                                  | prediction (Vol. 2, pp. 1–758).  |
|                                  | New York: Springer               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Regularizing Groups of Variables

In the previous section, Lasso was used for variable selection,
primarily in the context when many variables could be assumed irrelevant
to the outcome. Variables may be related to each other and form groups.
It may be useful to select variables on a per-group basis [28].

Assume that variables form K groups with p_(k) variables in the kth
group. Let β^((k)) denote the coefficients of the variables in group k.
With l denoting the log likelihood function, the group lasso is
formulated as

[$$ {\max}_{\beta }\ l\left(\beta \right)-\lambda
{\sum}_{k=1}^K\sqrt{p_k}{\left|\left|{\beta}^{(k)}\right|\right|}_2. $$]

The sparse group lasso [29] formulation

[$$ {\max}_{\beta }\ l\left(\beta \right)-\lambda \alpha
{\left|\left|\beta \right|\right|}_1-\lambda \left(1-\alpha
\right){\sum}_{k=1}^K\sqrt{p_k}{\left|\left|{\beta}^{(k)}\right|\right|}_2
$$]

also has a (regular) lasso penalty, allowing for selecting variables on
a per-group basis and further selecting variables within the groups.

Regularizing Partial Correlations

The precision matrix, that is the inverse of the variance-covariance
matrix, is a key parameter of a multivariate normal distribution.
Regularization is necessary to estimate the precision matrix when
sufficient observations are not available.

Let Θ denote the precision matrix and S the sample covariance matrix.
The regularized estimate of Θ is computed as

[$$ {\max}_{\theta \ge 0}\mathit{\log}\ \mathit{\det}\ \varTheta
\kern0.5em - tr\left( S\varTheta \right)-\lambda {\sum}_{j\ne
k}{\varTheta}_{jk}. $$]

The inverse covariance matrix contains the partial correlations. Two
random variables X_(i) and X_(j) are independent if their covariance is
0; and they are conditionally independent (conditioned on all other
variables) if the ijth element of the inverse covariance matrix is 0
[30].

Regularization to Constrain the Search Space of Models

So far, we have shown examples of regularization to avoid overfitting,
either by computing a sparse solution (some parameters/coefficients are
set to exactly 0) or by introducing bias to reduce variance. We have
done so mostly in the context of regression.

Regularization is more general. It can be broadly viewed as a means to
constrain the search space of models to confer some desirable property
on the model. It is not limited to regression, but it is often used in
conjunction with likelihoods. This is not a requirement, it can be used
with any kind of quasi-likelihood or arbitrary loss functions.
Constraining the search space of models through regularization is
arguably the most common use and providing an exhaustive overview is
impractical as new applications are continuously developed. In this
section, we simply show some examples.

Knowledge distillation. Deep learning models are regarded complex highly
performing models. Very complex DL models have been trained in many
areas that can be further modified for particular applications (See
chapters “Considerations for Specialized Health AI and ML Modelling and
Applications: NLP,” “Considerations for Specialized Health AI and ML
Modelling and Applications: Imaging—Through the perspective of
Dermatology”). These modified models are still very large, and deploying
such models into resource-limited environment is difficult. The
teacher-student paradigm, consist of a large teacher model used to train
a small student model. Knowledge distillation is the process of
generating smaller student models (models with fewer parameters),
deployable in limited-resource environment, that are trained based on
the more complex teacher models. Knowledge distillation is often
implemented using regularization: the student model is regularized so
that it resembles the teacher model in various aspects [31].

Learning DAGs. Traditionally, learning DAGs is a combinatorial
optimization problem. However, the NOTEARS method introduced a penalty
term, applicable to weight matrices, that enforces DAG-ness when this
weight matrix is used as an adjacency matrix [32].

Dropout (Neural Networks)

Dropout layers in Neural Networks aim to reduce overfitting due to
noise. In dropout, a pre-defined (as hyperparameter) proportion (dropout
portion) of nodes are dropped from the hidden layers and possibly from
the input layers. “Dropping from the network” means that the inputs and
outputs of these nodes are severed and thus these nodes no longer
influence the prediction. The set of nodes to be dropped is selected at
random in each epoch. After the epoch, the nodes are restored [33].

Dropout layers have properties both from regularization as well as from
ensemble learning. Clearly, they are similar to regularization, because
they constrain the network architecture by dropping some nodes.

The ensemble perspective can be explained as follows. One way to reduce
the risk of overfitting in a neural network would be to build an
ensemble of neural networks, i.e. multiple neural network models with
different parameterizations. Given the high cost of training neural
networks, this approach is impractical. Instead, dropout re-configures
the network temporarily, which means that the network being trained in
each epoch has a (slightly) different architecture. Over the training
epochs, a range of different network architectures are explored.

An alternative explanation of the dropout layers is, that the
potentially high number of parameters a network has over possibly many
layers, makes the network susceptible to co-adaptation, where multiple
parts (sets of nodes) of the network get optimized so that some parts
can correct for errors made by other parts. This co-correction allows
for easely fitting noise, which is undesirable. Dropping nodes out of
the network at random, breaks these co-adaptation patterns.

Dropouts can be defined on the input layer, as well. In this case, the
network temporarily ignores some of the input features. This is similar
to introducing noise into the data to make the model more robust.

When a neural network model is used to make predictions, all nodes are
used for the prediction, i.e. no dropout is used for prediction. Since
the nodes were trained with some of the nodes missing, the weights of
the nodes may be too high. To correct for this, the weights are scaled
down by the dropout portion at prediction time.

Why Regularized Models and Other Predictive Modeling Should Not Be Used For Reliable Causal Modeling

Regularization, with the exception of penalizing the precision (partial
correlation matrix), has profound impact on a modeling technique’s
ability to condition on variables.

Figure 12 depicts a dataset with two variables A and B and an outcome
(target) T. The target T is binary, points in red correspond to positive
outcome and the points in black to negative. The data generating causal
relationships are A→T and A→B. This means that B is independent of T
given A; or in other words, A alone is sufficient to classify the
instances, B contains no additional information. From a causal
perspective, the association of B with the target is confounded by A
(their common cause). Any valid causal method must be able to
differentiate correlation from causation, i.e., determine which
correlations are causal and which are confounded. This is not happening
in the example since the decision surface (orange line) of the
(logistic) ridge regression gives the same weights to both A and B.
Ridge regression is not designed to realize that B and T are
conditionally independent given (conditioned on) A. Contrast this with
the decision surface (blue line) produced by unpenalized Logistic
Regression, which assigns almost zero weight to the confounded variable
(B) and nearly all the weight to the true cause (A) since LR is capable
of correctly conditioning on any set of confounders (thus correctly
estimating direct causal effects).

[]

A dual-line and a dual scatterplot of B versus A. The lines are logistic
and ridge regressions. The line logistic is vertical at 0. The line
ridge is diagonally left. The 2 sets of plots are clustered in the top
right and bottom left corners.

Ridge regression is not the only method that has this problem. The
maximal margin decision boundary that SVMs would select, is similar to
the orange line; and most classifiers including modern regularized
regression methods, principal component and other classical
dimensionality reduction methods, as well as all predictive modeling
without causal properties, will make similar errors.

Figure 13 illustrates another example where Lasso penalized regression
(and other non-causal techniques) will fail to correctly condition on
variables. In this example, we have 7 variables, A, B, …, E, S and the
target variable T. A, B, …, E are direct causes of T. Variable S which
is not causal for T (but confounded with it via A,....E) synthesizes
information from causal variables A, B, …, E. In this setup, S and T are
independent conditioned on A, B, …, E. However, since S synthesizes
information from A, B, …, E, it can contain more information about T
than any subset of A, B, …, or E. Thus, when building a predictive model
for T, a penalized model, like Lasso, can prefer a set of predictor
variables that contains S over the correct set of A, B, …, E. In
contrast, unpenalized logistic regression (and any sound causal
algorithm) will correctly identify that S is independent of T given the
other variables and will assign a zero coefficient to S given the true
causes.

[]

An illustration represents the blocks A, B, C, D, and E are mapped to
the blocks S and T.

For large scale benchmark studies comparing all modern predictive
modeling algorithms with causal algorithms see refs. [34, 35]. In these
references, it is explained why various additional non-causal methods
fail to model causality.

(b) The broader implication is that because discovering causal structure
and estimating effects require sound conditional independence tests and
conditional association estimation, regularized regression and other
purely predictive methods cannot be used for causal structure discovery
or causal effect estimation even for simple questions (e.g. direct
causal effect estimation) and even when the complete set of confounders
is measured and are included in the model. Although unpenalized
regression can be used for causal effect estimation, note that this has
to be guided by knowledge of the causal structure (or elicitation of it
using complex causal modeling algorithms).

See chapter “Foundations of Causal AI/ML” for more details and best
practices.

Feature Selection and Dimensionality Reduction

Variable selection (aka feature selection) for predictive modeling has
received considerable attention during the last three decades in a
variety of data science fields [36, 37]. Feature selection and
dimensionality reduction are techniques of choice to tame high
dimensionalities in diverse big data applications. Intuitively, feature
selection for prediction aims to select a subset of variables for
constructing a diagnostic or predictive model for a given classification
or regression task. Ideally this selected set should include all
variables with unique information and discard variables the information
of which is subsumed by the selected set (since they add no information
to the classifier). Dimensionality reduction maps the original data on a
smaller number of dimensions so that fitting models is faster, less
prone to overfitting and less sample intensive (all problems created by
the high dimensionality and collectively known as “Curse of
Dimensionality”).

Feature Selection

Key concepts of the theory of feature selection were introduced in
chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”. Here we will
extend that material with a refinement of the types of feature selection
problems typically addressed in practice, their relative complexity,
examples, and algorithms that are used for feature selection.

Motivation and Standard Feature Selection Problem

In practice, reducing the number of features in clinical predictor
models can reduce costs, and increase ease of deployment. Second, a more
parsimonious model can be easier to interpret. Third, sometimes,
identifying the most impactful features helps gain an understanding of
the underlying process that generated the data. Finally, many
classifiers do not perform well with very high dimensional data: they
may overfit, exhibit too long compute times, or even fail to fit models.

Feature selection can be approached from three high-level theoretical
perspectives. (1) The first one is that of overfitting/underfitting. In
high-dimensional data sets, feature selection can reduce overfitting,
but in lower dimensions if not conducted properly it can introduce both
overfitting and underfitting (not both at the same time). It can
underfit relative to a model that has more features (i.e., resulting
model does not have enough capacity); and it can overfit if it is overly
influenced by random variations in the data; a model with the same
number of features could perform worse on the training set but perform
better on a test set. (2) Feature selection in moderate or low
dimensions can be used specifically to produce a parsimonious (and thus
potentially more interpretable and practical) model, but this may induce
underfitting if feature selection is not optimal. (3) Suboptimal feature
selection can introduce instability when it selection of features is
influenced by random perturbations in the data. To what extent such
instability affects predictivity depends on whether the unstable
features share the same information for the target or not. It is
therefore important to deploy feature selection methods which are both
theoretically sound and empirically strong.

The standard feature selection problem (chapter “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems”) is typically defined as:

  Find the smallest set of variables St in the training data such that
  the predictive accuracy of the best classifier than can be fit for
  response T from the data is maximized

A commonly used classification of feature selection considers three
primary categories of methods: wrapper methods, filter methods and
embedded methods [36]. We will further elaborate this taxonomy by
considering whether the feature selection methods have a strong
theoretical framework and properties (formal) vs not (heuristic).

Heuristic Algorithms

Wrapper methods. These methods conduct a heuristic search in the space
of all subsets of the variables to assess each subset’s predictive
information with respect to the selected predictive model. Wrapper
methods treat the classifier as a black box, fit a model to that data
with a particular feature set and evaluate the model. Then they build a
model with a different feature set and re-evaluate the new model. This
process continues until some stopping criterion is met. This approach is
computationally expensive, often overfits and underperforms, and
also has great variation in performance depending on methods.

a. Stepwise Regression. Historically it has been used broadly for
statistical regression modeling but its use is reduced because (a)
standard implementations have been shown to overfit and are unstable
[38] and (b) regularized regression has alleviated the need to use
them substantially.

These methods can start from an empty model and use a forward single
variable inclusion step, iterated with a backward single variable
elimination step method until no improvement can be made. Backward
elimination starts with a full model (a model contains all
predictor variables) and eliminates one feature at a time. It eliminates
the feature with least statistical significance (or equivalently, the
one that improves the objective criterion the least). Stepwise feature
selection stops when all features in the model achieve a certain level
of significance (e.g. p-value of 0.05) and no other significant feature
can be added. Alternatively, a penalized objective criterion (e.g.
AIC—described later) can be used and the stepwise feature selection
process terminates when this penalized objective is maximized.

b. SVM-RFE (recursive feature elimination) is an example of a more
recent (and surprisingly powerful) wrapper method. SVM-RFE builds an SVM
model and examines the contribution of features in the model. In each
iteration, 50% of features with the lowest importance are eliminated, a
model is re-fit and its accuracy evaluated in a test set. The process
iterates recursively until predictivity drops. Due to SVM’s resilience
to high dimensions, SVM-RFE can produce a stable, highly accurate and
non-overfitted set of features. What it typically lacks is minimality
(although in practice it often selects parsimonious models).

c. Bagging for feature selection. In an attempt to improve the stability
of feature selection methods and reduce their bias, bagging can be used.
Models are constructed on bootstrapped versions of the training data
using a base feature selection technique. Features that appear in some
percentage (e.g. 50%) of the models are selected. The tendency of the
feature selection method to select a feature because it randomly appears
better than another can be mitigated by using multiple samples.

Univariate Selection Filtering. Filter methods select (or pre-select)
features before the learning algorithm is applied to the data. Unlike
wrapper methods, filter methods do not use a predictive model for
evaluating the features, but rather use statistical criteria to select
features. The advantage of this approach is that it is agnostic of the
learning algorithm and can be much more computationally efficient than
fitting the model to the data.

Univariate variable screening (aka Univariate Association Screening, UAS
or univariate association filtering, UAF) is the most commonly-used
filter method for pre-selecting a set of variables that have significant
association with the outcome at a predefined significance level; or in
the case of UAF, variables are ranked based on their univariate
association with the outcome and the top k variables are selected. Any
common measure of association (e.g. correlation, signal-to-noise, G2,
etc.) can be used. The rationale for univariate variable screening is
that variables without a univariate association with the outcome are
(often) not relevant to the outcome. A key advantage of variable
screening is saving computational effort since the dimensionality of
problems can be reduced early in the analysis.

Embedded methods. In embedded methods, the modeling technique itself
incorporates a method to reduce the influence of irrelevant variables.
Examples of this approach are regularization techniques such as
SVMs, LASSO and similar methods. These methods and the mechanism by
which they eliminate features is described in section “Regularization”.

Feature Selector Algorithms Based on Formal Theories of Relevancy

The previously described feature selection methods are essentially
heuristic because they do not utilize a principled framework for optimal
feature selection. In the remainder we will discuss formal feature
selection frameworks (i.e., Kohavi-John and Markov Boundary) and will
describe algorithms that conduct provably optimal feature selection.

Kohavi-John and Markov Boundary framework for Standard predictive
feature selection problem. Kohavi and John [37] decompose the standard
feature selection problem as follows:

- A feature X is strongly relevant if removal of X alone will result in
  performance deterioration of an optimal Bayes classifier built on all
  data.

- A feature X is weakly relevant if it is not strongly relevant and
  there exists a subset of features, S, such that the performance of the
  Optimal Bayes Classifier fit with S is worse than the performance
  using S U {X}.

- A feature is irrelevant if it is not strongly or weakly relevant.

Intuitively, choosing the strongly relevant features provides the
minimal set of features with maximum information content and thus solves
the standard feature selection problem (since a powerful classifier in
the small sample or the Optimal Bayes Classifier in the large sample)
will achieve maximum predictivity.

Recall from chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” that a
set S is the Markov Boundary of variable T (S = MB(T)), if S renders T
independent on every other subset of the remaining variables, given S,
and S is minimal (cannot be reduced without losing its conditional
independence property). This is the MB(T) in the probabilistic sense.

Tsamardinos and Aliferis connected the Kohavi-John relevancy concepts
with BNs and Markov Boundaries as follows: In faithful distributions
(see chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems,” “Foundations
of Causal ML”) there is a BN representing the distribution and mapping
the dependencies and independencies so that:

1.  1.

    The strongly relevant features to T are the members of the MB(T).

     

2.  2.

    Weakly relevant features are variables, not in MB(T), that have a
    path to T.

     

3.  3.

    Irrelevant features are not in MB(T) and do not have a path to T.

    Thus in faithful distributions: the Markov boundary MB(T) = solution
    to the standard feature selection problem.

     

Local causally augmented feature selection problem and Causal Markov
Boundary. In faithful distributions with causal sufficiency (see chapter
“Foundations of Causal ML”) there is a causal BN that is consistent with
the data generating process and can be inferred from data in which:
strongly relevant features = members of MB(T) and comprise the solution
to the local causally augmented feature selection problem of finding:

1.  1.

    The direct causes of T

     

2.  2.

    The direct effects of T

     

3.  3.

    The direct causes of direct effects of T

     

Thus in faithful distributions with causal sufficiency the causal
graphical MB(T) set is connected with the probabilistic MB(T). Inducing
the probabilistic MB(T) then:

1.  1.

    Solves the standard predictive feature selection problem, and

     

2.  2.

    Solves the local causally augmented feature selection problem.

     

Equivalency-augmented feature selection problem and Markov Boundary
Equivalence Class. In faithful distributions the MB(T) exists and is
unique [39]. However, in non-faithful distributions where target
information equivalences exist (“TIE distributions”) we may have more
than one MB(T) [40]. The number of Markov Boundaries can be exponential
to the number of variables and in empirical tests Statnikov and Aliferis
extracted tens of thousands of Markov boundaries before terminating the
experiments [40].

In TIE distributions:

1.  1.

    The Kohavi John definitions of relevancy break down since there are
    no Kohavi-John strongly relevant features any more, only weakly
    relevant and irrelevant ones. This is because if S1, S2 are both in
    the MB equivalence class {MBi(T)} then: independent (S1, T | S2) and
    independent (S2, T | S1).

     

2.  2.

    The 1-to-1 causal and probabilistic relationship of the
    probabilistic and graphical MB(T) breaks down. A variable can be a
    member in some MBi(T) without having a direct causal or causal
    spouse relationship with T.

     

3.  3.

    The standard predictive feature selection problem is solved by the
    smallest member in the equivalence class of MBi(T).

     

4.  4.

    The Equivalency-augmented feature selection problem is to find the
    equivalence class of all probabilistic MBi(T).

     

These feature selection problem types can be further subdivided as shown
in Fig. 14. The problem types depicted were chosen on the grounds that
(a) applied ML papers often aim to solve them, and (b) proofs of feature
selection soundness often use these subtypes as the goal. They are
organized from simpler/lower complexity or hardness in the bottom,
increasing while moving to the top.

[]

A list of 10 feature selection problem types is subdivided into 4 levels
from easiest to hardest. 1 and 2 are easiest, 3 to 6 are easy, 7 and 8
are hard, and 9 and 10 are the hardest.

We will further elaborate on the nature of these problem types by
explaining subtypes 3 and 10 in the next two figures. These explanations
along with the material of chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML
Systems” and especially the definitions of standard, causal and
equivalency class problems, should make obvious their relevance to many
real-life tasks (Figs. 15 and 16).

[]

An illustration represents the blocks S 1 ellipsis S k are mapped to a
block T. A block L 1 ellipsis L n.

[]

A block flow chart of the feature selection problem type 10. R 1
ellipsis R k is followed by M D C 1 ellipsis M D C k. The chart ends
with M D E prime m, M D E n, and M S p prime 1.

Modern Markov Boundary Algorithms—Faithful Distributions

We do not mention MB algorithms with only historical significance. For a
review see [34]. Modern MB algorithms with guaranteed correctness,
sample efficiency, and excellent empirical performance are
instantiations of a broad family called GLL and include several HITON
variants (HITON MB, HITON PC, interleaved or not, with symmetry
correction or not, with additional wrapping or not, etc.), and MMMB and
MMPC algorithms. They can be instantiated for recovery of full Markov
boundaries or direct causal edges only. The IAMB family also exhibits
sound and computationally efficient behavior in real data but is not as
sample efficient.

These algorithms have been extensively tested and compared to all major
feature selectors including wrappers, UAF, SVM-RFE, Lasso, LARS,
LARS-EN, etc. See the benchmarks in [34, 41] for experiments covering in
total > 120 algortithms, >270 dataset/tasks and multiple loss functions
and data types. Consistent with the theory of feature selection the
Markov Boundary algorithms in these benchmarks return the smallest
feature sets and lead to classifiers with maximum predictivity. They
also achieve near-perfect empirical discrimination among strongly
relevant, weakly relevant and irrelevant features and are causally
consistent.

Modern Markov Boundary Algorithms—TIE Distributions

Statnikov et al. [40, 42] invented the TIE* and iTIE* algorithhm
families that can extract the full equivalence class of Markov
Boundaries. The algorithms are correct and efficient. In typical
usage they utilize GLL as subroutines . In [40, 42] extensive
experiments are reported with comparisons to dozens of real and
simulated datasets over multiple domains including comparisons with all
availialbel comparators for feature selection equivalence class
discovery. According to these benchmarks, MB equivalence classes are
common, their sizes varies across domains, and TIE* algorithms recover
them with great accuracy.

We next provide a summary table (Table 3.) with properties of widely
used feature selection approaches comparing their ability to tackle the
feature selection problems 1–10.

Table 3

Comparative capabilities of current FS strategies and algorithms
including simple univariate filtering, regularized regression, SVM-RFE
and Markov Boundary methods across the FS complexity categories of Fig.
10.”+” = can solve, “-“cannot solve

                         UAF                     Regularized Regression Variants (e.g., Lasso, LARS, LARS-EN)   SVM-RFE   Markov boundary induction in faithful distributions (e.g., GLL, IAMB)   Markov boundary induction in tie distributions (e.g., TIE*)   Markov boundary induction and active experimentation in tie distributions (e.g., ODLP)
  ---------------------- ----------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------- --------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  FS problem type 1      N/A (model-dependent)   +                                                              +         N/A (model-dependent)                                                   N/A (model-dependent)                                         N/A (model-dependent)
  FS problem types 2–5   +                       +                                                              +         +                                                                       +                                                             +
  FS problem type 6      -                       -                                                              -         +                                                                       +                                                             +
  FS problem type 7      -                       -                                                              -         +                                                                       +                                                             +
  FS problem type 8      -                       -                                                              -         +                                                                       +                                                             +
  FS problem type 9      -                       -                                                              -         −                                                                       +                                                             +
  FS problem type 10     -                       -                                                              -         −                                                                       +                                                             +

We close this section with the method label of feature selection
methods.

+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: feature selection (FS)                                     |
+:=================================+:======================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Finding a small set of variables   |
|                                  | that has all information about the    |
|                                  | response (FS)                         |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Can be used to reduce the number   |
|                                  | of inputs to a classifier or          |
|                                  | regressor model so that:              |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |   – Over fitting is avoided           |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |   – Learning is faster                |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |   – Deployment of a model is easier,  |
|                                  | faster, cheaper                       |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |   – The ML models are more            |
|                                  | understandable                        |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Causal FS methods also reveal      |
|                                  | local causal structure around the     |
|                                  | response variable                     |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Some learning algorithms have      |
|                                  | embedded FS (for example Decision     |
|                                  | Tree learning and Random Forests). In |
|                                  | such cases adding formal FS           |
|                                  | algorithms often further enhances     |
|                                  | their performance                     |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Data simplification, compression   |
|                                  | and visualization                     |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Clustering and subgrouping based   |
|                                  | on FS transforms of the data          |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.5.1.2. FS methods that are  |
|                                  | not designed for causal discovery     |
|                                  | cannot be interpreted causally and    |
|                                  | any estimates of causal effects will  |
|                                  | be biased                             |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.5.1.3. FS itself can be     |
|                                  | over fitted to the data if model      |
|                                  | selection protocols used are not      |
|                                  | well-designed (see chapter on         |
|                                  | overfitting)                          |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.5.1.4. FS like any other    |
|                                  | component of analysis needs be        |
|                                  | tailored to the data and problem.     |
|                                  | Using a default FS everywhere may     |
|                                  | lead to suboptimal results            |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  | Pittfall 3.5.1.5. If a classifier has |
|                                  | embedded FS, DR, or regularization    |
|                                  | does not mean that it cannot benefit  |
|                                  | from FS                               |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           | Highly-dependent on the specific FS   |
|                                  | method                                |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Markov boundary FS is based on     |
|                                  | Bayesian Network theory and is        |
|                                  | additionally concordant with          |
|                                  | Kohavi-John FS theory in faithful     |
|                                  | distributions. In non-faithful        |
|                                  | distributions MB FS has               |
|                                  | strong advantages over Kohavi-John FS |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • RFE-SVM is based on fitting SVM    |
|                                  | models and performing wrapping over   |
|                                  | models with progressively smaller     |
|                                  | feature sets chosen based on the SVM  |
|                                  | weights                               |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Univariate association filtering   |
|                                  | (UAF) rank-orders variables according |
|                                  | to association with the response and  |
|                                  | chooses the top k variables           |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Wrapping is heuristic search over  |
|                                  | the space of all possible subsets,    |
|                                  | each one evaluated for a specific     |
|                                  | classifier and loss function of       |
|                                  | interest                              |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Stepwise regression procedures     |
|                                  | originated in statistics and examine  |
|                                  | a series of regression models by      |
|                                  | iteratively including and discarding  |
|                                  | variables according to inclusion and  |
|                                  | exclusion criteria while conducting   |
|                                  | tests of statistical significance of  |
|                                  | model improvement at each step        |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Markov boundary FS accurately      |
| empirical evidence               | solves the standard FS problem by     |
|                                  | finding the smallest subset of        |
|                                  | variables that has all the            |
|                                  | information in the data about the     |
|                                  | response. Worst case computational    |
|                                  | complexity for inferring the MB is    |
|                                  | exponential to the number of          |
|                                  | variables but real-life complexity of |
|                                  | best-of-class algorithms on common    |
|                                  | data is very efficient. In faithful   |
|                                  | distributions with causal sufficiency |
|                                  | the Markov boundary solves a causal   |
|                                  | version of the standard FS problem:   |
|                                  | It finds the direct causes, directs   |
|                                  | effects and direct causes of direct   |
|                                  | effects of the response. Equivalence  |
|                                  | class MB induction recovers the whole |
|                                  | set of MBs in the data. Excellent     |
|                                  | empirical performance in most domains |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • RFE-SVM is not guaranteed to find  |
|                                  | the optimal FS solution and is not    |
|                                  | causally valid. Computational         |
|                                  | complexity is low order polynomial.   |
|                                  | It is very robust to small sample     |
|                                  | size and has very good performance in |
|                                  | many domains                          |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Univariate filter selection (UAF)  |
|                                  | is not guaranteed to give the         |
|                                  | smallest set of variables with all    |
|                                  | information about the response. The   |
|                                  | top-ranked UAF variables do not need  |
|                                  | to be causally related to the         |
|                                  | response. Computational complexity is |
|                                  | very small and sample efficiency is   |
|                                  | high                                  |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Wrapping is learner-specific,      |
|                                  | computationally intensive and tends   |
|                                  | to overfit. Not suitable for causal   |
|                                  | discovery, typically                  |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  |  • Stepwise regression procedures are |
|                                  | relatively fast but do not guarantee  |
|                                  | correct results and tend to overfit   |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.5.1.1. Markov         |
|                                  | boundary procedures are first choice  |
|                                  | for FS when modest sample size (or    |
|                                  | more) is available and regardless of  |
|                                  | how high is the dimensionality. They  |
|                                  | are particularly appropriate when     |
|                                  | causal interpretation of findings is  |
|                                  | desired and when we wish to have      |
|                                  | consistent and coherent predictive    |
|                                  | and valid causal models. Also when we |
|                                  | wish to find equivalence classes of   |
|                                  | optimal feature sets or optimal       |
|                                  | classifiers                           |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  | Best practice 3.5.1.2. SVM-RFE is a   |
|                                  | first choice in very small sample     |
|                                  | size and high dimensional/small       |
|                                  | sample when causal conclusions are    |
|                                  | not sought                            |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  | Best practice 3.5.1.3. UAF is common  |
|                                  | in genomics. Contrary to common       |
|                                  | over-interpretation by some           |
|                                  | researchers, the top ranked variables |
|                                  | are not strongly suggestive of        |
|                                  | biologically/mechanistically/causally |
|                                  | important or even valid factors. UAF  |
|                                  | has a place however when sample sizes |
|                                  | are extremely small                   |
|                                  |                                       |
|                                  | Best practice 3.5.1.4. Generic        |
|                                  | wrapping and stepwise procedures      |
|                                  | should be (and are increasingly)      |
|                                  | retired from practice                 |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| References                       | [36–42]                               |
+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+

Dimensionality Reduction

As we mentioned earlier, the main objective of dimensionality reduction
is to transform a high-dimensional space into a lower-dimensional
representation. While feature selection achieves a lower dimensional
space by keeping a subset of the original features without modifying the
actual features, dimensionality reduction combines several of the
original features into new features.

Dimensionality reduction techniques can be categorized as supervised vs
unsupervised and linear vs nonlinear.

1.  1.

    Supervised versus unsupervised: supervised techniques can use
    supervising information (such as outcome) to guide the
    dimensionality reduction. For example, linear discriminant analysis
    uses the class label to help project a multi-dimensional feature
    space into a lower-dimensional representation that maximally
    distinguishes among the classes. Unsupervised dimensionality
    reduction does not use outcome information. In this section, we
    focus on unsupervised dimensionality reduction; high-dimensional
    classification or regression are handled in other parts of this
    chapter.

     

2.  2.

    Linear vs nonlinear. The transformation that reduces a
    high-dimensional space into a the lower-dimensional representation
    can be linear or non-linear. New features created by linear
    dimensionality reduction techniques are linear combinations of the
    original features, while non-linear dimensionality reduction uses
    nonlinear combinations. For example, autoencoders are arbitrarily
    complex non-linear transformations (they may increase or reduce the
    dimensionality), while classic Principal Component Analysis PCA is
    linear. Nonlinear dimensionality reduction is also known as manifold
    learning ([43], Chapter 20). Unsupervised dimensionality reduction
    has a vast literature; here, we focus on two classical approaches.
    For other popular dimensionality reduction techniques, the reader is
    referred to [44].

     

Principal Component Analysis (PCA)

Given a data matrix X, with columns as variables and rows as
observations, find a matrix U = [u₁, u₂, …, u_(p)], such that (i) the
u_(i) ‘s are orthogonal to each other and (ii) each subsequent principal
component (or component for short) u_(i), captures a maximal portion of
the remaining variance.

Figure 17 depicts an illustration of PCA. The left pane shows the
original Gaussian data. The variance of the data along both dimensions
is approximately equal. PCA transforms this space into a new
representation, the principal component (PC) space. Data in the PC space
is depicted in the right pane. The horizontal axis corresponds to the
first PC and the vertical axis to the second. As we can see, the
variance (and thus information content) of the data along the first PC
is much larger than along the 2nd. If we had to create a lower
dimensional (i.e. one-dimensional) representation of the original data,
we could choose the first PC as this new dimension, as it would capture
much more variability than any of the original variables. In fact, among
all linear combinations of the original variables, the first PC captures
the highest amount of variance (under the constraint the total variances
of the original and transformed space must equal).

[]

A set of 2 scatterplot graphs of original data and P C space. A. X 2
versus X 1. The plots are scattered diagonally right. B. Comp 2 versus
Comp 1. The plots are distributed horizontally at the center.

Properties of PCA

1.  1.

    The components computed by PCA are linear combinations of the
    original features. Thus PCA is a linear dimensionality reduction
    method.

     

2.  2.

    Each vector u_(i) is an eigenvector of X^(T)X for centered X.

     

3.  3.

    The i^(th) PC has variance λ_(i), where λ_(i) is the eigenvalue
    corresponding to the i^(th) eigenvector.

     

4.  4.

    ∑λ_(i) is the total variance.

     

Exploratory Factor Analysis

The motivation behind factor analysis is that a (relatively) small
number of unobservable factors can explain the observed variables. For
example, “intelligence” is a quantity that is directly unobservable,
thus it is measured through a battery of tests that is believed to be
related to intelligence. In this example, the test results are the
observations and intelligence is the latent factor.

Given an m × n observation matrix X consisting of n observations
(columns) and m features (rows), we wish to explain these observations
by p factors, then a factor model is of form

[$$ X-M=\varLambda F+\varepsilon $$]

where M is the mean matrix containing the row means of X in its rows, Λ
is the (m × p) loadings matrix, F is the (p × n) factor matrix, and ε is
the error matrix (m × n) with mean 0 and finite variance.

Assumptions. We assume that

1.  1.

    F and ε are independent

     

2.  2.

    The factors in F are independent of each other

     

3.  3.

    F is centered.

     

PCA can be viewed as a special case of factor analysis where Λ is
orthogonal.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: dimensionality reduction (DR)                         |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Computes a lower dimensional  |
|                                  | representation of a              |
|                                  | high-dimensional features space  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Lower dimensional mapping can |
|                                  | help with visualization          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Can be used to reduce the     |
|                                  | number of inputs to a classifier |
|                                  | or regressor model so that:      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |   – Overfitting is avoided       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |   – Learning is faster           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • May reveal structure          |
|                                  | properties of the domain         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Some learning algorithms have |
|                                  | embedded DR (for example deep    |
|                                  | learning and other ANNs)         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Factor analysis: Estimate the |
|                                  | values of unobserved factors     |
|                                  | through multiple observed        |
|                                  | variables                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Data simplification,          |
|                                  | compression and visualization    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Clustering and subgrouping    |
|                                  | based on DR transforms of the    |
|                                  | data                             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.5.2.1. Some nonlinear  |
|                                  | methods can be very computation  |
|                                  | intensive                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.5.2.2. DR does not     |
|                                  | reduce the number of inputs that |
|                                  | need to be measured in order to  |
|                                  | deploy a model. Many expensive,  |
|                                  | dangerous (to measure) and       |
|                                  | unnecessary inputs discarded by  |
|                                  | FS will be needed by DR to be    |
|                                  | measured for model deployment    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.5.2.3. DR methods that |
|                                  | are not designed for causal      |
|                                  | discovery cannot be interpreted  |
|                                  | causally and any estimates of    |
|                                  | causal effects will be biased    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.5.2.4. DR itself can   |
|                                  | be overfitted to the data if     |
|                                  | model selection protocols using  |
|                                  | it are not well-designed (see    |
|                                  | chapter “Evaluation”)            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.5.2.5. DR like any     |
|                                  | other component of analysis      |
|                                  | needs be tailored to the data    |
|                                  | and problem. Using a default DR  |
|                                  | everywhere may lead to           |
|                                  | suboptimal results               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pittfall 3.5.2.6. If a           |
|                                  | classifier has embedded DR, that |
|                                  | does not mean that it cannot     |
|                                  | benefit from FS or               |
|                                  | regularization                   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Greatly differs by the method |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Generally, variables in the   |
|                                  | transformed representation are   |
|                                  | required to have some sort of    |
|                                  | independence of each other, and  |
|                                  | they collectively capture        |
|                                  | maximal amount of information    |
|                                  | across the full distribution     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Embedded DR constructs        |
|                                  | lower-dimensional transforms of  |
|                                  | the original data in a way that  |
|                                  | is consistent with the inductive |
|                                  | bias of the embedding learner    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       | PCA:                             |
| empirical evidence               |                                  |
|                                  |  • The number of PCs does not    |
|                                  | exceed the sample size           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • PCs are independent of one    |
|                                  | another                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • PCs cannot be interpreted as  |
|                                  | causal factors and loadings      |
|                                  | cannot be interpreted as causal  |
|                                  | effect sizes                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | EFA:                             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • It is a probabilistic model   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • PCA is a special case of EFA  |
|                                  | when loadings vectors are        |
|                                  | orthogonal                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Causal interpretation of      |
|                                  | hidden factor effects on         |
|                                  | measured variables under strong  |
|                                  | assumptions                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.5.2.1. When      |
|                                  | eliminating expensive, dangerous |
|                                  | and unnecessary inputs by        |
|                                  | predictor models is beneficial,  |
|                                  | then use FS instead of DR        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.5.2.2. For       |
|                                  | prediction of specific outcomes, |
|                                  | FS targeting these outcomes      |
|                                  | should be the methods of choice  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.5.2.3. Using a   |
|                                  | top-2 PC data transform is a     |
|                                  | staple of data visualization for |
|                                  | exploratory purposes             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.5.2.4. Both PCA  |
|                                  | and EFA should not be over       |
|                                  | interpreted causally,            |
|                                  | predictively or otherwise        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.5.2.5. PCA for   |
|                                  | classification can be            |
|                                  | overfitted, so it needs to be    |
|                                  | treated like any other data      |
|                                  | operation by the model selection |
|                                  | and error estimation protocol    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • For an overview, see chapter  |
|                                  | 20 in Murphy KP. Probabilistic   |
|                                  | Machine Learning: An             |
|                                  | Introduction. MIT Press, 2022    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Hinton, G.E. and Roweis, S.,  |
|                                  | 2002. Stochastic neighbor        |
|                                  | embedding. Advances in neural    |
|                                  | information processing systems,  |
|                                  | 15                               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Time-to-Event Outcomes

Survival data, (aka time-to-event data), describes the distribution of
time until an event occurs. This event can be the failure of a device,
incidence of a disease, a recurrence of a disease, an adverse event, or
death. Time is the number of days, weeks, months, years, etc. from the
beginning of follow-up until the event. Alternatively, it can also be
calendar time such as the subject’s age at the time of the event. We
tend to think of events as negative, such as death (after all the field
of survival analysis is named after studying survival time, the time to
death), but it can also be a positive event, such as discharge from
hospital. In the following, we use the terms “survival” and
“time-to-event” interchangeably as long as context clarifies the use,
and we also use the terms “event”, “failure” and “death”
interchangeably, unless this causes confusion.

Analytic tasks involving a time-to-event outcome are analogous to most
other outcome distributions. The main tasks are (1) estimating the
time-to-event (or the survival probability distribution S(t)); (2)
testing whether two time-to-event distributions are statistically
different; and (3) assessing whether one or more covariates (e.g.
exposures) significantly affect the survival distribution.

The need for survival analysis. At first glance, time-to-event could be
viewed as a continuous quantity and be modeled as one of the many known
non-negative distributions, however, this approach breaks down for the
following reasons. First, some subjects never experience the event of
interest within the practical time frame of the study. Discarding these
patients (with unknown time-to-event) leads to loss of information,
because we know that these patients did not experience an event until
the end of the study. In other words, time-to-event is not missing
completely, it has been bounded. Second, some subjects are lost to
follow-up before the study ends. Again, discarding such patients because
their time-to-event is missing, discards useful information (i.e., that
they had not experienced an event until the time they were lost to
follow-up). Both of these situations are referred to as right censoring
(see terminology section below). Third, in a study where the outcome is
not death, many enrollees may have already experienced the event before
enrollment. If this is allowed, cases with time-to-event = 0 can have
high probability. Moreover, parametric distributions handle the general
properties of time-to-event modeling poorly. As an example, fourth,
outliers (extreme survivors) are common, and they have potential to
become an influential point for some distributions. Also, fifth, many
parametric distributions have parameters that mathematically relate to
their moments (mean, variance). Censored data can make the estimation of
moments on which model parameters depend, difficult, thus compromising
the model.

Pitfall 3.6.1

In most practical settings, it is a significant pitfall to model
time-to-event/survival using ordinary predictive modeling classification
or regression.

Best Practice 3.6.1

When modeling time-to-event outcomes, specialized methods, such as the
ones described in this section, should be used, at minimum as
comparators with conventional techniques.

Terminology

Let T be a random variable with T_(i) denoting the time at which an
event happened to subject i. Let f(t) denote the density of T and let
F(t) denote the cumulative density of T. The cumulative density is
referred to as the failure function and is defined as

[$$ F(t)=\Pr\ \left(T\le t\right)={\int}_0^tf\left(\tau \right)\ d\tau .
$$]

The survival (or survivor) function is the complement of the failure
function and is defined as the probability that a subject survives
beyond a particular time t

[$$ S(t)=\Pr \left(T&gt;t\right)={\int}_t^{\infty }f\left(\tau \right)
d\tau =1-F(t). $$]

Properties of the survival function. The survival function is monotonic,
non-increasing, equals 1 at time 0 and decreases to 0 as time approaches
infinity. [45].

Often, instead of the survival function, we model the instantaneous
“probability” of an event. The hazard function is the instantaneous
“probability” per unit time that an event occurs exactly at time t given
that the patient has survived at least until time t,

[$$ h(t)=\underset{\varDelta T\to 0}{\lim}\Pr \kern0.5em \left(T\le t\le
T+\varDelta T|T&gt;t\right) $$]

Properties of the hazard function. The hazard function can be thought of
as the “velocity” of the failure function or the rate of change in the
failure function. Since the survival function is non-increasing, the
failure function is non-decreasing and h(t) is non-negative. The hazard
is not a true probability, it is a rate [45].

The cumulative hazard is

[$$ H(t)={\int}_0^th\left(\tau \right)\ d\tau . $$]

The hazard and survival functions are linked to each other through the
following relationship [46]. By taking the derivative of ln S(t), we get

[$$ \frac{d\ \ln\ S(t)\ }{dt}=\frac{dS(t)/
dt}{S(t)}=-\frac{f(t)}{S(t)}=-h(t), $$]

which leads to

[$$ S(t)=\exp \left(-H(t)\right) $$]

Figure 18. shows the survival (left) and the hazard (right) functions
for the diabetes dataset in [47]. The horizontal axis corresponds to the
follow-up time (in years). For visualization purposes we show points (in
grey color) on the actual hazard “curve”. There is one point every
follow-up day. The hazard estimates can change frequently in any
direction as long as they remain non-negative. To further improve
interpretability, a smoothed version of the hazard curve is also
presented in black. The survival curve is a non-increasing step function
starting at 1 at time 0 and ending at 0 at time infinity. It appears
smooth in this figure because of the high resolution (daily) and large
sample size, but it is nonetheless a step function. Note that the
survival function relates to the lack of event (probability of not
having an event), while the hazard function relates to experiencing an
event (the rate of having an event).

[]

A set of 2 line graphs. A. Survival function versus follow-up. The line
descends from (0, 1.0) to (6, 0.93). B. Hazard versus follow-up. The
line follows a concave downward trend. Data are estimated.

Censoring

When a patient is lost to follow-up and is no longer observable, the
time-to-event beyond the time of the patient dropping out cannot be
observed. This is not a typical missing data problem as it first
appears, because we have partial observations: the event did not occur
while the subject was under observation. This partial observability is
called censoring.

Left censoring happens, when the event takes place before the subject
enters observation. We know that the event has already occurred at time
0, but we do not know when. Right censoring happens when the event takes
place after the subject is no longer observed. We know that the event
did not take place during the observation period but we do not know
when/whether it occurred afterwards. Common reasons for right censoring
are that the study ended, the subject is lost to follow-up or the
subject withdrew from the study. Finally, interval censoring brackets
the time of the event between two time points. We know that the event
did not take place before the first time point and that it already
occurred by the second time point.

Let C denote the time to censoring with density g() and cumulative
density G(). With [$$ \tilde{T} $$] denoting the true time-to-event, the
subject’s follow-up time T is [$$ T=\min \left(C,\tilde{T}\right) $$].
Let δ denote the event type: δ =1 if an event took place ([$$
\tilde{T}\le C $$]); and δ = 0 if the subject got censored ([$$
\tilde{T}&gt;C $$]).

Censoring is random, if [$$ {\tilde{T}}_i $$] is independent of C_(i)
given X_(i), where X_(i) is the covariate vector of observation i.
Random censoring assumes that subjects who are censored at time t are
similar in terms of their survival experience to the subjects remaining
in the study. Independent censoring is a related concept. When a study
has subgroups of interest, independent censoring is satisfied if
censoring is random in all subgroups. Uninformative censoring happens
when the distribution of C_(i) and [$$ {\tilde{T}}_i $$] do not share
parameters [46, 48].

Competing risks arises when we have multiple outcomes of interest and
the occurrence of one outcome prevents us from observing another
outcome. As an example, consider heart disease and mortality as two
outcomes of interest. If a patient dies (from a cause other than heart
disease) we can no longer observe the patient’s time to heart disease.
In this case, we may have complete observation of the time-to-death, but
we only have partial information about the time to heart disease: we
only know that it is greater than the time-to-death.

Inference About Survival

In this section, we discuss methods to summarize the time-to-event
distribution of a population. First, the time-to-event distribution can
be summarized into a statistic (a single number) much in the same way as
the mean or median summarizes aspects of a typical distribution. The
fundamental difference is censoring: some subjects may not experience an
event and thus their exact time-to-event is unknown. Next, we describe
the time-to-event distribution as a function of time. We show methods to
estimate the survival function and equivalently the cumulative hazard
function. Finally, we present methods of constructing confidence
intervals around the survival and cumulative hazard functions.

Summary Statistics of Survival

A concise way of describing the survival distribution is by presenting
summary statistics. Often used summary statistics of common statistical
distributions include the mean, the standard deviation, and the median.
However in survival analysis, in the presence of censoring, it is
desirable to account for the follow-up times when we compute summary
statistics. Below, in Table 4, we describe some of the commonly used
survival statistics [45].

Table 4

Common statistics to summarize survival time distributions

  Statistic               Definition                                                            Remark
  ----------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  Average survival time   [$$ \overline{\mathrm{T}}=1/N{\sum}_i{T}_i $$].                       Ignores censoring
  Average hazard rate     [$$ \overline{\mathrm{h}}=\frac{\sum_i{\delta}_i}{\sum_i{T}_i} $$]    Uses hazard instead of survival to account for censoring
  Median survival time    Survival time t, where S(t) = 0.5                                     Lessens the impact of outliers
  k-year survival rate    Percentage of patients surviving k-years after their diagnosis [49]   Common choices for k include 5, 7, 10

Estimating the Survival Function

We present two estimators of the survival function: the Kaplan-Meier and
the Nelson-Aalen estimator. They yield very similar results.

The Kaplan-Meier estimator is more commonly used for estimating survival
itself, and this is the preferred method for exploring and visualizing
time-to-event data.

The Nelson-Aalen estimator, on the other hand, estimates the cumulative
hazard function, and is mostly utilized by other methods, such as the
Cox Proportional Hazards model.

Kaplan-Meier (Product Limit) Estimator

Let the index j iterate over the distinct time points t_(j) when an
event took place. Let us assume that there are J such time points. The
product limit formula is

[$$ {\displaystyle
\begin{array}{c}\hat{S}\left({t}_j\right)=P\left(T&gt;{t}_j\right)=P\left(T&gt;{t}_j|t&gt;{t}_{j-1}\right)P\left(T&gt;{t}_{j-1}\right)\\
{}=\left[1-P\left(T={t}_j|T&gt;{t}_{j-1}\right)\right]P\left(T&gt;{t}_{j-1}\right)\\
{}=\kern3.75em \left(1-{h}_j\right)S\left({t}_{j-1}\right),\end{array}}
$$]

where h_(j) is the hazard at time t_(j). Expanding this formula yields
the Kaplan-Meier estimate

[$$
\hat{S}\left({t}_j\right)={\prod}_j\left(1-{\hat{h}}_j\right)={\prod}_j\left(1-\frac{d_j}{n_j}\right),
$$]

where d_(j) is the number of events and n_(j) is the number of patients
at risk at time t_(j).

Nelson-Aalen Estimator

The Nelson-Aalen estimator estimates the cumulative hazard as

[$$ \hat{H}(t)={\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le t}\frac{d_j}{n_j}. $$]

The relationship between the cumulative hazard and the survival function
can be used to estimate survival, yielding the Breslow formula

[$$ \hat{S}\left({t}_j\right)=\exp
\left(-\hat{H}(t)\right)={\prod}_{j:{t}_j\le t}\exp\
\left(-\frac{d_j}{n_j}\right) $$]

Comparison of the Kaplan-Meier and the Breslow (Nelson-Aalen)
estimators (Fig. 19). Since exp (−h_(j)) ∼ 1 − h_(j) for small h_(j),
the Kaplan-Meier and the Breslow estimates are very similar and
asymptotically equal. The Breslow estimate has uniformly lower variance
but is upwards biased [46]. When ties are present in the data, the
Kaplan-Meier estimate is more accurate. Fleming and Harrington proposed
a modification to the Breslow estimate by introducing a small jitter to
break the ties in the follow-up times.

[]

A multiple-line graph of survival function versus follow-up. The lines
are Kaplan, Meier, Nelson, and Aalen. All the lines descend from (0,
1.0) to (6, 0.92). Data are estimated.

Confidence Intervals for the Survival Curves

Whenever conducting a survival analysis it is imperative to present
confidence intervals (CIs). Statistical packages routinely offer such
estimates. However when survival analysis is conducted with less
conventional time-to-event modeling methods, often packages that
implement these methods offer no facilities for CI estimation. We thus
present here the fundamentals of estimating CIs for survival curves and
hazard curves.

There are two fundamentally different approaches to constructing the
confidence intervals and for each approach there are numerous variants.
For brevity, in this section, we focus on one common method for directly
estimating the confidence interval of the survival function. The
interested reader is referred to Appendix 1 for the other methods.

Greenwood’s formula. We consider constructing the confidence interval in
survival space (as opposed to log survival or hazard space). The
variance of the log survival function can be estimated using Greenwood’s
formula

[$$ \mathrm{Var}\left(\log S(t)\right)\hat ={\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\frac{d_j}{n_j\left({n}_j-{d}_j\right)}, $$]

where d_(j) and n_(j) are defined previously as the number of events at
t_(j) and the number of patients at risk at time t_(j), respectively.
The delta method can be used to derive the variance of the (non-log)
survival function, which yields the plain-scale confidence interval

[$$ \hat{S}(t)\pm z\sqrt{\hat{S}{(t)}^2{\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\frac{d_j}{n_j\left({n}_j-{d}_j\right)},} $$]

where z is the normal quantile corresponding to the confidence level
[46].

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: Kaplan-Meier (KM) estimator of survival curves        |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Estimate survival curves      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Visualize the survival curves |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Non-parametric modeling       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Predict survival probability  |
|                                  | at time t                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • The data does not meet the    |
|                                  | assumptions of more              |
|                                  | sophisticated (e.g., cox         |
|                                  | regression) survival modeling    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Checking the proportional     |
|                                  | hazards assumptions              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.6.1.1. Estimating the  |
|                                  | effect of covariates is          |
|                                  | difficult. A separate curve is   |
|                                  | computed for each covariate      |
|                                  | combination. Does not scale to   |
|                                  | more than a very small number of |
|                                  | covariates                       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Non-parametric estimator      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • In biomedicine it is          |
| empirical evidence               | practically expected and used in |
|                                  | every publication involving      |
|                                  | survival                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.6.1.1. Plotting  |
|                                  | the KM curve can reveal data     |
|                                  | problems. Consider the           |
|                                  | complementary log-log plot of    |
|                                  | the KM curve                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       | Recommended textbooks include    |
|                                  | [45, 46, 48]                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Comparing Survival Curves

Comparing the estimated survival curves from two or more populations.
Two survival curves are considered statistically equivalent when the
data supports the hypothesis that these two curves are identical and any
apparent difference between them is due merely to random variations in
the samples that were used to estimate the curves.

In this section, we focus on the log rank test. Extensions of the log
rank test are described in Appendix 1. Consider a group variable, which
divides the population into G groups. At each unique event time,
j = 1,...,J, the association between grouping and survival can be
assessed. The null hypothesis is that the hazard at time t_(j) is the
same across all groups for all j. The alternative hypothesis is that the
hazard differs between the groups at at least one j.

Let n_(gj) denote the number of subjects at risk in group g at time
t_(j) and let d_(gj) denote the number of failures in group g at time
t_(j). For simplicity, we concentrate on the two-sample test, where
G = 2. The expected number of failures in group 1 at time t_(j) is

[$$
{e}_{1j}=\frac{n_{1j}}{n_{1j}+{n}_{2j}}\left({d}_{1j}+{d}_{2j}\right)
$$]

The observed number of failures across time in group g is
O_(g) = ∑_(j)d_(gj) and the expected number of failures is
E_(g) = ∑_(j)e_(gj). The log-rank statistic becomes

[$$
Z=\frac{{\left({O}_g-{E}_g\right)}^2}{\mathrm{Var}\left({O}_g-{E}_g\right)},
$$]

and the variance can be estimated from the hypergeometric distribution.
Z follows a Χ² distribution with 1 degree of freedom and can be used as
test of curve equivalence [48].

Cox Proportional Hazards Regression

Two important uses of regression models is to assess the effect of
covariates on the hazard and to make predictions. Regression models we
consider fall into two categories: semi-parametric and parametric
models. Semi-parametric models, the Cox proportional hazards regression
in particular, models the hazard as a product of a non-parametric
baseline hazard function (which is a function of time) and (the
time-invariant) multiplicative effect of the covariates. The covariates
thus have a proportional (multiplicative) effect on the baseline hazard.
Fully parametric models make a distributional assumption about the
cumulative hazard (as a function of time) and model the parameter of
this distribution as a linear additive function of the covariates. In
this section, we focus on the Cox proportional hazard model (aka Cox
model, Cox PH); fully parametric models will be discussed in the
section "Parametric Survival Models".

The proportional hazards assumption. Fig. 20 illustrates the
proportional hazards assumption using the diabetes example from [47].
The left panel shows the cumulative hazard of diabetes as a function of
years of follow-up time. The orange curve in the plot corresponds to
patients with impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and the blue line
corresponds to patients with healthy glucose. At all time points, the
ratio of cumulative hazard along the orange line versus the blue line is
constant, 6.37. In other words, having IFG (versus not having IFG)
confers a proportional, 6.37-fold, increase of diabetes risk upon the
patients, and it remains constant across time. To translate this into
the terminology of Cox models, the baseline hazard corresponds to
patients without IFG (the corresponding covariate x = 0) and they have a
time-dependent risk of diabetes depicted by the blue curve. Patients
with IFG (x = 1), experience a risk (hazard) that is proportionally
(6.37 times) higher across the entire timeline (orange curve).

[]

A set of 2 dual-line graphs. The lines are baseline and I F G. A.
Cumulative hazard versus follow-up. Both lines follow an increasing
trend. B. Survival function versus follow-up. The lines follow a
decreasing trend.

The Cox model. Let X be the covariate matrix, and let X_(i) denote the
covariate vector for subject i. The hazard at time t is modeled as

[$$ {h}_i(t)={h}_0(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta \right) $$]

(1)

where h_(i)(t) is the hazard of the ith subject at time t, h₀(t) is the
baseline hazard (common across all subjects) at time t, and β are
regression coefficients. The cumulative hazards can be expressed as

[$$ {H}_i(t)={H}_0(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta \right)=\exp \left({X}_i\beta
\right)\ {\int}_0^t{h}_0\left(\tau \right) d\tau $$]

showing that the covariates increase (or decrease) the cumulative hazard
proportionally relative to the baseline cumulative hazard. For
additional details about the model (e.g. the partial likelihood
function), see Appendix 1.

Assumptions.

1.  1.

    The proportional hazards assumption: the covariates have a
    proportional (multiplicative) effect on the hazard relative to the
    baseline hazard.

    Consider two subjects, i and j, with covariate vectors X_(i) and
    X_(j), respectively. The hazard ratio of these two subjects is

    [$$ \frac{H_i(t)}{H_j(t)}=\frac{H_0(t)\exp\ \left({X}_i\beta
    \right)\ }{H_0(t)\exp \left({X}_j\beta \right)}=\frac{\exp
    \left({X}_i\beta \right)\ }{\exp \left({X}_j\beta \right)\ } $$]

    and is constant with respect to time (the [$$ \frac{\left(\exp
    \left({X}_i\beta \right)\right)}{\left(\exp \left({X}_j\beta
    \right)\right)} $$] ratio does not depend on time). The name
    proportional hazards reflects the fact that the hazards of two
    patients are proportional to each other.

    Continuing with the diabetes example, if patient i has IFG
    (X_(i) = 1) and patient j does not (X_(j) = 0), with β = 1.85, the
    hazard ratio is exp.(1.85) = 6.37. Therefore, the ratio of the
    hazards between the orange and the blue curves in Fig. 20 is 6.37.

     

2.  2.

    Independence. Observations with an event are independent of each
    other. Only observations with an event are multiplied in the partial
    likelihood.

     

3.  3.

    The effect of the covariates is linear and additive on the log-log
    survival.

     

Testing the Significance of the Covariates

Generally, in regression, we have two ways to test the significance of a
coefficient. The first method is the likelihood ratio test and the
second one is the Wald test. Although the proportional hazards
regression maximizes a partial likelihood (as opposed to a full
likelihood) as it leaves the baseline hazard unspecified, this does not
affect the likelihood ratio test and both methods remain applicable.

Estimating the Baseline Hazard

Fitting a Cox proportional hazards model does not require the estimation
of the baseline hazard. After the model has been fitted, the baseline
hazardfunction is estimated using a variant of the Nelson-Aalen
estimator that incorporates effects of covariates

[$$ {\hat{H}}_0(t)={\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\frac{\delta_j}{\sum_k{R}_k\left({t}_j\right)\exp \left({X}_k\beta
\right)}. $$]

where R_(k)(t) indicates whether subject k is in the risk set at time
t_(j). Notice, that when β = 0, this reduces to the Nelson-Aalen
estimatorfrom the “Terminology” section.

The variance of the baseline hazard is also based on the Nelson-Aalen
estimator[$$ \mathrm{Var}\left({\hat{H}}_0(t)\right)={\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\frac{d_j}{{\left({\sum}_k{R}_k\left({t}_j\right)\exp \left({X}_k\beta
\right)\ \right)}^2}. $$]

Making Predictions

For an individual i, hazard can be estimated as

[$$ {\hat{H}}_i(t)={\hat{H}}_0(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta \right) $$]

and the corresponding survival can be computed using the Breslow
estimator (see section "Estimating the Survival Function".)

[$$ {\hat{S}}_i(t)=\exp \left(-{\hat{H}}_i(t)\right) $$]

Testing the Proportional Hazards Assumption

There are three methods for testing the proportional hazards assumption:
(1) visual inspection, (2) formal statistical testing with
time-dependent covariates, and (3) Schoenfeld residuals. We describe the
first two methods and refer the interested reader to Appendix 1 for a
more thorough discussion of the Schoenfeld residuals.

Visual Inspection

The first method is visual inspection of the log-log survival plot.
Since under the proportional hazards assumption,

[$$ {\hat{S}}_i(t)=\exp \left(-{\hat{H}}_0(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta
\right)\right), $$]

its log-log transform is

[$$ \log \left(-\log {S}_i(t)\right)\hat =\left(\log {H}_0(t)\right)\hat
+{X}_i\beta . $$]

The log-log transform of two survival curves, corresponding to two
different values of X_(i), (say) x₁ and x₂, only differ in the X_(i)β
term, which is not a function of time t, thus the two curves should be
parallel with a distance of (x₂ − x₁)β between them.

To check the validity of the proportional hazards assumption, we plot
the log-log transform of the Kaplan-Meier survival curves for two
different values of X_(i) and expect these curves to be parallel.

A benefit of visual inspection is that we can see where (at what t) the
violation of the proportional hazards assumptions happens and we may
also see patterns that suggest the functional forms to correct the
violation. However, the decision whether the proportional hazards
assumption is violated is subjective, no formal test is applied and
hence no test statistic or p-value is obtained to guide the decision as
to whether the proportional hazards assumption is violated.

Figure 21 shows the complementary log-log plot of the diabetes data set.
The two curves correspond to two levels of the covariate glucose status:
the blue line shows patients without impaired fasting glucose (IFG)
while the orange line shows patients with IFG. Since the two curves are
parallel, the proportional hazards assumption appears to hold for
glucose status.

[]

A dual-line graph of log minus log survival versus log follow-up. The
parameters are baseline and I F G. The lines follow an increasing trend.

Figure 22 shows two synthetic examples where the proportional hazards
assumption is violated. In both examples, the blue line represents the
baseline hazardand the orange line corresponds to some exposure. In the
left panel, the effect of the exposure changes from beneficial to
harmful at about 2 years. In the right panel, the effect of the exposure
(orange line) is quadratically related to (log) time.

[]

A set of 2 dual-line graphs of log minus log survival versus log
follow-up. The parameters are baseline and I F G. The baselines follow
an increasing trend. The I F G starts from the middle and follows an
ascending trend.

Time-Dependent Covariates

The second method is based on time-dependent covariates. Under the
proportional hazards assumption, adding regression terms involving
interactions between the covariates and functions of time should not
improve the fit. To check the validity of the proportional hazards
assumption, we fit models of the form

[$$ h(t)={h}_0(t)\exp \left( X\beta +\left(X\times g(t)\right)\gamma
\right), $$]

where g(t) are vectors of function of time, X × g(t) are covariate-time
interactions and γ is the coefficient vector of the covariate-time
interaction terms. Under the proportional hazards assumption, we expect
γ = 0.

A benefit of this method is that a statistical test is performed, a
p-value is obtained, and thus the decision is objective. A weakness is
the need for choosing an appropriate function g(t). Different choices of
g() can lead to different conclusions. Common choices include the
identity: g(t) = t; the log transform of time: g(t) = log t ; and the
heaviside function, where g(t) = 1 if t exceeds a threshold τ and
g(t) = 0 otherwise.

In practice different functions of t are tested. The complementary
log-log plot can provide hints as to the functional form of the
violation.

Addressing the Violations of the Proportional Hazards Assumption

The consequences of violating the proportional hazards assumption are
usually not dire. Violations do not usually affect the predictions, they
mostly affect the error estimates.

Workarounds for the violations exist, however, they end up answering a
question that is different from the original research question.

When the data set is large, violations are almost unavoidable. Thus
depending on the extent of the violation and purpose of the study, we
may opt to ignore the violation.

Suppose a test reports a proportional hazards violation, we start by
verifying that the non-proportionality is substantial. Not all
non-proportionalities are substantial. Statistically significant
non-proportionality can arise from large sample sizes, where even small
deviations from proportionality can become significant; or violation can
arise also from influential points. The former can be ignored, the
latter can be removed. To assess whether a non-proportionality is
substantial, the key method is visualization. Not only can visualization
show whether the non-proportionality is substantial, but it can also
suggest a functional form to correct it.

For example, a formal test reports violations for the diabetes data set.
However, inspecting the complementary log-log plot (Fig. 21) shows no
violation of concern; the statistically significant violation is simply
a result of the large sample size (54,700 patients) and is
inconsequential to the analysis results.

Once we verified that the violation is substantial and decided to
address it, we have several options.

1.  1.

    The first option is stratified Cox models. If the covariate with the
    non-proportionality is a factor with relatively few levels, it can
    be used as a stratification factor in a stratified Cox model. The
    non-proportional effect now becomes part of the baseline hazard. If
    the covariate is a quantitative (continuous valued) variable,
    stratified Cox models can still be constructed, but the variable
    needs to be categorized (into a few categories) before it can be
    used as a stratification factor.

     

2.  2.

    If the non-proportionality is present in a relatively short
    timeframe and not in the entire timeline, the timeline can be
    partitioned into segments in which the proportional hazards
    assumption holds and separate Cox models can be constructed in each
    time segment.

     

3.  3.

    Finally, if the non-proportionality was detected through methods (2)
    or (3—see Appendix 1), using time or a transformation of time, g(t),
    adding an interaction term with the appropriate time-transformation
    can resolve the non-proportionality.

     

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: Cox proportional hazards regression                   |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Regression models for         |
|                                  | time-to-event outcomes           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Right-censored data           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Interest is the effect of     |
|                                  | covariates and making            |
|                                  | predictions                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Same interpretability as      |
|                                  | classical regression models for  |
|                                  | other outcome types              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    | N/A                              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.6.3.1. The key         |
|                                  | assumption is the proportional   |
|                                  | hazards assumption. Often,       |
|                                  | violation of the proportional    |
|                                  | hazards assumption is a          |
|                                  | non-issue, occasionally it can   |
|                                  | lead to problems                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.6.3.2. The models      |
|                                  | assume linearity and additivity. |
|                                  | Not appropriate if these         |
|                                  | assumptions are violated         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.6.3.3. High            |
|                                  | dimensionality is a problem for  |
|                                  | the unregularized model          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • It is a semi-parametric       |
|                                  | regression model                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • The effect of covariates is a |
|                                  | proportional (multiplicative)    |
|                                  | increase/decrease relative to a  |
|                                  | time-dependent baseline hazard   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Coefficient estimates are     |
|                                  | obtained from maximizing a       |
|                                  | partial likelihood               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Although a partial likelihood |
| empirical evidence               | is maximized, the favorable      |
|                                  | properties of maximum likelihood |
|                                  | estimation are preserved:        |
|                                  | Estimates are consistent,        |
|                                  | efficient and asymptotically     |
|                                  | normally distributed             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Partial likelihood is convex  |
|                                  | and thus easy to solve           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.6.3.1.           |
|                                  | First-choice model for           |
|                                  | time-to-event data               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.6.3.2. Consider, |
|                                  | additionally, whether the        |
|                                  | problem can be solved as a       |
|                                  | classification problem, or using |
|                                  | survival modeling versions of ML |
|                                  | predictive models                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.6.3.3. In the    |
|                                  | presence of substantial          |
|                                  | violations, different models,    |
|                                  | including extensions of the cox  |
|                                  | PH, may be more appropriate      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.6.3.4. Consider  |
|                                  | the Markov boundary feature      |
|                                  | selector for survival analysis   |
|                                  | that results from using cox      |
|                                  | proportional hazards models as   |
|                                  | conditional independence testing |
|                                  | within the Markov boundary       |
|                                  | algorithm                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.6.3.5. For       |
|                                  | high-dimensional data, consider  |
|                                  | regularized cox proportional     |
|                                  | hazards models. Also consider    |
|                                  | the cox Markov boundary method   |
|                                  | described above                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.6.3.6. If age is |
|                                  | included in the model and is     |
|                                  | nonlinear, consider an age-scale |
|                                  | Cox PH model                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       | Kleinbaum DG, Klein M. survival  |
|                                  | Analysis. A self-learning text.  |
|                                  | 2020, springer                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Therneau T, Grambsch P. modeling |
|                                  | survival data. Extending the cox |
|                                  | model. 2000, springer            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Extensions of the Cox Proportional Hazards Regression

Several extensions to the Cox PH model have been proposed. In this
section, we review some of them.

Stratified Cox Model

Stratified Cox models allow the population to be divided into different
non-overlapping groups, called “strata”. Each stratum has its own
baseline hazard and each group may also have its own coefficient vector.
The standard form of a stratified Cox models is

[$$ {h}_i(t)={h}_{0k}(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta \right) $$]

which assumes a common covariate effect across all strata that is
proportional to the stratum-specific baseline hazard, h_(0k)(t) for the
kth stratum. The coefficients represent an “average” hazard ratio across
the population (regardless of strata). This is the most flexible way of
incorporating effects that violate the proportional hazards assumption,
but stratified cox models offer no direct way of assessing the
significance of the stratifying factor. An alternative form of the
stratified Cox models considers the possibility of some covariates in a
stratum (or some of the strata) having an effect that differs from its
effect in other strata. Such effects are incorporated as interaction
effects between the covariate and the stratum. If all covariates have
interactions with the strata, then the resulting Cox model is the same
as fitting separate Cox models for each stratum. Naturally, having to
estimate separate baseline hazards and interaction terms requires
sufficient sample size.

Recurring Events and Counting Process Cox Model

So far, time-to-event data was described by the triplet {T_(i), δ_(i),
X_(i)}, where T_(i) denotes the time to event, δ_(i) the event type
(event or censoring), and X_(i) is the covariate vector. Alternatively,
each subject’s timeline can be divided into multiple segments and each
segment can be described by a quartet {start_(i), end_(i), δ_(i),
X_(i)}, where start_(i) and end_(i) are the two end points of the time
segment, δ_(i) denotes whether an event occured in the time segment, and
X_(i) is the covariate vector. This format is called the counting
process format. Many applications of the counting process format exist,
here we highlight a few.

The first application is the change of the time scale. The term time
scale refers to the way time is measured. The triplet format measures
time on the study scale, and, specifically, time 0 is when subjects
entered the study. The counting process format allows for different time
scales. For example, time can be measured as patients’ age, where
start_(i) is the age when they entered the study and end_(i) is the age
when they experienced an event. We discuss different time scales
later in more detail.

Another commonly used application of the counting process format is
time-dependent covariate Cox models. Time-dependent covariate Cox models
allow for modeling under the assumption that the covariates can change
over time. The time scale is divided into multiple segments and each
segment can have its own covariate vector. As long as the subjects
experience at most one event, the time-dependent covariate Cox model
does not cause any complications, even though each subject can
contribute multiple observations (rows). This stands in contrast to
longitudinal data analysis (section "Longitudinal Data Analysis"), where
observations from the same subject are correlated and this causes
estimation issues. The key assumption to avoid such estimation problems
is that the subjects have at most one event.

A third application of the counting process format is when subjects can
experience multiple events. The timeline can be divided into multiple
segments when subjects experience an event: resulting in a separate
timeline for the first, second, etc. event. Now, each subject can enter
the partial likelihood function multiple times. Several remedies exist.
First, we can consider only the first event of all patients. Second, we
can use longitudinal data analysis techniques. Analogues of both GEEs
and mixed effect models exist for time to event outcomes. A third,
commonly used option is to initially fit a model ignoring the
correlation due to the possibly multiple observations per subject (with
event) and then re-computing the error estimates, taking the correlation
into account. Chapter 8.2.2 of [19, 46] describes three popular
variations of this option in detail.

Age-Scale Models

The term time scale refers to the way time is measured for a
time-to-event outcome. Typically, time is measured from a particular
event, e.g. enrollment into the study, to the end of study. This is the
study time scale. An alternative is calendar scale, where time is
measured based on a calendar, e.g. the age of the participant.

Changing the time scale has two important effects. First, the risk sets
are different. At first sight it may appear that age scale can be easily
converted into a study-scale by T_(i) = end_(i) − start_(i), however,
the risk sets are different. Consider two patients. The first one enters
the study at the age of 40 and suffers a heart attack (event of
interest) at the age of 51. The second one enters the study at 55 and
suffers a heart attack 5 years later at the age of 50. On the study-time
scale, we have two events, one at 5 and one at 11 years. At the time of
the first event, at year 5, we have a risk set of two patients. In
contrast, on the age scale, we have two events, one at 51 and one at 60.
At both events, the risk set contains only one patient. Since the risk
sets are different, the survival estimates (or equivalently the hazard
estimates) are different, as well. These two time-scales yield different
results and admit different interpretations.

The second effect of age-scale relates to how age is entered into the
model. One option is to use study-scale and add a covariate that
represents age; and the other option is to use age-scale. In case of
using age scale, age is modeled completely non-parametrically; the
baseline hazard is a function of age. As such, the statistical
significance of the age effect is difficult to assess. Conversely, when
age is added as a covariate, the usual assumptions (linear, additive
effect) apply and the baseline hazard is based on time in the study.
Whether we use age-scale or study-time scale can also be determined
based on whether the model assumptions about age as a covariate are
reasonable.

Parametric Survival Models

The Cox proportional hazards model estimates the effects of the
covariates first and then estimates the baseline hazard in a
non-parametric manner. Non-parametric estimation typically requires more
samples than parametric estimation.

Parametric models that model the time-dependent hazard (or equivalently,
the survivor) curves in a fully parametric manner, can be more sample
efficient if their assumptions are met.

In this section, we model the time-to-event variable T using parametric
distributions. Consider X, a covariate matrix, β the regression
coefficients and W is the error term. Rather than modeling T directly,
we model its natural logarithm as

[$$ \log\ T=\mu + X\beta +\sigma W $$]

In this model, μ is called a location parameter, σ is called the scale
parameter and W is the error term. Similarly to linear regression, in
parametric survival models, the coefficients have a linear effect on the
location parameter of the distribution of logT.

Principle of operation. Recall from section “Predictive Modeling Tasks”,
that in OLS regression with covariates X, outcome y, and error term ε,
the model can be written as y = Xβ + ε. The error term is assumed to
follow a normal (Gaussian) distribution, with location parameter (mean)
μ = 0 and scale parameter (standard deviation) σ. The covariates
linearly affect the location parameter and the outcome thus have the
same distribution as the noise, i.e. Gaussian, but with location
parameter μ = Xβ and scale parameter σ (which remained unchanged).

Parametric survival models work analogously. The error term W is assumed
to have a particular distribution with location and scale parameters μ
and σ, respectively. The outcome logT then follows the same distribution
as W, with location parameter μ + Xβ. The model assumes that the
covariates effect the location parameter linearly. The various
parametric survival models differ in their choice of the distribution of
W. We refer the reader to Appendix 1, which discusses several such
distributions and the corresponding parametric survival model.

Property [Accelerated Failure Time (AFT)]. The covariates shift the
location μ, which accelerates or decelerates the passing of time. This
class of models is referred to as accelerated failure time (AFT) models.
Let S₀(t) denote the survival time distribution when all covariates are
0. The survival time distribution for a subject with covariates X is

[$$ {\displaystyle \begin{array}{c}S(t)=\Pr \left(T&gt;t\right)=\Pr
\left(\log T&gt;\log t\right)\\ {}=\Pr \left(\mu + X\beta +\sigma
W&gt;\log t\right)\\ {}=\kern0.5em \Pr \left(\mu +\sigma W&gt;\log t-
X\beta \right)\\ {}=\Pr \left(\exp \left(\mu +\sigma W\right)&gt;t\exp\
\left(- X\beta \right)\right)\\ {}=\kern0.375em {S}_0\left(t\exp \left(
X\beta \right)\right)\end{array}} $$]

The covariates, depending on the sign of Xβ, accelerate or decelerate
the passing of time by a factor of exp(−Xβ).

Figure 23 shows an AFT model fitted to the diabetes dataset. The outcome
is diabetes-free survival, the horizontal axis is follow-up years. The
orange line represents patients with impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and
the blue represents patients with normal fasting glucose. Patients with
normal fasting glucose have higher diabetes-free survival probability.
If we draw a horizontal line at a particular (diabetes-free) survival
probability, and compute the ratio of the time it takes to get to that
probability along the blue line versus the orange line, we would find
that this ratio is constant, exp.(−2.08) = 0.12 in this example. In
other words, the time it takes for the diabetes-free survival to drop to
a probability P is much shorter (takes 0.12 times as long) for patients
with IFG than without.

[]

A dual-line graph of survival versus log follow-up years. The lines are
baseline and I F G. The lines follow a decreasing trend from (0, 1.0) to
( (6, 0.95) and (6, 0.65). Data are estimated.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: accelerated failure time (AFT) models                 |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Regression models for         |
|                                  | time-to-event outcomes           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Right-censored data           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Interest is the effect of     |
|                                  | covariates and making            |
|                                  | predictions                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Same interpretability as      |
|                                  | regression models for other      |
|                                  | outcome types                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Non-recommended Uses and         | Pitfall 3.6.4.1. The key         |
| Pitfalls                         | assumption is the accelerated    |
|                                  | failure time (AFT) assumption.   |
|                                  | Not appropriate if this          |
|                                  | assumption is violated           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.6.4.2. The models      |
|                                  | assume linearity and             |
|                                  | additivity (location shift). Not |
|                                  | appropriate if these assumptions |
|                                  | are violated                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.6.4.3. High            |
|                                  | dimensionality is a problem      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Fully parametric model that   |
|                                  | specifies the full likelihood    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • The error term is assumed to  |
|                                  | have a location-scale            |
|                                  | distribution. This ensures that  |
|                                  | the log survival time has the    |
|                                  | same distribution. Covariates    |
|                                  | change the location parameter,   |
|                                  | accelerating/decelerating the    |
|                                  | passing of time                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical Properties and       |  • Parameter estimates are       |
| empirical evidence               | obtained using maximum           |
|                                  | likelihood estimation. They are  |
|                                  | consistent, unbiased, efficient  |
|                                  | and asymptotically normally      |
|                                  | distributed                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • AFT is a family of            |
|                                  | distribution with different      |
|                                  | properties                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Exponential survival             |
|                                  | model—Constant hazard assumption |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Weibull survival model—AFT and   |
|                                  | PH                               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Log-logistic survival model—AFT  |
|                                  | and proportional odds assumption |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.6.4.1. Use AFT   |
|                                  | if the assumptions are met       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.6.4.2. Use cox   |
|                                  | PH if only the PH assumption is  |
|                                  | met                              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       | KleinJP, Moeschberger ML.        |
|                                  | SURVIVAL ANALYSIS techniques for |
|                                  | censored and truncated data.     |
|                                  | 2003, springer                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Kleinbaum DG, Klein M. survival  |
|                                  | Analysis. A self-learning text.  |
|                                  | 2020, springer                   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Parametric Survival Models Versus Cox PH Models

If the model assumptions of the parametric models are met, the
parametric models are more sample efficient. If the assumptions are not
met or if we are in doubt, the semi-parametric model is more robust to
model misspecification and only requires the proportional hazards
assumption.

Appendix 1 describes method to check the appropriateness of various
parametric survival models. In this section, we show one example,
comparing the fit from a Weibull model (a particular type of parametric
survival model) with Cox PH model.

The left panel in Fig. 24 shows the complementary log-log plot of the
diabetes data set. We continue to use impaired fasting glucose (IFG) as
the sole covariate and the two survival curves were computed using the
Kaplan-Meier estimator. The two lines corresponding to the two values of
this covariate, IFG in orange and non-IFG in blue, are reasonably
straight and parallel for the first 6 years. As shown in Appendix 1, the
curves being parallel indicates that the proportional hazards assumption
holds. If the curves are straight the AFT assumption holds. Beyond
6 years, the curves turn and become horizontal. They remain parallel but
they no longer continue to have a constant slope. The turn signals a
violation of the AFT assumption, however, they remain parallel,
indicating that the PH assumption is still met. This appears to be a
small violation, however, a large portion of the population have a
follow-up time in excess of 6 years.

[]

Two graphs. A. A dual-line graph of log minus log survival versus log
follow-up. Both lines follow an increasing trend. B. A multiple-line
graph of survival versus follow-up. The parameters are no I F G, I F G,
Kaplan-Meier, and Weibull. All lines follow a decreasing trend.

The right panel in Fig. 24 shows the Weibull fit (in dashed lines) and
the Kaplan-Meier survival curve (in solid line) for the IFG patients
(orange) and non-IFG patients (blue). We can see that the lack of events
beyond 6 years caused a substantial bias in the Weibull estimates. We
expected this bias based on the violation of the AFT assumption. Since
the PH assumption is still met, a Cox model would be a better fit for
this data.

Non-Linear Survival Models

The regression models in the previous sections all assume that the
covariates have a linear (additive and proportional) relationship with
the log hazard or log survival time. To overcome this limitation, the
original features X can be transformed through a non-linear non-additive
transformation to serve as the input to the partial or full likelihood
function of the above models. Deep-learning based survival models and
the Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM) for time-to-event outcome have taken
this approach. The Xβ term in the Cox partial likelihood is replaced by
a non-linear non-additive function f(X). This function is an ANN for
deep learning and a GBM for Cox GBM.

A Random Survival Forest (RSF) consists of a collection of B trees. This
collection does not directly maximize a likelihood function like the
previously discussed methods, so RSF works slightly differently. In RSF,
each of the B trees models the cumulative hazard of a patient using the
Nelson-Aalen estimator. The cumulative hazard estimates from the B trees
are then averaged to obtain an overall prediction for the cumulative
hazard [50].

One key in time-to-event modeling is censoring. The partial likelihood
automatically takes censoring into account, but the full likelihood may
not. Deep learning models based on the full likelihood, assuming a
Weibull distributed survival time, have been proposed. An alternative to
the partial likelihood in the presence of censoring is the censoring
unbiased loss (CUL), which is a general method for bias-correcting the
unobservable loss. Censoring unbiased deep learning (CUDL) follows this
strategy [51, 52].

High-dimensional data. Similar to non-survival regression models, high
dimensionality, when the number of predictor variables is large relative
to the number of observations, poses a challenge. In non-survival
regression, regularizing the likelihood function was one of the
solutions. Analogous solutions by regularizing the partial likelihood
function of the survival models has been proposed in the form of an
elastic-net style Cox model.

Survival models for longitudinal data. When we have longitudinal data,
the covariates and the outcome can change over time. We have already
discussed extensions to the Cox model that allow for changing predictors
(time-dependent covariates) and recurring events. In the general
regression setting, longitudinal data is handled through marginal models
or through mixed effect models, because the observations become
correlated. We have also discussed that in the Cox model, as long as we
only have one event per patient, marginal or mixed effect models are not
required [46].

Apart from providing the correct error estimates in the longitudinal
setting, mixed effect models are also used for separating
subject-specific and population effects. Frailty models are the
time-to-event outcome analogues of the mixed effect regression models
and allow for separating subject-specific effects and population
effects.

Longitudinal Data Analysis

Longitudinal data is generated when measurements are taken for the same
subjects on multiple occasions. For example, EHR data of patients is
longitudinal as the same measurements, e.g. vitals, are taken at
multiple encounters. Longitudinal data stands in contrast with single
cross-sectional data, where measurements are taken (or aggregated) at a
single particular time point. It also contrasts with time series data,
where measurements are taken for a single subject (or for few subjects)
for a long period of time and inference is conducted within the subject.

Using longitudinal data offers several advantages. (1) It can provide
more information about each subject than data from a single
cross-section since we observe the subject over a time span. (2) It also
allows for a crossover study design, where a patient can be a control
patient for himself: When a subject experiences an exposure during the
study period, he/she is a “control” subject before the exposure and is
an “exposed” patient after the exposure. (3) it also allows for
separating aging effects from intervention effects. Finally, (4) it
allows for separating subject-specific effects from population effects
[5, 53].

Figure 25 shows an illustrative synthetic data set. Five subjects are
followed over 10 time periods and a measurement is taken in each time
period. The left panel shows a plot of the data set. The horizontal axis
represents time, and the vertical axis is the measurement. We can see an
overall upward trend: as time increases the measured values increase. We
fitted a linear regression model to the entire data, which is shown as
the bold black line. This model is a population-level model and it
confirms this increasing trend. We also fitted a regression line, shown
as dashed gray lines, to each individual subject. These are called
individual-level lines. We can see that most (all five in this sample)
subjects also exhibit an increasing trend, but their initial points
(y-intercepts) vary, and their slopes also vary. Some methods allow for
modeling individual effects such as the per-subject intercept and
per-subject slope.

[]

2 graphs. A. A multiple-line graph of the outcome versus time. A line
and 5 dotted lines on the sides follow an increasing trend. B. A
scatterplot of the error versus index. The plots in different shades are
scattered in a linear pattern.

These advantages of longitudinal data analysis, however, come at a
price. The multiple observations of the same patients are correlated
with each other, which violates the i.i.d. (independent, identically
distributed) assumption that most analytic methods make.

The right panel in Fig. 25 shows the error relative to the
population-level regression model (the bold black line in the left
panel). The horizontal axis is simply an observation index and the
vertical axis is the (signed) error (residual). Observations from the
five subjects are grouped together along the horizontal axis in
increasing order of time: index 1–10 corresponds to the 10 time points
of the first subjects, etc. Different subjects are depicted in different
colors. We can see that the errors of each subject (errors depicted in
the same color) tend to form clusters. Within a subject, once we know
the error of one observation, errors of the other observations will
typically not differ as much as errors from a different subject. This
means that errors of the same subject are correlated with each other.
There is also a trend within each subject: as time increases, the errors
tend to increase or decrease. This is due to the differences in the
growth rates of the different subjects (the differences across the
slopes of the gray lines in the left panel).

When we assume that the errors in the right panel are generated from 50
independent observations, we would estimate the variance of the outcome
to be about 1 (ranging between −2 and 2). Once we account for the fact
that the observations came from 5 different subjects, the spread of the
error becomes the range covered by the same color, and the variance
becomes approximately 0.57; and after accounting for the differences in
individual growth rates, the error variance drops to (approx.) 0.1. Such
reduction in the noise variance leads to much improved estimates and is
very beneficial for detecting significant effects from exposures.

The data is balanced when measurements for all subjects are taken at the
same time points.

When the data is balanced, coefficient estimates, whether they are
computed using methods for longitudinal data or for cross-sectional
data, will be similar albeit with substantially different errors. If the
purpose of the analysis is prediction for previously unseen subjects, no
individual effect estimates will be available, thus the results obtained
from the regular regression models will be very similar to those
obtained from the longitudinal models.

Conversely, when the design is not balanced, methods specifically
designed for longitudinal data should be used. Also, when the
significance of the coefficients needs to be estimated, or estimating
errors is important, or individual (within-subject) effects are of
interest, or if predictions are to be made for previously seen patients
(whose individual effect sizes are already estimated), methods
specifically designed for longitudinal data should be used (regardless
of whether the design is balanced or not).

As we mentioned earlier, the key drawback of using longitudinal data is
the correlation among the observations of the same subject. All methods
in this section address this correlation. Moreover, linear mixed models
(LMMs) can additionally model within-subject variability, while
generalized estimating equations (GEE) offer improved coefficient
estimates at lower computation cost relative to LMMs. Both of these
techniques are described in later sections.

Terminology and Notation

The sampling unit of the analysis is a subject or a patient and we index
the sampling units i = 1, . . , N. The analytic units are observations.
Each patient can have multiple observations, indexed by j = 1, …, n_(i),
taken at n_(i) different occasions (time points). The time of these
occasions are denoted by t_(ij), the time of the jth occasion for the
ith patient.

The design is balanced, if all subjects share the same time points.

Let y_(ij) denote the response variable (of patient i at occasion j) and
let X be covariates. The covariates for subject i can be time-invariant
(constant across time) or they can vary across time (a
situation referred to as time-varying covariates). The vector of
time-invariant covariates for subject i is denoted by X_(i) and the
vector of time-varying covariates from subject i at occasion j is
denoted by X_(ij).

Random effects are effect estimates that are computed for observation
units that are thought of as a random sample from a population. In
contrast, fixed effects are effect estimates computed for specific
observation units. The within-subject effects are random effects,
because the corresponding units, namely the subjects, are thought of as
a (hopefully) representative random sample (the discovery cohort) from a
population of patients. We could have conducted our study with a
different random sample from the same population and we would expect
similar results. Conversely, the time effects are fixed effects, because
we wish to know the effect of a specific time period j on the outcome.
The time points are not a representative random sample from a population
of time points, they represent periods of exposure to the intervention.
If we conducted our study using different time periods, say 2 months
exposures as opposed to 2 days, we would certainly expect to get
different results.

The questions we ask about longitudinal data are similar to and are a
superset of the questions we ask about cross-sectional data. These
questions include:

1.  1.

    Are two sets of observations (y_(i1), y_(i2), …, y_(in) and y_(k1),
    y_(k2), …, y_(kn)), one for patient i and the other one for patient
    k, different?

     

2.  2.

    Are observations at different time points j and k different
    (y_(·j)=^(?)y_(·k))? Or more broadly, describe the changes in
    observations over time.

     

3.  3.

    Making predictions. We may wish to predict the value of the
    observation at a particular time point for a subject we have
    observed before; or we may want to predict the value of an
    observation for a subject that we have not seen before.

     

4.  4.

    Estimate the effect of exposures.

     

5.  5.

    Estimate subject-specific effects.

     

ANOVA and MANOVA for Repeated Measures

Before the advent of more advanced and flexible analysis methods,
repeated ANOVA and MANOVA were the first-choice methods for analyzing
repeated measures data. In this chapter, we focus on the more advanced
methods (which subsume ANOVA and MANOVA), and detailed discussion of
ANOVA and MANOVA are presented in Appendix 2. Given their historic
importance and hence presence in the health sciences literature, we
still provide method labels for them below.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method Label: Repeated Measures ANOVA                               |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • ANOVA for repeated measures   |
|                                  | data                             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Single-sample or              |
|                                  | multiple-sample ANOVA            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Assumes the data to be in the |
|                                  | PP (person-period) format        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Assessing the significance of |
|                                  | time effects and treatment       |
|                                  | effects                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.7.2.1. Repeated        |
|                                  | measures ANOVA is not a          |
|                                  | predictive model                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.7.2.2. Repeated        |
|                                  | measures ANOVA assumes compound  |
|                                  | symmetry; not appropriate when   |
|                                  | this assumption is violated      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Operates on the same          |
|                                  | principle as most ANOVA methods  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • See Appendix 2 for detailed   |
|                                  | models                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Requires balanced design      |
| empirical evidence               |                                  |
|                                  |  • Assumes the compound symmetry |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Performs statistical tests of |
|                                  | time effect and treatment        |
|                                  | effects                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Contrasts can be used to      |
|                                  | perform specific tests (e.g.     |
|                                  | difference between two treatment |
|                                  | levels)                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.7.2.1. Also      |
|                                  | consider the random intercept    |
|                                  | LMM. The LMM is more flexible    |
|                                  | and contains the ANOVA           |
|                                  | specification as a special case  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Hedeker D, Gibbons RD.        |
|                                  | Longitudinal Data Analsyis.      |
|                                  | Wiley, 2006. Chapter 2           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: repeated measures MANOVA                              |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • MANOVA for repeated measures  |
|                                  | data                             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Single-sample or              |
|                                  | multiple-sample MANOVA           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Assumes the data to be in the |
|                                  | PL (person-level) format         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Assessing the significance of |
|                                  | time effects and treatment       |
|                                  | effects                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.7.2.3. Repeated        |
|                                  | measures MANOVA is not a         |
|                                  | predictive model                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall 3.7.2.3. Repeated        |
|                                  | measures MANOVA in its original  |
|                                  | form, does not allow for missing |
|                                  | observations                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Operates on the same          |
|                                  | principle as most ANOVA /MANOVA  |
|                                  | methods                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • See Appendix 2 for detailed   |
|                                  | models                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Requires balanced design      |
| Empirical evidence               |                                  |
|                                  |  • In contrast to ANOVA, it does |
|                                  | not make the compound symmetry   |
|                                  | assumption, but it does not      |
|                                  | allow missing values             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Performs statistical tests of |
|                                  | time effect and treatment        |
|                                  | effects                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Contrasts can be used to      |
|                                  | perform specific tests (e.g.     |
|                                  | difference between two treatment |
|                                  | levels)                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.7.2.2. Also      |
|                                  | consider LMMs                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Hedeker D, Gibbons RD.        |
|                                  | Longitudinal Data Analsyis.      |
|                                  | Wiley, 2006. Chapter 3           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Linear Mixed Effect Models

The key difference between methods developed for longitudinal data and
for cross-sectional data lies in their ability to take within-subject
correlations into account. Linear Mixed Effect Models (LMM), the subject
of the present section, aim to partition the variance-covariance matrix
into within-subject and between-subject variances.

If differentiating and estimating within-subject versus between-subject
variance is of interest, then Linear Mixed Effect Models should be used.

Model Specification and Principle of Operation. Regular regression
models model the outcome as a combination of deterministic “fixed”
effects and a random noise

[$$ {y}_i={\beta}_0+{X}_i\beta +{\varepsilon}_i, $$]

where β₀ is an intercept, β is a vector of coefficients for the fixed
effects imparted by the covariates X_(i) and ε is a normally distributed
noise term with mean 0 and variance σ².

Mixed effects regression models, similarly to regular regression models,
allow for fixed effects, but they further partition the “noise” into
different anticipated random effects. Different types of LMM models
differ in the random effects they anticipate, which in turn, confers
different structures on the variance-covariance matrix.

Let the subscript i correspond to the subject and j to the (index of)
the occasion when the subject was observed. Let X_(ij) denote the
covariate vector and y_(ij) the response of subject i at occasion j. The
time point of this occasion is t_(ij).

Mixed effect models are often expressed in the hierarchical format. The
first-level model is on the level of the population

[$$ {y}_{ij}={\beta}_{0i}+{X}_{ij}\beta
+{t}_{ij}{\beta}_{ti}+{\varepsilon}_{ij} $$]

and the second-level (subject-level) models define the models for the
(subject-specific) intercept β_(0i) and (time) trend β_(ti) for subject
i. Mixed effect models are a family of models that chiefly differ in the
way β_(0i) and β_(ti) are defined.

Assumptions. Different definitions lead to different variance-covariance
matrices based on different assumptions, however, all mixed effect
models share some common assumptions.

1.  1.

    As in all linear models, the fixed effects, X_(ij), are assumed to
    have a linear (additive and proportional) relationship with y_(ij).
    This assumption can be relaxed by including a priori known
    interactions and nonlinearities.

     

2.  2.

    Time enters the mixed effect models explicitly (t_(ij)). This allows
    for observation times to vary across subjects. In many models, time
    has a linear additive effect on the response, however, models with
    curvilinear relationships will be discussed later.

     

3.  3.

    The structure of the variance-covariance matrix is specified through
    a random intercept and/or trend. This allows for the dimension of
    the variance-covariance matrix to vary across patients, which in
    turn, allows for a differing number of observations across subjects.
    The second and third properties combined make mixed effect models
    appropriate for the analysis of longitudinal data that is not of
    repeated measures design (observation times vary) or for repeated
    measures design with missing observations.

     

4.  4.

    Models in this chapter assume an outcome with Gaussian distribution,
    but mixed effect models have been extended to the exponential family
    outcomes through a linkage function that linearizes these outcomes.
    These models, Generalized Mixed Effect Models, are the mixed-effect
    analogues of GLMs.

     

In the following sections, we describe specific mixed effect models,
their assumptions, relationships between covariates, time and outcome
they can represent, and the variance-covariance matrix forms these
assumptions yield.

Random Intercept Models

Random intercept models are mixed effect models with a subject-specific
random intercept effect but only with a population average trend effect.
The second level models are thus

[$$ {\beta}_{0i}={\beta}_0+{\upsilon}_i $$]

[$$ {\beta}_{ti}={\beta}_t $$]

The subject-specific intercept β_(0i) is decomposed into a population
average effect β₀ and a subject-specific random effect υ_(i). The time
effect β_(ti) is simply the population average trend (slope) β_(t)
(without a subject-specific random effect). Thus, the random intercept
model decomposes the “noise” into a subject-specific random effect υ_(i)
and the actual noise at the jth occasion ε_(ij).

It is further assumed that

[$$ {\upsilon}_i\sim N\left(0,{\sigma}_{\upsilon}^2\right) $$]

[$$ {\varepsilon}_i\sim N\left(0,{\sigma}_e^2\right) $$]

This yields a block-diagonal variance-covariance matrix. Each block
corresponds to a subject and is of the form

[$$
{\varSigma}_i=\left[\begin{array}{cc}\begin{array}{ccc}{\sigma}_v^2+{\sigma}_e^2&amp;
{\sigma}_v^2&amp; {\sigma}_v^2\\ {}{\sigma}_v^2&amp;
{\sigma}_v^2+{\sigma}_e^2&amp; {\sigma}_v^2\\ {}{\sigma}_v^2&amp;
{\sigma}_v^2&amp; {\sigma}_v^2+{\sigma}_e^2\end{array}&amp;
\begin{array}{cc}\cdots &amp; \kern1.25em {\sigma}_v^2\kern1.25em \\
{}\cdots &amp; {\sigma}_v^2\\ {}\cdots &amp; {\sigma}_v^2\end{array}\\
{}\begin{array}{ccc}\vdots \kern2.5em &amp; \vdots &amp; \kern3.125em
\vdots \\ {}{\sigma}_v^2\kern2em &amp; {\sigma}_v^2&amp; \kern2.375em
{\sigma}_v^2\end{array}&amp; \begin{array}{cc}\ddots &amp; \vdots \\
{}\cdots &amp; {\sigma}_v^2+{\sigma}_e^2\end{array}\end{array}\right]
$$]

This form of variance-covariance matrix is referred to as compound
symmetry. It assumes that the covariance between observations of the
same subject are constant over time. This is often unrealistic:
observations closer to each other in time are typically more correlated
than observations further away in time.

Random Growth Models

Random growth models, in addition to the subject-specific random
intercept, also have a random slope for time. This allows (i) for
changes (slopes) to vary across subjects and (ii) for time to enter the
variance-covariance matrix. The second-level model is

[$$ {\beta}_{0i}={\beta}_0+{\upsilon}_{0i} $$]

[$$ {\beta}_{ti}={\beta}_t+{\upsilon}_{ti} $$]

Similarly to the way the intercept was decomposed into a
subject-specific effect υ_(0i) and a population-level effect β₀ in the
random intercept model, in the random growth model the time effect is
also decomposed into a subject-specific effect υ_(ti) and a
population-level time effect β_(t). It is assumed that

[$$ {\upsilon}_{0i}\sim
N\left(0,{\sigma}_{\upsilon_0}^2\right),\kern0.28em {\upsilon}_{ti}\sim
N\left(0,{\sigma}_{\upsilon_t}^2\right) $$]

[$$ {\varepsilon}_i\sim N\left(0,{\sigma}_e^2\right) $$]

With subjects i and k being independent, the variance-covariance matrix
is block-diagonal, with each block representing a patient and taking a
form of

[$$ {\varSigma}_i={\sigma}_e^2I+{T}_i{\varSigma}_{\upsilon }{T}_i^T $$]

where

[$$ {T}_i^T=\left[\begin{array}{cccc}1&amp; 1&amp; \cdots &amp; 1\\
{}{t}_1&amp; {t}_2&amp; \cdots &amp; {t}_{n_i}\end{array}\right] $$]

and

[$$ {\varSigma}_i=\left[\begin{array}{cc}{\sigma}_{\upsilon_0}^2&amp;
{\sigma}_{\upsilon_0{\upsilon}_t}\\
{}{\sigma}_{\upsilon_0{\upsilon}_t}&amp;
{\sigma}_{\upsilon_t}^2\end{array}\right]. $$]

With time entering the covariance matrix, the covariance among the
observations of the same patient can change over time.

Polynomial Growth Model

To model non-linear time effects, the level-1 model can be extended with
polynomials of time.

Specifically, in vector notation, it becomes

[$$ {y}_i={\beta}_{0i}+{X}_i\beta +{T}_i{\upsilon}_i+{\varepsilon}_i.
$$]

where T_(i) contains polynomial of t_(i). To be able to model a
quadratic time effect, T_(i) would be

[$$ {T}_i=\left[\begin{array}{ccc}1&amp; {t}_1&amp; {t}_1^2\\ {}1&amp;
{t}_2&amp; {t}_2^2\\ {}1&amp; \vdots &amp; \vdots \\ {}1&amp;
{t}_{n_i}&amp; {t}_{n_i}^2\end{array}\right]. $$]

Comparison of the Various Model Assumptions

Figure 26 illustrates the difference among the three model types. Four
synthetic data sets were generated using four different assumptions. In
all four data sets, five subjects were observed at 10 time points. The
four data sets are plotted in the four panels. For all four panels, the
horizontal axis is the index j of the observations, grouped by subject.
Since the key issue in longitudinal data is partitioning the errors
(based on these four assumptions), the vertical axis corresponds to the
error relative to a population-level model.

[]

A set of 4 scatterplots of random intercept, growth model,
quadratic-time random intercept, and quadratic growth. They represent
the error versus the index. The plots in different shades are scattered
in clusters in graph A and random linear patterns in B, C, and D.

The first assumption is the random intercept. This causes errors to
cluster by subject. The mean of the error in each subject is the
subject’s random intercept β_(oi). No other structure can be observed:
the scale of the errors remains the same over time.

The second assumption corresponds to the growth model. In addition to
clustering due to the random intercept, the plot also shows that the
errors consistently increase over time, at a rate that differs across
patients. This growth rate is the random slope υ_(it). Observations of
the same subject closer together in time have more similar errors (and
thus observations) than observations of the same subject further apart
in time. This is a violation of the compound symmetry structure, but the
random growth model can handle this situation correctly.

The third assumption is quadratic time, random intercept. The data has
both linear and quadratic population-level time effect but only a random
intercept. We only removed the linear time effect, thus the errors
(residuals) form a per-subject parabola, indicative of a quadratic
effect. The parabolas have similar shape across patients (although
different parts of the same parabola are visible), which suggests that
this is a (quadratic) population-level effect, but the parabolas have
different foci along the y axis, suggesting a subject-level random
intercept.

Finally, the quadratic growth model has both population-level as well as
a subject-level quadratic time effect. The quadratic structure is
apparent in the parabolic shapes of the within-subject errors, however,
the shape of the parabolas change across the patients, suggesting a
subject-level effect. Because of the strong population-level quadratic
time-effect, it is difficult to see whether the subject-level time
effect is only linear or quadratic. The parabolas are located at
different positions along the vertical axis, which indicates a
subject-level random intercept.

Generalized Linear Mixed Effect Models (GLMM)

Generalized Linear Mixed Effect Models relate to LMMs the same way as
Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) relate to linear regression models.
GLMMs allow for a link function to link the expectation of the outcome
with the linear predictor. Similarly to GLMs, GLMMs can thus be used to
solve regression problems with non-Gaussian dependent variables, such as
classification problems (logistic outcome), counting problems (Poisson
outcome), etc.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: linear mixed effect models (LMM)                      |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Regression models for         |
|                                  | longitudinal data                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Longitudinal data with        |
|                                  | balanced or unbalanced design    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Separates subject-level       |
|                                  | effects from population-level    |
|                                  | effects                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Predictive modeling with      |
|                                  | within-subject predictions       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Accurate error estimates are  |
|                                  | required or the interest is the  |
|                                  | statistical significance of      |
|                                  | covariates                       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  • Generalized LMM has been      |
|                                  | developed for non-Gaussian       |
|                                  | response variables               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.7.3.2. GEEs can be     |
|                                  | computationally more efficient   |
|                                  | and may produce better           |
|                                  | predictive models. Use LMM when  |
|                                  | the goal is to identify          |
|                                  | subject-level effects            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Partitions the error into     |
|                                  | subject-level and                |
|                                  | population-level components      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Random intercept model:       |
|                                  | Assumes a subject-specific       |
|                                  | intercept                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Random growth model: Assumes  |
|                                  | a subject-specific intercept and |
|                                  | time-trend                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Polynomial growth model:      |
|                                  | Assumes a subject-specific       |
|                                  | curvilinear time effect          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • See the text for the detailed |
| empirical evidence               | assumptions                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • ML estimator. Coefficient     |
|                                  | estimates are consistent,        |
|                                  | asymptotically normal            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.7.3.1. Use LMM   |
|                                  | when the goal is to identify     |
|                                  | subject-level effects            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.7.3.2. If the    |
|                                  | main purpose is estimating the   |
|                                  | effect size of covariates or     |
|                                  | making predictions for           |
|                                  | previously unseen subjects, GEE  |
|                                  | can be more computationally      |
|                                  | effective                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Hedeker D, Gibbons RD.        |
|                                  | Longitudinal Data Analsyis.      |
|                                  | Wiley, 2006. Chapter 4           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Generalized Estimating Equations

As discussed earlier, the key statistical challenge with longitudinal
data is the correlation among the observations of the same subject. This
challenge is addressed by assuming a variance-covariance matrix for the
error when the regression parameters are estimated. In the
previous section (“Linear Mixed Effect Models”), we described a method
for constructing such a matrix by separating the error variation into a
set of subject-specific and a set of population-level effects. These
effects define the form of the variance-covariance matrix. An
alternative strategy is to assume a functional form for the
variance-covariance matrix. This second strategy is the subject of the
current section.

In this approach, the parameters that define the variance-covariance
matrix are treated as nuisance parameters and the main interest is the
coefficients of the covariates, including time. The variance-covariance
parameters are marginalized (integrated out) and hence this type of
models are referred to as marginal models.

Model Specification. The specification of the generalized estimating
equations models proceeds similarly to that of generalized linear models
(see section “Foundational Methods”). Given a covariate matrix X, the
following components are defined.

1.  1.

    Linear predictor: η_(ij) = X_(ij)β;

     

2.  2.

    Linkage function that links the mean of the linear predictor to the
    expectation of the outcome g(E(Y_(ij))) = μ_(ij);

     

3.  3.

    A variance function relating the mean of the outcome to its
    variance: Var(y_(ij)) = ϕV(μ_(ij));

     

4.  4.

    A working variance-covariance matrix parameterized by a: R(a)

     

The first three components are shared with the generalized linear
models; GEEs add the fourth component.

Several variance-covariance matrix forms are implemented by statistical
software packages and the most common matrices are described below.

1.  1.

    Identity: R(a) = I. This assumes that the observations of a subject
    are independent of each other and thus it reduces a GEE to a regular
    GLM.

     

2.  2.

    Exchangeable: R(a) = ρ. Observations of the same subject have
    constant covariance ρ, which does not depend on time. This matrix
    form is the same as the compound symmetry in the random intercept
    models.

     

3.  3.

    Autoregressive: [$$ R(a)={\rho}^{\left|j-{j}^{\prime}\right|} $$].
    With j and j’ denoting two time steps, the covariance among
    observations of the same subject depends on time. If ρ < 1, then the
    further away the observations are in time, the smaller the
    covariance.

     

4.  4.

    Unstructured. Each element of the matrix is estimated from data.

     

Among the four matrices, we have already seen the identity and the
exchangeable structures and the unstructured matrix is straightforward
to imagine. The autoregressive matrix will take the following form

[$$ R\left(\rho \right)=\left[\begin{array}{ccc}1&amp; \rho &amp;
{\rho}^2\kern0.5em {\rho}^3\kern0.5em \cdots \\ {}\rho &amp; 1&amp;
\begin{array}{cc}\rho &amp; \begin{array}{cc}\ {\rho}^2&amp; \cdots
\end{array}\end{array}\\ {}\begin{array}{c}{\rho}^2\\ {}\vdots
\end{array}&amp; \begin{array}{c}\rho \\ {}\vdots \end{array}&amp;
\begin{array}{cc}1&amp; \begin{array}{cc}\ \rho &amp; \kern0.5em \cdots
\end{array}\\ {}\vdots &amp; \begin{array}{cc}1&amp; \kern0.5em \ddots
\end{array}\end{array}\end{array}\right]. $$]

When |ρ| < 1, increasing powers of ρ become smaller, thus the more
distant two observations are in time, the smaller their covariance.

Figure 27 shows three types of error distributions. For 5 subjects, 10
observations were generated using independent error (left panel),
exchangeable error (middle panel) and autocorrelated error (right
panel). The 5 subjects are shown in different colors and their 10
observations are ordered by time along the horizontal axis. The noise
has standard normal distribution with σ = .1 in all three cases. The
error in the left panel is noise and all errors, regardless of which
subject they came from, are independent: knowing the error of an
observation for a patient does not provide any information about the
error of another observation of the same patient or about any
observation of any other subject. In the middle panel, the error has a
noise component and a random intercept component. Errors are correlated
within each subject and subjects are independent of each other. We have
seen this correlation structure earlier. Finally, in the right panel, we
have autocorrelated errors. Two errors of the same subject are more
similar to each other the closer they are to each other in time

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: generalized estimating equations (GEE)                |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main Use                         |  • Regression models for         |
|                                  | longitudinal data                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • A linkage function can be     |
|                                  | specified                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  • Longitudinal data with        |
|                                  | unbalanced design                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Most used when the focus is   |
|                                  | on coefficient estimates and     |
|                                  | making predictions for           |
|                                  | previously unseen patients       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall 3.7.4.1. No              |
|                                  | individualized effects are       |
|                                  | estimated. Consider the LMM if   |
|                                  | separation of the individual     |
|                                  | effects from the population      |
|                                  | effect is desired                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  • Uses estimating equations     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • It is a marginal model.       |
|                                  | Assumes a parametric form for    |
|                                  | the working variance/covariance  |
|                                  | matrix and marginalizes it out   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  • Uses M estimation.            |
| empirical evidence               | Specification of the likelihood  |
|                                  | is not required                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Solving estimating equations  |
|                                  | is very computationally          |
|                                  | efficient                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Even if the structure of the  |
|                                  | variance/covariance matrix is    |
|                                  | misspecified, it yields good     |
|                                  | results                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best practice 3.7.4.1. Use GEE   |
|                                  | when predictions for previously  |
|                                  | unseen subjects is needed        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.7.4.2. Use LMM   |
|                                  | when subject-specific effects    |
|                                  | are of interest                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best practice 3.7.4.3. GEE can   |
|                                  | be more computationally          |
|                                  | efficient than LMM               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  • Hardin, J.W. and Hilbe, J.M., |
|                                  | 2002. Generalized estimating     |
|                                  | equations. Chapman and hall/CRC  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  • Hedeker D, Gibbons RD.        |
|                                  | Longitudinal Data Analsyis.      |
|                                  | Wiley, 2006. Chapter 3           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

[]

A set of 4 scatterplots of the error versus the observation. The plots
in different shades are scattered horizontally in A, clusters in B, and
a zig-zag pattern in C.

Brief Summary of Other Techniques of Interest

Network science. The field of network science [54] offers a completely
different approach to conventional predictive modeling and causal
discovery methods. Network Science leverages the remarkable consistency
in the properties of a broad array of systems that are adaptive and
robust. Systems that exhibit these measurable properties are called
Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS) [55]. The application of Network Science
to problems of health and disease is called Network Medicine [56] and
its main idea follows: a disease represents a pathologic biological
process that emerges, and is sustained over time, because it is embedded
in a transformed biologic system that acquires adaptive properties.
Accordingly, if such an adaptive system related to a given disease is
identified, the capacity to determine its areas of vulnerability may
reveal promising targets or new approaches for treatment. A typical
network science analysis proceeds by building network representations of
complex systems and then calculating a number of metrics on the network
model. Such metrics include: Network Diameter, Characteristic Path
Length, Shortest Path Distribution, Degree Distribution, and Clustering
Coefficient. The specific structure and properties of the network model
help the analyst identify drug or other intervention targets and other
important system properties.

Active learning. The field of Active Learning studies methods for the
iterative collection of data and corresponding refinement of models
until an accurate enough model is built or other termination criteria
are met. Active Learning methods address both predictive modeling and
causal discovery tasks [57–61].

Outlier detection. Outlier (or novelty) detection methods seek to find
extreme or otherwise atypical observations among data. “Super utilizer”
patients is a prototypical example of outliers that has great importance
for healthcare. Numerous methods have been invented for outlier
detection over the years in many fields including statistics,
engineering, computer science, applied mathematics etc. and they are
based on multivariate statistics, density estimation, “1-class” SVMs,
clustering, and other approaches [15, 62].

Genetic Algorithms (GAs). Genetic Algorithms are heuristic search
procedures in the space of models that the analyst wishes to consider.
For example, the analyst may use GAs to find a good linear regression, a
good SVM, a good Decision Tree or other model of choice. The search
resembles the process of genetic evolution and can be shown to advance
rapidly to better models [21]. On the other hand, GAs are
computationally very expensive and prone to get trapped in local optima
(i.e., solutions that cannot be improved in the next reachable steps in
any direction in the model search space, although a better solution does
exist several steps away). GAs also are used when the analyst does not
have a good insight about the process that generates the data, or about
which method may perform well for the task at hand. When such insight
exists, it is typically better to use methods that have known properties
that guarantee high performance for the desired analysis [63, 64].

Visualization. Visualization methods rely on the capability of the human
visual apparatus to decode complex patterns when these patterns have
been represented in convenient visual forms. Another use of
visualization serves explanatory purposes; that is, presenting and
explaining results that were obtained via computational means.
Interactive data visualizations, where users are allowed to manipulate
their views of the data to obtain more information, have been found to
be rapid and efficacious in identifying early infection and rejection
events in lung transplant patients [65]. Data visualization can also be
useful in displaying health care data, such as that coded with the Omaha
System; and intraoperative anesthesia data, such as maintenance of blood
pressure [66]. Evaluation techniques have been developed to gauge
visualization effectiveness in clinical care [67]. Significant
challenges exist, however, in implementing visualization more widely in
electronic health records, many of them resulting from the highly
multivariable nature of case-oriented medical data which can lead to
misleading results. In biological research, heatmaps, clustering,
PCA-based visualization and lately t-SNE are very widely used [68].

Recommended Level of Understanding for Professional Data Scientists

The information provided in chapters “Foundations and Properties of
AI/ML Systems,” “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML
Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science,” and “Foundations
of Causal ML” describing fundamental techniques and their properties
aims to provide on one hand a big picture description of methods, and a
concise summary of their relative and absolute strengths and weaknesses
and types of outputs (e.g., models) produced by each method.

We recommend that the reader commits to memory the methods information
in the above chapters to the extent feasible, and especially for the
application domain(s) of interest to them. This will help them evaluate,
choose and appropriately apply the right methods, a skill set that
eventually, with time and practice will become second nature.

The professional data scientist however should have a much deeper level
of understanding that in addition to the information here includes
knowing the key algorithms of each method family and possess the
ability^([14]) for each algorithm to:

1.  (a)

    Describe it in pseudocode from memory;

     

2.  (b)

    code it in a programming language of choice;

     

3.  (c)

    trace the algorithm on paper for small but representative example
    problems;

     

4.  (d)

    describe the algorithm’s function to an expert, a novice, or a lay
    person at the appropriate level of nuance/simplification;

     

5.  (e)

    recite its key theoretical properties;

     

6.  (f)

    prove the properties or at least outline the essence of the proofs;
    and

     

7.  (g)

    interpret the algorithms’ output.

     

These skills are typically developed with a combination of formal
training, and hands-on experience. The many technical references
provided throughout this volume provide a core knowledge base for the
technically-oriented reader.

Classroom Assignments and Discussion Topics Chapter “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
and Health Science”

1.  1.

    What kind of ML tasks are implied by the following questions? (There
    could be more than one correct answers.)
    1.  (a)

        What is a particular patient’s risk of type-2 diabetes mellitus
        (T2DM) in 7 years?

         

    2.  (b)

        How many years will it take for a particular patient to develop
        T2DM?

         

    3.  (c)

        What is the likely next diseases a particular patient with T2DM
        will develop?

         

    4.  (d)

        What diseases do patients with T2DM typically develop?

         

    5.  (e)

        In patients with T2DM, what other diseases are commonly present?

         

    6.  (f)

        What is the average age at which patients develop T2DM?

         

    7.  (g)

        At what age is a particular patient going to develop T2DM?

         

    8.  (h)

        What is the expected cost of medications (per annum) for an
        average T2DM patient?

         

    9.  (i)

        What is the expected cost of medications (per annum) for a
        particular patient (given other diseases the patient may suffer
        from)?

         

     

2.  2.

    What kind of modeling tasks are described by the following
    questions? Also, name the outcome type. There can be more than one
    solution; give as many answers as you can.
    1.  (a)

        Predicting the length-of-stay for hospitalized patients.

         

    2.  (b)

        Predicting whether the length-of-stay of hospitalized patients
        will exceed 9 days.

         

    3.  (c)

        Predicting the risk of developing diabetes (in patients who are
        not known to have diabetes currently).
        - We wish to know the probability that the patient develops
          diabetes within 7 years from now.

        - We wish to know the probability that the patient develops
          diabetes on any day between now and 7 years from now.

        - We wish to know how many days (from now) it will take for a
          patient to develop diabetes.

         

    4.  (d)

        Predicting the type of cancer (e.g. small-cell, non-small-cell,
        large-cell, squamous cell).

         

    5.  (e)

        Given a sequence of diseases a patient has already developed,
        predict the most likely next disease.

         

    6.  (f)

        What kind of diseases do hospitalized patients with a
        length-of-stay in excess of 4 days suffer from?

         

    7.  (g)

        What are the most common reasons (e.g. admitting diagnoses) for
        receiving opioids?

         

    8.  (h)

        Identify distinct patient groups, based on their lab results, in
        a cohort of pre-operative patients.

         

     

3.  3.

    What are the most appropriate modelling methods in the following
    scenarios? Assume you are tasked with building a diabetes risk
    prediction model that estimates the probability that a patient
    develops diabetes in 7 years given the patients’ health records.
    1.  (a)

        Suppose you have 20 different predictor variables, which are
        reasonably informative and uncorrelated, have 100 patients in
        your training sample, and each patient has one observation
        vector (for all 20 predictor variables).

         

    2.  (b)

        Suppose you have the same 20 predictor variables as in (a), but
        now you have 10,000 patients, each contributing one observation
        vector.

         

    3.  (c)

        Suppose you have 200 predictor variables that form highly
        correlated blocks. Each variable is important and has its own
        unique effect despite the high correlation. Further, you only
        have 200 patients, one observation vector per patient.

         

    4.  (d)

        Suppose you have 2000 predictor variables, most of which are
        irrelevant to the task at hand. Unfortunately, you do not know a
        priori which variables are irrelevant. You have 200 patients,
        one observation vector per patient.

         

    5.  (e)

        Suppose you have 20 different predictor variables, which are
        reasonably informative and uncorrelated, 1000 patients, and you
        have 10 observation vectors per patient. These 10 observations
        were collected at equally spaced time intervals for all
        patients.

         

    6.  (f)

        Suppose you have 20 different predictor variables, which are
        reasonably informative and uncorrelated, 1000 patients, and you
        have 10 observation vectors per patient. These 10 observations
        were collected at exactly the same time for all patients.

         

    7.  (g)

        Suppose you have 20 different predictor variables, which are
        reasonably informative and uncorrelated, 1000 patients, and you
        have 10 observation vectors per patient. These 10 observations
        were collected at different times for each patient and the
        collection time is known.

         

    8.  (h)

        Suppose you have 20 different predictor variables, which are
        reasonably informative and uncorrelated, 1000 patients, and you
        have varying number of observations per patient.

         

     

4.  4.

    You are tasked with building a survival (time-to-event) model that
    estimates patients’ risk of developing diabetes at any time within
    the next 7 years. What kind of model would you use in the same
    scenarios as in question 3?

     

5.  5.

    You have decided to build classifiers for a classification task. You
    are given the predictor variables, the outcome and a training data
    set. What models would be appropriate under the following scenarios?
    1.  (a)

        The predictor variables are not highly correlated, all have
        approximately linear effects, and your training data set
        contains 10 observations per predictor variable.

         

    2.  (b)

        The predictor variables are not highly correlated, all have
        approximately linear effects, and you have several million
        observations per predictor variable. Which algorithms are most
        likely to run into computational problems?

         

    3.  (c)

        The predictor variables are not highly correlated, but they may
        have unknown non-linear effects. You have sufficient amount of
        data, but not to the extent where you would expect computational
        issues.

         

    4.  (d)

        The predictor variables are not highly correlated, but they may
        have unknown non-linear effects. You have only 1 observation per
        predictor variable.

         

    5.  (e)

        The predictor variables are correlated and may have unknown
        non-linear effects. You have sufficient amount of data for any
        algorithm.

         

    6.  (f)

        The predictor variables are not highly correlated, all have
        approximately linear effects, and the clinical expects are
        asking for an “interpretable model”. Select a model type and
        explain why (or how) it is “interpretable”.

         

    7.  (g)

        The predictor variables are correlated and may have unknown
        non-linear effects. You need to build an “interpretable” model.
        The predictive performance “is not the primary concern”.

         

    8.  (h)

        The clinical experts are asking for a model that is highly
        interpretable and has the best possible predictive performance.
        What do you tell the experts?

         

     

6.  6.

    A data representation is a collection of features (variables)
    obtained by transforming the original variables. For example, a
    variable set obtained through dimensionality reduction is a
    (lower-dimensional) data representation. In this question, your goal
    is to create a data representation, appropriate under the following
    conditions.
    1.  (a)

        Predictor variables are reasonably linear, have no interactions,
        and sufficient observations exist. We want the resulting
        variables to be orthogonal to each other.

         

    2.  (b)

        Predictor variables are reasonably linear, have no interactions,
        and sufficient observations exist. We want the resulting
        variables to be “independent” of each other in some sense.
        Select a method and explain what “independent” means for that
        method.

         

    3.  (c)

        Predictor variables are reasonably linear, have no interactions,
        and we wish to have a low-dimensional representation to
        visualize the data.

         

    4.  (d)

        Predictor variables may have nonlinear effects, interactions and
        we wish to build a survival model or a classifier (we do not
        know yet) using the new representation.

         

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Stanton, J.M., 2001. Galton, Pearson, and the peas: a brief history
    of linear regression for statistics instructors. J Stat Educ, 9(3).

2.  2.

    Taboga M. “Gauss Markov theorem”, Lectures on probability theory and
    mathematical statistics. Kindle Direct Publishing; 2021. Online
    appendix.
    https://​www.​statlect.​com/​fundamentals-of-statistics/​Gauss-Markov-theorem.

3.  3.

    Hilbe JM. Generalized linear models. Encyclopedia of mathematics.
    http://​encyclopediaofma​th.​org/​index.​php?​title=​Generalized_​linear_​models&​oldid=​38890.

4.  4.

    GLM N, McCullagh P, Nelder JA. Generalized linear models. CRC Press;
    1989.

5.  5.

    Stroup WW. Generalized linear mixed models. Modern Concepts: Methods
    and Applications. CRC Press; 2013.

6.  6.

    Agresti A. Categorical data anlaysis. 2nd ed. Chapter 7.2. Wiley
    Interscience; 2002.

7.  7.

    Zhang, Wei. Shift-invariant pattern recognition neural network and
    its optical architecture. Proceedings of Annual Conference of the
    Japan Society of Applied Physics.1988.

8.  8.

    Rumelhart DE, Hinton GE, Williams RJ. Learning internal
    representations by error propagation. Tech. rep. ICS 8504. San
    Diego, California: Institute for Cognitive Science, University of
    California; 1985.

9.  9.

    Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput.
    1997;9(8):1735–80.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​neco.​1997.​9.​8.​1735.Crossref

10. 10.

    Attention is all you need. NIPS'17: Proceedings of the 31st
    International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
    2017 P. 6000–6010.

11. 11.

    Scarselli F, Gori M, Tsoi AC, Hagenbuchner M, Monfardini G. The
    graph neural network model. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 2009
    Jan;20(1):61–80. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TNN.​2008.​2005605.Crossref

12. 12.

    Zhang M, Li J. A commentary of GPT-3 in MIT technology review 2021.
    Fundament Res. 2021;1(6):831–3.

13. 13.

    Jia X, Willard J, Karpatne A, Read JS, Zwart JA, Steinbach M,
    Kumar V. Physics-guided machine learning for scientific discovery:
    an application in simulating lake temperature profiles. ACM/IMS
    Transactions on Data Science. 2021;2(3):1–26.

14. 14.

    Vapnik V. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer
    Science & Business Media; 2013.

15. 15.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF, Hardin DP, Guyon I. A gentle introduction
    to support vector machines. In: Biomedicine: theory and methods,
    vol. 1. World Scientific; 2011.

16. 16.

    Statnikov,A, Aliferis, CF, Hardin DP, Guyon I. A gentle introduction
    to support vector machines. In: Biomedicine: case studies and
    benchmarks (Vol. 2). World Scientific. 2012.

17. 17.

    Domingos P, Pazzani M. On the optimality of the simple Bayesian
    classifier under zero-one loss. Mach Learn. 1997;29:103–30.

18. 18.

    Cover T, Hart P. Nearest neighbor pattern classification. IEEE Trans
    Inf Theory. 1967;13(1):21–7.

19. 19.

    Hart PE, Stork DG, Duda RO. Pattern classification. Hoboken: Wiley;
    2000.

20. 20.

    Tan PN, Steinbach M, Kumar V. Introduction to data mining. Pearson
    Education; 2018.

21. 21.

    Mitchell, T.M., 1997. Machine learning (Vol. 1, 9). New York:
    McGraw.

22. 22.

    Dupuy A, Simon RM. Critical review of published microarray studies
    for cancer outcome and guidelines on statistical analysis and
    reporting. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99(2):147–57.

23. 23.

    Wolpert DH. Stacked generalization. Neural Netw. 1992;5(2):241–59.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0893-6080(05)80023-1.Crossref

24. 24.

    Breiman L. Stacked regressions. Mach Learn. 1996;24:49–64.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​BF00117832.Crossref

25. 25.

    Couronné R, Probst P, Boulesteix AL. Random forest versus logistic
    regression: a large-scale benchmark experiment. BMC Bioinformatics.
    2018;19:270. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12859-018-2264-5.Crossref

26. 26.

    Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman JH, Friedman JH. The elements of
    statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction,
    vol. 2. New York: springer; 2009. p. 1–758.

27. 27.

    Zou H. The adaptive lasso and its oracle properties. J Am Stat
    Assoc. 2006;101(476):1418–29.

28. 28.

    Yuan M, Lin Y. Model selection and estimation in regression with
    grouped variables. J R Stat Soc Ser B. 2007;68(1):49–67.

29. 29.

    Simon N, Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. A sparse-group lasso. J
    Comput Graphical Stat. 2013;22(2)

30. 30.

    Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. Sparse inverse covariance
    estimation with the graphical lasso. Biostatistics.
    2008;9(3):432–41.

31. 31.

    You J, Yu B, Maybank SJ, Tao D. Knowledge distillation: a
    survey. 2021. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2006.​05525.

32. 32.

    Zheng X, Aragam B, Ravikumar P, Xing EP. DAGs with no tears:
    continuous optimization for structure learning. 2018.

33. 33.

    Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A. Deep learning. MIT Press; 2016.

34. 34.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part I: algorithms and
    empirical evaluation. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(1):171–234.

35. 35.

    Aliferis, CF, Statnikov, A, Tsamardinos, I, Mani, S and Koutsoukos,
    XD, 2010. Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal
    discovery and feature selection for classification part II: analysis
    and extensions. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(1).

36. 36.

    Guyon I, Elisseeff A. An introduction to variable and feature
    selection. J Mach Learn Res. 2003;3(Mar):1157–82.

37. 37.

    Kohavi R, John GH. Wrappers for feature subset selection. Artif
    Intell. 1997;97(1–2):273–324.

38. 38.

    Harrell FE. Regression modeling strategies: with applications to
    linear models, logistic regression, and survival analysis, vol. 608.
    New York: springer; 2001.

39. 39.

    Pearl J. Causality. Cambridge university press; 2009.

40. 40.

    Statnikov A, Lemeir J, Aliferis CF. Algorithms for discovery of
    multiple Markov boundaries. J Mach Learn Res. 2013;14(1):499–566.

41. 41.

    Aphinyanaphongs Y, Tsamardinos I, Statnikov A, Hardin D, Aliferis
    CF. Text categorization models for high-quality article retrieval in
    internal medicine. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2005;12(2):207–16.

42. 42.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF. Analysis and computational dissection of
    molecular signature multiplicity. PLoS Comput Biol.
    2010;6(5):e1000790.

43. 43.

    Murphy KP. Manifold learning. In: Probabilistic machine learning: an
    introduction, chapter 20. MIT Press; 2022.

44. 44.

    Murphy KP. Probabilistic machine learning: an introduction. MIT
    Press; 2022.

45. 45.

    Kleinbaum DG, Klein M. Survival Analysis. A self-learning text.
    Springer; 2020.

46. 46.

    Therneau T, Grambsch P. Modeling Survival Data: extending the Cox
    Model. Springer; 2000.

47. 47.

    Castro MR, Simon G, Cha SS, Yawn BP, Melton LJ, Caraballo PJ. Statin
    use, diabetes incidence and overall mortality in normoglycemic and
    impaired fasting glucose patients. J Gen Intern Med. 2016;31:502–8.

48. 48.

    KleinJP MML. Survival Analysis techniques for censored and truncated
    data. Springer; 2003.

49. 49.

    National Cancer Institute. Five-year survival rate.
    https://​www.​cancer.​gov/​publications/​dictionaries/​cancer-terms/​def/​five-year-survival-rate

50. 50.

    Ishwaran, H., Kogalur, U.B., Blackstone, E.H. and Lauer, M.S., 2008.
    Random survival forests.

51. 51.

    Wang P, Li Y, Reddy CK. Machine learning for survival analysis: a
    survey. ACM Comput Surv. 2019;51(6):1–36.

52. 52.

    Buckley J, James I. Linear regression with censored data.
    Biometrika. 1979;66:429–36.

53. 53.

    Hedeker D, Gibbons RD. Longitudinal Data Analsyis. Wiley; 2006.

54. 54.

    Barabási AL. Network science. Philos Trans R Soc A Math Phys Eng
    Sci. 2013;371(1987):20120375.

55. 55.

    Holland JH. Complex adaptive systems. Daedalus. 1992;121(1):17–30.

56. 56.

    Barabási AL, Gulbahce N, Loscalzo J. Network medicine: a
    network-based approach to human disease. Nat Rev Genet.
    2011;12(1):56–68.

57. 57.

    Tong S, Koller D. Support vector machine active learning with
    applications to text classification. J Mach Learn Res.
    2001;2(Nov):45–66.

58. 58.

    Meganck S, Leray P, Manderick B. modeling decisions for artificial
    intelligence 58–69. Springer; 2006.

59. 59.

    Settles, B., 2009. Active learning literature survey.

60. 60.

    Ren P, Xiao Y, Chang X, Huang PY, Li Z, Gupta BB, Chen X, Wang X. A
    survey of deep active learning. ACM computing surveys (CSUR).
    2021;54(9):1–40.

61. 61.

    Olsson, F., 2009. A literature survey of active machine learning in
    the context of natural language processing.

62. 62.

    Zimek A, Schubert E, Kriegel HP. A survey on unsupervised outlier
    detection in high-dimensional numerical data. Stat Anal Data Min:
    ASA Data Sci J. 2012;5(5):363–87.

63. 63.

    Katoch S, Chauhan SS, Kumar V. A review on genetic algorithm: past,
    present, and future. Multimed Tools Appl. 2021;80:8091–126.

64. 64.

    Srinivas M, Patnaik LM. Genetic algorithms: A survey. Computer.
    1994;27(6):17–26.

65. 65.

    Pieczkiewicz DS, Finkelstein SM, Hertz MI. Design and evaluation of
    a web-based interactive visualization system for lung transplant
    home monitoring data. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2007;2007:598–602.

66. 66.

    Lee S, Kim E, Monsen KA. Public health nurse perceptions of Omaha
    system data visualization. Int J Med Inform. 2015;84(10):826–34.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ijmedinf.​2015.​06.​010.Crossref

67. 67.

    Pieczkiewicz DS, Finkelstein SM. Evaluating the decision accuracy
    and speed of clinical data visualizations. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
    2010;17(2):178–81.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​jamia.​2009.​001651.Crossref

68. 68.

    Van der Maaten L, Hinton G. Visualizing data using t-SNE. J Mach
    Learn Res. 2008;9(11):2579–605.

69. 69.

    Hardin JW, Hilbe JM. Generalized estimating equations. Chapman and
    hall/CRC; 2002.

Footnotes

1

 

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_4

Foundations of Causal ML

Erich Kummerfeld¹  , Bryan Andrews¹ and Sisi Ma¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Erich Kummerfeld

Email: erichk@umn.edu

Abstract

The present chapter covers the important dimension of causality in ML
both in terms of causal structure discovery and causal inference. The
vast majority of biomedical ML focuses on predictive modeling and does
not address causal methods, their requirements and properties. Yet these
are essential for determining and assisting patient-level or
healthcare-level interventions toward improving a set of outcomes of
interest. Moreover causal ML techniques can be instrumental for health
science discovery.

Introduction

Previous chapters have discussed methods for using ML to predict
outcomes. We will start by illustrating the concepts of causal ML
techniques using a hypothetical vignette. Imagine a scenario where we
have used predictive methods that estimate that a particular patient,
Amy Anonymous, who has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder (AUD)
but is currently abstaining, has a high probability of relapsing. The
next step would naturally be to perform interventions with the goal of
preventing the relapse. Can ML help identify the best interventions for
preventing Amy’s relapse? Causal ML methods can help solve such
problems, specifically addressing questions like:

1.  1.

    How much would Amy’s chance of relapsing be reduced if Amy receives
    a specific therapy?

     

2.  2.

    What factors other than therapy, if any, might also help prevent
    relapse?

     

3.  3.

    What additional complications might ensue if Amy receives a specific
    therapy?

     

These are all fundamentally causal questions because they refer to
actions that change the usual function of the modeled system, whereas
predictive modeling applies only when we model the system’s (the human
organism or a healthcare system) behavior in its natural state (without
any interventions). Using data to answer them requires causal ML. Using
data to answer the first of these questions is a causal inference
problem, [1] while using data to answer the second and third questions
are causal structure discovery problems [2].

- Causal inference is the problem of quantifying the effect of specific
  interventions on specific outcomes.

- Causal structure discovery is the problem of identifying the causal
  relationships among a set of variables.

Like regression and classification, these are very broad problems.
Numerous solutions within AI/ML and outside these disciplines have been
developed for each. Both of these problems can further be complicated by
the presence of unmeasured (aka “hidden” or “latent”) variables.
Specialized algorithms exist to address such settings [1–4]. For
pedagogical simplicity we focus in the present chapter mostly on
situations where all relevant factors have been measured.

We will next review the core concepts of causal modeling. As we saw in
chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” any ML method can
be conceptualized as search in the space of models appropriate for the
problem domain. Causal ML therefore deals with the space of causal
models.

Causal Models Versus Predictive Models

Predictive knowledge is associative, capturing co-variation between two
or more phenomena. In contrast, causal knowledge is etiological, and
captures whether and to what degree the manipulation of one phenomenon
results in changes in another. For example, to reduce Amy’s risk for
relapse, one needs to manipulate, (aka intervene on, or treat), its
causes. In contrast, while being in a rehab facility is strongly
associated with experiencing the symptoms of a relapse, preventing Amy
from entering the rehab will not prevent or treat a relapse, since
presence in the rehab facility is not a cause of relapse but an effect.
These forms of knowledge are distinct, and distinct methods are required
to model them.

Causal models must therefore be able to (a) represent cause-effect
relationships; (b) answer questions of the type “what will be the
effects of manipulating factor X” and “which factors should one
manipulate in order to affect X”; (c) generate data from the model for
simulation purposes. In addition, causal models can answer also the
usual predictive queries, e.g.: if we observe X what is the probability
of Y?”

The fundamental distinction between predictive and causal ML models is
that predictive models inform us about the unperturbed distribution over
a set of variables (i.e., patterns that occur “normally”, without any
intervention on the factors); whereas causal models inform on what
modified patterns and distributions one will obtain when interfering and
altering the underlying process that generates the data.

Pitfall 4.1

Popular and successful predictive ML methods are not designed and
equipped to satisfy the essential requirements of causal modeling.

While causal ML methods are capable of being used for prediction under
no interventions as well under interventions, predictive ML methods have
several practical advantages over causal ML ones when used for
prediction under no intervention. Therefore:

Best Practice 4.1

For predictive tasks (i.e., without interventions contemplated) use of
Predictive ML should be first priority. For causal tasks (i.e., with
interventions contemplated) use of Causal ML should be first priority.

Also as discussed in chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML
Systems”, in some cases we need to construct flexible predictive models
that can accept queries designating any subset of variables as evidence
and other subsets as outcomes of interest, while leaving the remaining
variables unspecified. We saw in chapter “Foundations and Properties of
AI/ML Systems” how BNs can attain this goal without building a new model
for every new query (as the majority of predictive modeling algorithms
do; see chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML
Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”). The same is true
when a mixture of observational and manipulation evidence variables are
part of the query (i.e., flexible causal/predictive modeling). Causal
Probabilistic Graphs (e.g., Causal BNs) can handle such flexible
reasoning.

Properties of Well-Constructed Causal Models^([15])

First and Foremost Causal Models Must Be Able to Represent the Cause-and-Effect Relationships Among Variables

For causal discovery, this is necessary for answering questions about
which variables cause which other variables. For causal inference, this
is necessary for removing bias due to confounding. For example, consider
a study (Fig. 1) on diet and alcohol abuse, that finds that people who
eat fast food regularly are more likely to abuse alcohol. This does not
mean that preventing a fast food diet will decrease the chance of Amy’s
alcohol abuse relapse. Other factors, for example motivation and stress
may lead a person to eat more fast food and may also lead a person to
abuse alcohol (thus the relationship between fast food and alcohol abuse
is confounded by motivation and stress in the Fig. 1 hypothetical
example). Causal models can represent complex systems of relationships
involving up to hundreds of thousands of variables with clear
distinction between confounded vs causal associations.

[]

A relationship diagram. Motivation with negative 0.5 links to fast food
and with 0.7 to adherence. Stress with 0.5 to fast food and with
negative 0.7 to days abstained. Group with 0.8 to adherence, which with
0.2 to days abstained.

Second, Causal Models are Markovian

That is, from the perspective of what are the effects of causal
manipulations, the distribution of every variable can be entirely
determined by its immediate causes [1]. If Variable T has direct causes
A and B and we manipulate A and B this will have the maximum possible
effect on T. No other simultaneous manipulation of variables in the
system will have an effect on T once we manipulate A and B. Stated
differently, T is “shielded” causally by all variables once we
manipulate its direct causes.

From an information transfer (and thus predictive) perspective, however,
every variable is independent of every non-descendant variable given its
immediate causes (a condition known as the Markov Condition [1]). In
other words, non-direct causes of T will have no information about what
happened to T after we manipulated A and B. Downstream effects of T and
spouses of T (i.e., direct causes of the direct effects of T) will have
additional information about what happened to T after we manipulated A
and B.

It is widely accepted that causation itself is Markovian (in the
macroscopic world, whereas exceptions happen in the quantum world [2],
luckily with no relevance to health science and care). This is reflected
by common practice in medical science, epidemiology, biology etc., where
causation is studied in two fundamental ways:

1.  (a)

    Causal chains of the type A → B → C

     

2.  (b)

    Causal chains of the type A ← C → B

     

In the chain (a) common health science and health care intuitions are
that manipulating A will affect B and thru B will affect C; A, B and C
all correlated with one another; once we fix B then manipulation of A
will stop affecting C; the correlation of A and C will vanish if we
observe or fix B; and the correlation of A and B and of B and C will not
ever vanish regardless of observing any other variable.

In the chain (b) common health science and health care intuitions are
that manipulating A will not affect B and manipulating B will not affect
A; A, B and C all correlated with one another; once we fix C or observe
C then the correlation of A and B will vanish; and the correlation of A
with C and of C with B will not ever vanish regardless of observing or
fixing any other variable.

Third, Causal Models are Modular [1]

Being Markovian leads to the models being decomposable into smaller
parts, where we can study these local regions and their function without
reference to remote areas in the causal process.

Fourth, Causal Models Are Manipulatable and Generative

Manipulatable refers to capturing in the model the changes that a
physical manipulation makes in the actual part of the world that the
model represents. A way to represent a physical world manipulation in
the model is to assign the corresponding value to the manipulated
variable and eliminate all causal edges to it (i.e., because physical
manipulations neutralize all other possible causes).

A generative model is one that encodes the full distribution of
variables at hand so that every probabilistic calculation can be made
with the model. This is sharp distinction with discriminative predictive
models that only seek to encode a small fragment of the full
distribution, typically the conditional probability of a response given
a fixed set of inputs (and in many cases less than that, for example
decision surfaces that encode even less information but manage to
predict the response to arbitrary accuracy).

In the next sections, we review the predominant class of causal models.

Causal Probabilistic Graphical Models (CPGMs) Based on Directed Acyclic
Graphs (DAGs)

A CPGM comprises (1) a DAG; (2) a joint probability distribution (JPD)
over variable set V such that each variable corresponds to a node in the
DAG; and (3) a restriction of how the JPD relates to the DAG, known as
the Causal Markov Condition (CMC).

1.  1.

    A directed graph is a tuple <V,E>, where V is a set of nodes
    representing variables 1-to-1, and E is a set of directed edges, or
    arrows, each one of which connects a pair of members of V. A path is
    any set of adjacent edges. A directed path is a path where all edges
    are pointing in the same direction. A directed graph is a DAG if it
    has no cycles in it, that is, if there is no directed path that
    contains the same node more than once. Fig. 1 is an example of a
    DAG.

     

2.  2.

    The JPD over V is any proper probability distribution (i.e., every
    possible joint instantiation of variables has a probability
    associated with it and the sum of those is 1).

     

3.  3.

    The CMC states that every variable V is independent of all variables
    that are non-descendants (i.e., not downstream effects) of V given
    its direct causes.

     

Causal ML Models Have Well-Defined Formal Causal Semantics

They typically take the form:

1.  1.

    Parent set (direct causes) Pa(V_(i)) of variable V_(i),
    Pa(V_(i)) = {Pa(V_(i))₁, Pa(V_(i))₂, …} is defined over all V_(i);
    and

     

2.  2.

    Probability Pr(V_(i) = j| Pa(V_(i))₁ = k, Pa(V_(i))₂ = l, …) is
    defined over all variables V_(i) for all value combinations of V_(i)
    and its direct causes.

     

1.  1.

    Describes the direct causal relationships among all variables

     

2.  2.

    Describes the conditional probability distribution of every variable
    given its direct causes.

     

If V_(i) has Parent Pa(V_(i))_(j) that means that in a randomized
experiment where one would manipulate Pa(V_(i))_(j), changes would be
observed in the distributions of V_(i) relative to the distribution when
Pa(V_(i))_(j) is not manipulated and these changes are entailed by the
conditional probability distribution of the variable given its parents.

Unique and Full Joint Distribution Specification in GCPMs

If the fundamental property of the Causal Markov Condition (CMC) holds,
then (1) and (2) (parents set, and conditional probabilities of each
variable given its parents, respectively) together specify a full and
unique joint distribution over variables set V.

Joint Distribution of GCPMs Can Be Factorized Based on Local Causes

This joint distribution is factorized as a product of the conditional
probability distribution of every V_(i) given its direct causes
Pa(V_(i)):

[$$ \Pr \left(\left\{{V}_1,{V}_2,\dots, {V}_n\right\}\right)=\prod
\limits_i\Pr \left({V}_i\left|, Pa{\left({V}_i\right)}_1\right|,
Pa{\left({V}_i\right)}_2\left|,\dots \right|,
Pa{\left({V}_i\right)}_{m_i}\right), $$]

(3)

where V_(i) has m_(i) parents.

Inspection of the Causal Graph of a GPCM Informs About Conditional Independencies in the Data

By inspection of the causal graph (and application of an interpretive
rule following from the CMC, called d-separation) we can infer a set of
conditional independencies in the data, without statistically analyzing
the data.

If furthermore, all dependencies and independencies in the data are the
ones following from the CMC, then we speak of Faithful distributions
encoded by such GCPMs.

A CPGM encoding a faithful distribution entails that all dependencies
and independencies in the JPD can be inferred from the DAG. Therefore
the DAG becomes a map (so-called i-map) of dependencies and
independencies in the data JPD. Conversely by inferring dependencies and
indecencies in the data we can construct the CPGM’s DAG and parameterize
the CPDs of every variable given its parents effectively recovering the
causal process that generates the data. This is the fundamental
principle of operation of causal ML methods.

Additional Notes

Two nodes are adjacent if they are connected by an edge. Two edges are
adjacent if they share a node.

Parents, children, ancestors, and descendants: In a directed graph, if
variables X, Y share an edge X → Y then X is called the parent of Y, and
Y is called the child of X. In Fig. 1, Motivation is a parent of
Adherence, and Adherence is a child of Motivation. If there is a
directed path from X to Y then X is an ancestor of Y and Y is a
descendant of X.

Degree: The degree of a node is the number of edges connected to it. In
a directed graph, this can be further divided into in-degree and
out-degree, corresponding to the number of parents (connected edges
oriented towards the node) and children (connected edges oriented away
from the node) that the node has. For example, in Fig. 1, Group has
degree 1, in-degree 0, and out-degree 1. In the same figure, Adherence
has degree 3, in-degree 2 and out-degree 1. A node with degree 0 is said
to be “disconnected”.

Collider: A collider is a variable receiving incoming edges from two
variables. For example in: X → Y ← Z, Y is the collider. A collider is
either “shielded” or “unshielded” iff the corresponding parents of the
collider are connected by an edge or not, respectively. Unshielded
colliders give form to the so-called “v-structure”. In Fig. 1, Fast Food
is a collider of stress, and motivation.

Trek: A trek is a path that contains no colliders. In Fig. 1, the path
from Motivation to Days Abstinent through Adherence is a trek; also the
path connecting Fast Food and Days Abstinent through Stress is also a
trek. However, the path connecting Motivation and Group through
Adherence is not a trek, since it contains the collider Adherence.

D-Separation

1.  1.

    Two variables X, Y connected by a path are d-separated (aka the path
    is “blocked”) given a set of variables S, if and only if on this
    path, there is (1) a non-collider variable contained in S, or (2) a
    collider such that neither it nor any of its descendants are
    contained in S.

     

2.  2.

    Two variables, X and Y, connected by several paths are d-separated
    given a set of variables S, if and only if for all paths connecting
    X to Y, they are d-separated by S.

     

3.  3.

    Two disjoint variable sets X and Y are d-separated by variable set S
    iff every pair <X_(i),Y_(j) > are d-separated by S, where X_(i) and
    Y_(j) are members of X, Y respectively.

     

Structural Equation Models (SEMs)

SEMs are causal inference models that can be used after causal
relationships have been discovered or when they are known a priori. Left
panel of Fig. 2 shows an example causal graph with three variables X, Y,
and Z. The three SEM equations show the quantitative functions for each
variable given its parents.

[]

A model depicts the causal graph that consists of X pointing to Y and Z
variables, which leads to the joint distribution properties of variables
X, Y, and Z, which further leads to data table with values listed for X,
Y, and Z in 10 rows.

Note that these equations are termed structural equations to emphasize
the causal/generative nature of the relationship. SEMs can be
continuous, discrete, or mixed, thus extending the definitions of
discrete causal models we have seen so far.

The general form of a structural equation for modeling variable x is
x = f(Parent(x), ε), where Parent(x) represents the parents of x, and ε
is a noise term representing the unexplained variance in x. The
variables on the right hand side of the causal structural equations are
causes of the variables on the left hand side. This information mirrors
the causal graph, where directed edges (−>) represent direct causal
relationships. The quantitative aspect of the causal relationship (e.g.
how much change in Y is expected if X is manipulated from 0 to 1) is
represented by function f). For example, in the structural equation for
Y in Fig. 2, Y is a linear function of X with additive noise ε_(Y).

In the same example the expected effect of changing X from 0 to 1 via
manipulation of X, on Y is 1 (measured in units of Y), which can be
computed by E(Y|do(X = 1))–E(Y|do(X = 0)) = E(1 + e_Y)–E(0 + e_Y) = 1.
The do(.) notation in the equation represents a manipulation involving
the assignment of a value that is enacted regardless of other factors in
the model that appear as parents of the manipulated variable. To further
clarify the causal vs. associational relationship, consider variables Y
and Z. The expected effect of changing Z from 0 to 1 on Y is 0, which
can be computed by
E(Y|do(Z = 1))–E(Y|do(Z = 0)) = E(X + e_Y)–E(X + e_Y) = 0. Y is not
affected by manipulating Z, since Z is not a cause of Y. This is also
obvious from the causal graph, since there is no directed path (sequence
of variables connected by directed edges pointing to the same direction)
leading from Z to Y. However, the values of Y are associated with values
of Z since they are both caused by X.

In summary, when Z is manipulated from value 0 to value 1, Y does not
change, even though Y and Z are correlated in observational data without
manipulations. The correct causal model explains the observed
statistical association between Y and Z as confounded by X and indicates
that if we wish to change (e.g., treat) Y, we should manipulate X rather
than Z.

- The above could be inferred using a CPGM with equivalent results
  (albeit using probabilities and probabilistic inference rather than
  structural equations and expectations).

- The fundamental difference however is that for a SEM model to be
  useful we need to first infer the causal relationships via an external
  mechanism. By contrast many algorithms exist that infer a CPGM from
  data automatically.

Pitfall 4.2

Using SEMs to estimate causal effects with the wrong causal structure.

Going back to Fig. 1 assume that this model represents the causal
process correctly and further that motivation and stress were not
measured in this RCT. Also assume that a data analyst is interested in
how diet affects relapse rates in patients with AUD, and has access to
the trial data, which includes how much the participants eat fast food.
The analyst regresses Days Abstinent on Fast Food, and finds that eating
more fast food is negatively associated with days abstinent. With the
goal of ensuring that this association is not related to the RCT design
itself, the analyst also regresses Days Abstinent against both Fast Food
and Group, and again finds that there is a negative association between
fast food consumption and days abstinent. Excitedly, the analyst goes
forth to publicize the findings, and recommends that perhaps limiting
the consumption of fast food will reduce relapse rates for AUD patients.
Based on these findings, other researchers carry out an RCT to test this
theory, but find that (as expected by the true causal model) restricting
fast food consumption has no effect on relapse.

The analyst has fallen into a common pitfall when they performed
regression analyses without any knowledge of the structure of the
underlying causal process, and inappropriately interpreted confounded
associations as causal. Even if the analyst reports that an association
was found, and does not make claims of causal effects, such associations
carry a promise of possible valuable causal relationships.

The same problem is encountered when applying any predictive ML method.
It is a grave error to apply such non causal methods when causal results
are sought.

Consider the following variant of the above scenario where Group
(treatment) is not manipulated but observed. Furthermore consider that
the analyst, in an effort to eliminate confounding bias, models
Adherence as a confounder (on the grounds that it correlates with both
group and days abstained). In such a scenario the estimated causal
effect of Group will be falsely zero because the plausible confounder,
in reality, is on the causal path between group and the outcome.

Pitfall 4.3

Using regression to estimate causal effects without knowing the true
causal structure (and making assumptions about which are the true
measured confounders).

Causal Effect Estimation^([16])

Further elaborating on causal inference, often we wish to estimate the
quantitative causal influence that a variable C has on variable T for a
manipulation that causes a 1 unit change of C. The key to obtaining
unbiased causal effect estimates from observational data is to partition
the total (bivariate, i.e., marginal) statistical association between
pairs of variables into the components of that total association due to
causal vs. confounded relationships across all connecting paths. In
principle, this is relatively straightforward if we know the true causal
structure governing the variables we observe. For example, consider
estimating the causal effect of C on T using data generated from the
causal system depicted in Fig. 3.

[]

Three directed graphs depict a network pattern of variables for true
causal structure, association, and causal structure discovery. The
variable T at the center of the networks is highlighted. Each includes
nodes from A to L.

In the true causal graph, there are two paths contributing to the
overall observed association between C and T. path 1: C → T, and path 2:
C ← A → D → T^([17]). The first path is a causal path, and when one
changes the value of C, the value of T will change as a result through
this path. The second path is a confounding path, since the change in C
cannot causally propagate through this path to affect T. In other words,
when we compute the total marginal (aka univariate) association between
C and T, the resulting value reflects the combined contributions from
the causal effect C → T and the confounding C ← A → D → T.

In order to estimate the causal effect of C on T, we need to eliminate
the component of association due to the confounding path. This can be
easily achieved by estimating the relationship between T and C, using A
as a covariate in a regression model, or more generally controlling for
the associational effect of A. Assuming for example linear functions
with Gaussian noise, the causal effect of C on T can be estimated by
fitting the linear regression T = β_(c) ∗ C + β_(A) ∗ A + ε.

The estimated coefficient for C then will be the unbiased causal effect
estimate of the causal influence of C on T. The reason that this
regression model can result in unbiased estimates of causal effects is
because adding A to the regression model (i.e. conditioning on A) blocks
the confounding path C ← A → D → T and therefore removes the association
component between C and T due to the confounding (path 2).

Conditioning on the wrong variables will likely result in biased effect
estimation. For example, conditioning on G by fitting the regression
model T = β_(c) ∗ C + β_(g) ∗ G + ε results in biased effect estimation,
since conditioning on G, which is a collider on the C → G ← D → T opens
the path and introduces additional association between C and T due to
this non-causal path (plus the confounding thru A is not controlled).

In practice there are numerous choices for variables to condition on,
especially in high dimensional data and in domains with poor prior
knowledge. For example, as an alternative to A, conditioning on D by
fitting the regression T = β_(c) ∗ C + β_(d) ∗ D + ε will also result in
unbiased effect estimation, since it also blocks the C ← A → D → T path
and does not open any additional paths (the
C ← A → D ← B → I ← H ← E → T path is still blocked when conditioning on
D, due to the presence of I as a collider).

As illustrated above, the principle for achieving unbiased causal effect
estimation from observation data is to ensure that only the true causal
paths are open (between the pair of variables under consideration) given
the variables controlled by conditioning.

Best Practice 4.2

In order to estimate unbiased causal effects, control variables that are
sufficient to block all confounding paths. These variables can be
identified by causal structure ML algorithms.

Best Practice 4.3

Often there is a choice of multiple alternative variable sets that block
confounding paths. An applicable choice is to control/condition on the
set Pa(A) in order to block all confounding paths connecting A and T.
However this sufficient confounding blocking variable set is not the
minimal one and it is recommended to use the minimal blocking variable
set in order to maximize statistical power and minimize uncertainty in
the estimation of the causal effect.

Pitfall 4.4

Discovering the correct variables to condition on can be hard or even
impossible in the presence of hidden variables. Discovering the minimal
blocking variable set may be computationally hard or intractable when
the causal structure is large and complex.

It is also possible that the causal effect for a specific variable
cannot be estimated from observational data for some causal data
generating functions. In these cases experiments are needed. For those
cases that causal effect estimation is feasible from experimental data,
Pearl’s Do-Calculous procedure will return the right set of conditioning
variables. Do-calculus specifies a systematic procedure to determine if
a causal effect is estimable and sequences of operations to compute the
causal effect when possible [1].

Also in some distributions, discovery of a causal edge may require
conditioning on all variables (which is statistically not feasible).

The Do-Calculus is critically different from conventional methods for
causal structural learning and causal inference, e.g. structural
equation modeling [5], path analysis [6], matching [7], propensity
scoring [8]. The conventional methods of the structural equation family
are generally hypothesis-driven and only examine a small fraction of
possible causal structures governing the data, which make them likely to
miss the true causal structure and result in biased estimates of causal
effects. Moreover, even without any hidden variables present, the number
of possible models is astronomical for even a few dozen variables,
making specification of a good model like winning the lottery. Causal
structure discovery algorithms together with Do-calculus circumvent
these difficulties in many practical settings.

Causal Structure Discovery ML Algorithms

Given that the definition of causes involves manipulation,
experimentation is by default one way to discover causal knowledge.
However, in domains where experiments are unethical, technically not
feasible, or resource prohibitive, or when we want to construct
system-level causal models with numerous variables and all their
interactions, it is inefficient, impractical and occasionally impossible
to derive causation strictly with experimentation. When combining
experimentation with observational causal algortihms (and simultaneous
measurement of all variables) however, in the worst case, N-1
experiments are needed to derive all causal relationships in a
non-cyclic causal system with N variables, given that one variable can
be randomized per experiment [9].

Instead, investigating the statistical relationships among variables in
observational data and using the result to guide experimentation can be
more efficient. In fact, in many scientific domains, in order to
discover causal factors, investigators often first examine observational
data for variables that are associated with their outcome of interest
and then conduct experiments on a subset of the associated factors to
determine the causes. This common practice reflects the attempt to use
observational data to improve the efficiency of experimental causal
discovery. However, as we will illustrate, association is a poor
heuristic for causation. In some cases, it provides very little guidance
to which experiments need to be performed.

The right panel of Fig. 3 illustrates the local causal structure around
a variable T of interest. Based on this causal structure, association
will be identified among most variables, indicated by lines connecting
most pairs of variables shown in the middle panel (this is referred to
as the correlation network in some literature). Specifically, other than
variable J, all measured variables would be univariately associated with
T. Therefore, statistical association is not a good strategy for
identifying causes of T. Furthermore, the strength of the association is
also not a good indicator of causality, since given the true causal
structure, there exist distributions where non-causal variables (e.g. G,
K, L) can have stronger associations with T than that of the causes of
T. Chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” provides
additional theoretical results about causal ML.

Different from association based methods, causal structure discovery
methods are designed to discover causal relationships given
observational data up to statistical equivalency [2]. Domain knowledge
and knowledge regarding the data collection process can be readily
incorporated to facilitate the discovery process [1, 2]. Different
algorithms for causal structure discovery leverage different statistical
relationships. For example, constraint-based algorithms infer causal
relationships using conditional independence relationships, whereas
score-based algorithms search for the causal structure that maximizes
likelihood-based scores given data. Further, algorithms such as the IC*
[1] and FCI³ [2] can identify hidden confounding variables, which is
very helpful when we are not certain if we have measured all possible
entities that participate in the causal process.

When the Causal Markov Condition and Faithfulness Condition hold,
statistical associations that are non-causal can be identified by
examining statistical properties such as conditional independence. For
example, the association between A and T is deemed not directly causal,
since A and T are independent given variables C and D (denoted as
A ⟂ T ∣ C, D where ⊥ denotes conditional independence, and ∣ denotes
conditioning. Conditional dependence is denoted with []A not
perpendicular to symbol.. Also, determination of the direction of causal
relation can be resolved due to the collider relations (i.e., in “Y
structures” such as T→ C ← A, where C is a variable known as an
“unshielded collider”). Importantly, the presence of hidden variables
can also be identified by examining conditional independence. It is
worth noting that even in systems with a moderate number of variables
(e.g. > a few dozen), it is computationally impossible and sample
inefficient, to examine all conditional independence relationships,
since the number of all possible conditional independence tests grows
exponentially with the number of variables. Therefore, modern causal
discovery ML algorithms implement efficient search strategies to ensure
that the discovered causal structure is correct and the procedure is
scalable to millions of variables in many real-life settings (see
Chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and
AI Methods and Systems” for detailed description of development and
validation of such methods). Table 1. below lists several classic causal
structure discovery algorithms, their assumptions, the statistical
relationships they examine, and the search strategies they employ.

Table 1

Summary of classic causal discovery algorithms

  Method             Assumptions                                                       Statistics                                                                                                                                   Search strategy
  ------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  PC [2, 10]         CMC, faithfulness, causal sufficiency, acyclic                    Conditional Independence                                                                                                                     Start from full graph, eliminate indicated by CI tests
  FCI [2, 11]        CMC, faithfulness, acyclic                                        Conditional Independence                                                                                                                     Same as PC in the first phase. Potential hidden variables are identified by examining conditional independences in a second phase
  GES [12]           CMC, faithfulness, causal sufficiency, acyclic                    Likelihood of model equivalence class given data                                                                                             Start from empty graph, greedy edge addition and greedy edge elimination operating on the model equivalence class
  GFCI [13]          CMC, faithfulness, acyclic                                        Likelihood of model given data for skeleton discovery and causal orientation, conditional independence for hidden variable identification.   Same as GES in the first phase. Potential hidden variables identified by examining conditional independence in the second phase
  MMHC [14]          CMC, faithfulness, causal sufficiency, acyclic                    Conditional Independence; likelihood of model given data                                                                                     Identify local graph of each variable by conditional independence tests, connect local graphs to global graph, greedy edge addition, elimination, and reversal according to likelihood
  LGL-GLL [15, 16]   CMC, faithfulness, causal sufficiency, acyclic                    Conditional Independence                                                                                                                     Flexible algorithm families. Generalized local learning (GLL) identifies local graph of each variable by conditional independence tests, local to global learning (LGL) constructs the global graph by stitching the local neighborhood of variables together. Maybe combined with additional algorithms, e.g., post-process results with equivalence class and hidden variable algorithms
  LiNGAM [17]        CMC, faithfulness, causal sufficiency, acyclic, non-Gaussianity   ICA; Wald test; chi-square test; difference test                                                                                             A combination of ICA, causal-order permutations, and edge pruning tests

It is worth noting that models that rely solely on conditional
independence cannot fully resolve the orientation of all edges in the
causal system in general. Since the same conditional independence
relationships can correspond to multiple causal structures (i.e.,
belonging to the same so-called Markov Equivalence Class). For example,
the conditional independence relationships corresponding to the
following causal three structures X → Y → Z, X ← Y → Z, and X ← Y ← Z,
are identical (i.e. X, Y, and Z are pairwise dependent, but X ⊥ Z ∣ Y, X
[]A not perpendicular to symbol. Y ∣ Z, Y []A not perpendicular to
symbol. Z ∣ X), i.e. they are Markov equivalent. Markov equivalent
causal structures may still be distinguishable by statistical properties
other than conditional independence. Methods that aim to tackle this
problem are generally referred to as pairwise edge orientation methods,
since they explore the statistical asymmetry between pairs of variables
to determine causal direction. These methods, originally pioneered by D.
Janzing et al. [42] typically require non-linear generating function
and/or non-Gaussian noise terms to break the symmetry in causal
direction [18].

Trace of PC on Alcohol Abstinence Example

The PC algorithm is an early algorithm in the field that is no longer
used in practice (because of low efficiency and high error) but is
useful pedagogically to explain how causal discovery may take place. PC
begins by forming a completely connected graph of undirected edges,
representing no conditional independence anywhere. The algorithm
proceeds by iteratively testing for conditional independence between
pairs of (currently) adjacent variables conditioned on sets of
increasing size. To begin with, unconditional independence is tested,
followed by conditional independence with conditioning sets of
cardinality one, then of cardinality two, then of cardinality three, and
so forth. The members of these conditioning sets are pulled from the
variables adjacent to either member of the current pair being tested.
After completing all such conditional independence tests (which thins
out the graph), the PC algorithm orients the undirected edges by
referencing which conditioning sets were used to separate the
independent pairs. For each unshielded triple, if the mediating node was
not in the stored conditioning set (aka “sepset”), then it orients the
triple as a collider. Lastly, a final set of orientation rules are
applied that take advantage of the acyclicity constraint [2].

Let us revisit the AUD example and step through a run of the PC
algorithm. First, a completely connected graph of undirected edges is
formed in Fig. 4. This represents that we have not yet seen any
conditional independences. Next, unconditional independence relations
are tested (i.e., conditional sets of size zero). In this case, five
independencies are found which results in the removal of five edges as
shown in Fig. 5. Next conditional independence relations with
conditioning sets of cardinality one are tested. In this case, three
conditional independencies are found which results in the removal of
three more edges as shown in Fig. 6. Next conditional independence
relations with conditioning sets of cardinality two are tested. In this
case, one more conditional independence is found which results in the
removal or one more edge in Fig. 7. The PC algorithm will go on testing
conditional independences (up to the point that the conditioning sets
lead to under-powered test), but it will not find any more. Accordingly,
the conditional independence phase of the algorithm will result in the
undirected graph in Fig. 8.

[]

A node graph with a network of interconnected nodes labeled motivation,
fast food, stress, group, adherence, and days abstained, which indicate
the P C trace.

[]

A node graph with a network of interconnected nodes labeled motivation,
fast food, stress, group, adherence, and days abstained, which indicate
the P C trace. Stress is linked less strongly to adherence, group, and
motivation, and similarly group with fast food.

[]

An illustration presents a network of interconnected nodes labeled
motivation, fast food, stress, group, adherence, and days abstained,
which indicate the P C trace. The links between nodes, motivation and
group to days abstained are lighter. There is no link between group and
motivation.

[]

An illustration of a network displaying the A U D trial testing with
nodes labeled motivation, fast food, stress, group, adherence, and days
abstained. Fast food to days abstained has a weak link. There is no link
between group and motivation.

[]

An illustration of a network displaying A U D trials with nodes labeled
motivation, fast food, stress, group, adherence, and days abstained.
Motivation links to adherence.

The edges of the undirected graph in Fig. 8 are oriented by referencing
which conditioning sets were used to separate the independent pairs. For
each unshielded triplet, if the mediating node was not in the
conditioning set, then PC orients the edges to make the middle node in
the triplet a collider. In the AUD example, the endpoints of the
triplets <Motivation, Fast Food, Stress>, <Motivation, Adherence,
Group>, and < Stress, Adherence, Days Abstained> were not separated by
Fast Food, Adherence, and Days Abstained, respectively. Accordingly, PC
orients these triplets as involving colliders in Fig. 9. At this point,
the final set of orientation rules would be normally applied, however,
the graph has already been fully oriented. Note that in general, there
are many cases where the final model produced by PC will have some
undirected edges remaining, corresponding to a set of possible graphs
that are not fully resolved.

[]

An illustration of a network displaying A U D trial with nodes labeled
motivation, fast food, stress, group, adherence, and days abstained.
Stress and motivation link to fast food. Motivation and group to
adherence. Adherence and stress to days abstained.

Latent Variables

As depicted in Fig. 10 (left), suppose Motivation and Stress are latent
(i.e., unmeasured, aka “hidden”). In this case, if we run PC, the
resulting graph would be the one shown in Fig. 10 (right). This graph
correctly identifies the causal path from Group to Days Abstained and
can be used to correct estimation the effect of Group to adherence.
However the graph is misleading in that it suggest that the effect of
Adherence to Days Abstained can be estimated by conditioning on Fast
Food, when in reality conditioning on Fast Food opens a confounding path
and leads to inaccurate causal effect estimate. Such examples showcase
the need to use algorithms that reveal latent variables and their
confounding on measured ones.

[]

2 illustrations of networks. 1. With nodes labeled motivation, fast
food, stress, group, adherence, and days abstained, with lines
connecting nodes group, adherence, and days abstained highlighted. 2.
Group links adherence, which links days abstained. Fast food to
adherence and days abstained.

We can think about latent variables as variables that have been
marginalized out of a larger, complete, but not fully observed, set of
variables. In this paradigm, we assume that the causal model over the
complete set of variables is a DAG. Thus, under this assumption, the
“margin” of a DAG is a natural choice to represent the model’s structure
over the observed set of variables.

Intuitively, the “margin” of a DAG should be a graph whose restriction
of the model manifests as conditional independence in the marginal
probability distribution. More precisely, the conditional independence
statements implied by the marginalized graph should be the subset of
conditional independence statements implied by the DAG over the
remaining variables after marginalization.

Unfortunately, DAGs are not closed under marginalization in this sense.
That is, there are DAGs with margins that are not consistent with any
DAG. For example, in Fig. 10 (left), Group is independent of Fast Food
and independent of Days Abstained conditioned on Adherence, however, no
DAG represents these exact relations. Accordingly, a richer family of
graphs is required to represent margins of DAGs.

Acyclic Directed Mixed Graphs

Acyclic directed mixed graphs (ADMGs) characterize margins of DAGs
(Richardson and Spirtes 2002, Richardson 2003). These graphs
additionally include bi-directed edges; see Fig. 11 (right) for an
illustration. Intuitively, an ADMG can be constructed from a DAG with
latent variables by a simple latent projection.

1.  1.

    For each unshielded non-collider with a latent mediating variable,
    1.  (a)

        If the triple is directed, add a similarly directed edge between
        the endpoints,

         

    2.  (b)

        Otherwise, add a bi-directed edge.

         

     

2.  2.

    Remove all latent variables.

     

Importantly, ancestral relationships are invariant under latent
projection. For example, in Fig. 11, Group and Adherence are ancestors
of Days Abstained while Fast Food is not. These (non-)ancestral
relationships are preserved during the marginalization process.
Accordingly, it is sufficient to learn an ADMG over the measured subset
of variables to infer the presence (or absence) of causal relationships
between the measured variables. To this end, the FCI and GFCI algorithms
learn Markov equivalence classes of ADMGs [2, 11, 13].

[]

2 illustrations of a network. 1. With nodes labeled motivation, fast
food, stress, group, adherence, and days abstained, with lines
connecting nodes group, adherence, and days abstained highlighted. 2.
Group links adherence, which to days abstained. Fast food interacts with
adherence and days abstained.

General Practical Approach to Causal ML

In this section, we describe a protocol for conducting causal analysis
that involves the following 6 steps:

Best Practice 4.4

A Protocol for health science causal ML

1.  1.

    Define the goal of the analysis.

     

2.  2.

    Preprocess the data.

     

3.  3.

    Conduct causal structure discovery.

     

4.  4.

    Conduct causal effect estimation.

     

5.  5.

    Assess the quality and reliability of the results.

     

6.  6.

    Implementation and enhancement of results.

     

We will next walk the reader through the six step process, pointing also
out common pitfalls and how to overcome them.

Evaluate whether the Goals of Modeling Require Causal Analysis

Problem solving that is causal in nature is best addressed by causal
modeling. In health-related domains, causal questions generally involve
the mechanism and especially the treatment of diseases or interventions
on the healthcare system, or discovery of biological causality etc. Some
example causal questions in our simple vignette are: (1) what are the
causes of alcohol abuse? (2) How much improvement in abstinence days can
be expected if some motivation enhancer improves it by one standard
deviation? (3) What is the best treatment for a 35 year-old male with a
high stress job that suffers from alcohol abuse?

Questions regarding risk prediction, (e.g. what is the probability of
failing 30 days abstinence for a 35 year-old male with a high stress
job?), can also be answered with causal discovery analysis. After all,
if we have a accurate causal model, we can instantiate the causal model
with relevant observational information to deduce a risk prediction.
However, the current generation of predictive modeling methods have
advantages in answering risk prediction questions not involving
manipulations compared to the current generation of causal discovery
methods. The main reasons for this are: the current generation of
predictive models are discriminant and not generative, can represent
more complex mathematical relationships, have built in regularization to
avoid overfitting, and most importantly are fitted by analytical
protocols such as nested cross validation to maximize their predictive
performance via model selection and unbiased performance estimation
(whereas causal models seek first and foremost causal validity and have
no access to causal error estimators that are available to predictive
models). Therefore, we recommend using predictive modeling methods (see
chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”) for prediction related
tasks.

We also note that Markov Boundary feature selectors naturally bridge the
predictive and causal domains by revealing local causal edges and
retaining the maximum predictive information. They are not however
full-fledged causal discovery procedures and need be combined with other
causal algorithms for complete causal discovery (chapter “An Appraisal
and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in
Healthcare and Health Science”).

It is also worth noting that some questions appear to require predictive
modeling on the surface, but they actually require casual knowledge to
answer correctly. For example, the question “what is the risk of relapse
within 30 days for a 35 year-old who suffers from alcohol abuse, if he
were treated with naltrexone?” This question can be addressed correctly
with predictive modeling if we have observed similar patients taking the
medication and others not in a randomized assignment. If, however,
observed treatments were not randomized, then we would need causal
modeling to answer correctly.

Check If the Data Is Suitable for Causal Discovery Analysis and Preprocess Data Appropriately

Causal discovery analysis can be applied to a wide range of data. To
ensure that the discovered causal relationships correspond to the goal
of the project and have biological and clinical relevance, special
attention needs to be paid to the data design, the data collection
process, and the data elements being collected. We point out several
common situations where data preprocessing might be needed.

Deterministic relationships: Existing causal discovery algorithms may
produce erroneous results when deterministic relationships are present
among variables. Examples of deterministic relationships are: item
scores for a depression inventory vs. the total score for the same
depression inventory; height and weight vs. BMI. How to incorporate this
kind of information into causal discovery analysis is an area of active
research, but at present our recommendation is to eliminate
deterministic relationships by using a subset of the variables that are
involved in the deterministic relationships.

Specificity of Measurements: Some measurements/variables can contain
information from multiple related variables. This is common in mental
health data. For example, the depression inventory also often measures
anxiety symptoms, and vice versa. As a result, when causal discovery
analysis is conducted on these types of variables, a high amount of
interconnectivity is found. High connectivity in a causal graph is not
in general problematic. But in this case, it is an artifact of the lack
of specificity in the measurements and the findings are hard to
interpret causally. One way to improve the measurement specificity is
through feature engineering, i.e. instead of directly using the original
variables with low specificity, we can construct new variables (e.g.
separate out depression specific items from the depression inventory and
anxiety inventory, and construct a variable that represents depression
more specifically). This can be done by either using prior knowledge, or
using data driven methods such as factor analysis [19].

Using EHR Data: Different from observational research and clinical trial
data, EHR data are collected at irregular time intervals as part of the
patients’ clinical care. Using the EHR data for any modeling generally
requires the researcher to come up with a study design, construct a
specific patient cohort, extract relevant EHR data from it, and
preprocess the data according to the goal of the study. These steps
should follow the same principles for designing observational studies
while considering specific properties of the EHR data [20–23]. For data
preprocessing, one needs to consider the nature of various EHR data
elements and the nature of diseases. For example, a diagnosis code might
appear in the patients’ record multiple times. This may be due to
multiple episodes of acute disease, or may be due to chronic disease and
differentiating between them may be important. Similarly, the timestamps
in the EHR reflect the documentation time of an event and often do not
coincide with the onset time of the measured event. Further, missing
measurements in the EHR data is almost definitely not missing at random,
since the care providers decide if a measurement would be taken based on
the patients’ symptoms. Therefore, using imputation algorithms that
assume missing at random would cause errors in the analysis. Some of
these challenges in the EHR data can be handled with preprocessing, but
others might require adaptations to generic causal discovery algorithms
[24, 25].

Causal Structure Discovery

Prior knowledge can be readily incorporated into many causal structure
discovery algorithms and can greatly facilitate the structure discovery,
especially for edge orientation. Prior knowledge can come from multiple
sources. One source is the knowledge of the data collection process. For
example, in datasets with longitudinal design, information is collected
at multiple time points. This timing information can assist edge
orientation since events that happen later cannot be the cause of events
that happened earlier. It is worth noting that one needs to distinguish
between the time that an event happens vs. the timing that the event was
measured or documented. For example, we might have measured a patient’s
Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and their depression score at the
same clinical encounter, but to study the causes of depression, we would
assign the SNP to an earlier time point than the depression score.
Further, one needs to consider if the variable contains information over
a time span. For example, HbA1C contains information regarding glucose
over the past 2 or 3 months, it can be assigned an earlier time point
compared to variables that reflect instantaneous information such as the
blood oxygen level if these variables were measured at the same time.

Prior knowledge can also come from experimental design. For example, in
randomized trials, due to the randomization, the participant’s
pretreatment measurements should not cause the treatment assignment.
This prior knowledge can be encoded by prohibiting edges that emerge
from the pretreatment variables to the treatment variable.

A third source of prior knowledge is existing domain knowledge. One can
enforce the presence or absence of edges according to existing domain
knowledge, but this needs to be done with caution. Since the condition
under which the domain knowledge was obtained can be different from the
current dataset and its data generating process.

Since incorporating prior knowledge can have a significant effect on the
resulting causal structure, we recommend only incorporating the most
reliable prior knowledge as input to the causal discovery algorithm. We
also encourage performing the causal structure discovery analysis with
and without all or a subset of the prior knowledge as sensitivity
analysis to investigate the added value of incorporating prior
knowledge.

Choice of Algorithms At a high level, the performance of the causal
structure discovery largely depends on: (1) if the algorithm used is
theoretically guaranteed to produce the correct results under its
assumptions, (2) how far does the data deviate from the assumptions of
the algorithms, and (3) statistical power. One should always choose
algorithms that have solid theoretical properties and clearly defined
assumptions (see for example the list of algorithms and assumptions in
Table 1). Choice of algorithms can also be informed by benchmark studies
applied to data with similar characteristics [15, 26, 27].

One important assumption is causal sufficiency, i.e. the absence of
latent common causes. Latent common cause, also referred to as latent
variables are likely present for health data, therefore, it is
recommended to apply algorithms that can detect latent variables such as
the FCI or GFCI directly to the data for causal discovery, or use FCI
and GFCI [2] as a second step for latent variable discovery following
the skeleton discovery by another more scalable algorithm.

Another common violation of assumptions of most causal discovery
algorithms is target information equivalence [28]. In health data,
overlapping or redundant information often exists, such as co-occurring
symptoms in multiple organs and systems, concurrent abnormal lab values
from different lab tests, and simultaneously disturbed molecular
pathways. This information redundancy can result in target information
equivalence, where multiple variable sets contain statistically
equivalent information regarding a target variable of interest. Due to
the statistical equivalency, the causal role of these variables cannot
be determined from observational data alone. Applying algorithms that
are not designed and equipped to handle target information equivalence
will likely result in missing important causal information. We recommend
to always investigate presence and consequences of target information
equivalence when appropriate algorithms are available (e.g., TIE*)
[28–31].

Statistical power also influences the choice of algorithm. For smaller
sample sizes with large numbers of variables, local causal discovery
algorithms have advantages over global causal discovery algorithms due
to their sample efficiency [15, 16]. It is also worth noting that the
algorithms’ parameter setting also impacts statistical power and
therefore the algorithms’ performance. The choice of the underlying
statistical test (for constraint based algorithms) or scores (for score
based algorithms) need to correspond to the distribution of data to
maximize the statistical power. For example, for constraint based
algorithms, Fisher’s test is recommended for multivariate Gaussian data,
and the G² test is recommended for discrete data. Special distributions
and data designs (e.g., time-to-event longitudinal designs) might
require specially-designed statistical tests. Further, only a subset of
algorithms can scale to a very high number of variables without
compromising correctness thus being applicable to high dimensional data
such as omics data [15].

Causal Effect Estimation

Causal effect estimation should follow the causal structure discovery
and be based on the discovered causal structure. Causal effects can be
estimated using the Do-calculus principles with SEM as stated in section
“Structural Equation Models (SEMs)” above. Note that the SEM model for
effect estimation is not restricted to linear regressions. Other
mathematical models can be adopted to accommodate non-Gaussian
distributions and complex relationships as needed.

It is worth noting that traditional causal effect estimation methods,
such as propensity score-based methods and matching generally are either
based on hypothesized causal graphs, untestable assumptions for
correctness (i.e., “strong ignorability”) or do not have an explicitly
defined causal graph associated with the effect estimation. Given the
large space of possible graphs over the set of observed variables, it is
highly unlikely that the hypothesized graph would correspond to the true
causal structure, therefore these methods can and often lead to biased
effect estimation. On the other hand, the lack of an explicitly defined
causal graph makes it difficult to interpret the result practically and
state the properties of the result of effect estimations [1].

Quality Check and Interpretation of Results

There are several ways to evaluate the discovered causal graphs and
estimated causal effects. We recommend several analyses that are
suitable for most causal analysis, but problem-specific evaluation
should be designed and conducted when appropriate.

Stability of causal discovery. The stability of the causal discovery
procedure due to sampling variability can be assessed by bootstrap
analysis [32]. In bootstrapping, the same causal discovery procedure
(causal structure discovery and causal effect estimation) that was
performed on the entire sample can be repeatedly applied to different
bootstrap samples. The percentage of time an edge is discovered across
all bootstrap samples represents the stability of the causal structure
discovery. Edges with percentages closer to 0 or 1 indicate higher
stability, representing they are consistently absent or present across
all bootstrap samples (i.e., they are more robust to sampling
variation). The empirical distribution of the estimated causal effect
for manipulating one variable on another variable over all bootstrap
samples represents the stability of both the causal structure discovery
and the effect estimation. An empirical distribution with smaller
variance indicates better stability. Poor stability can indicate issues
related to the distribution of the data. For example, it is possible
that the identification of a particular edge based on the entire dataset
was driven by outliers and such edges would have low stability in
bootstrap samples. When poor stability is observed, we recommend careful
inspection of the empirical distribution of the data, as well as target
information equivalence analysis (that may be driving the instablity).

Fit of the causal model to the data. After the causal structure
discovery and parameterization of the causal model (i.e. estimating all
parameters for functions X_i = f(Parent(x))), one can assess the fit of
the causal model to the data. In general, the fit can be assessed with
scores like the BIC. If the model parameters are estimated with SEM
softwares (e.g. OpenMx, Mplus, Lavaan), one can also examine common
metrics for goodness of fit from the SEM literature [33–35].

Generalizability. To test the generalizability of causal discovery
results, one can identify a separate dataset that contains the same or
similar measurements as the primary dataset, conduct causal analysis and
compare the results. For example, comparing the causal discovery results
on EHR data collected from different hospital systems to assess the
generalizability of causal mechanisms over different patient populations
[24]; comparing the causal discovery results in a veteran population
with PTSD vs. civilian population with traumatic brain injury tests the
generalizability of causal mechanism over different disease populations
[36].

It is worth noting that the goal for testing generalizability is not to
require that the causal mechanism underlying two datasets must be the
same, but rather to assess whether the causal mechanisms are indeed the
same in different populations. The discrepancies among causal mechanisms
discovered from multiple datasets do not indicate that the discovered
causal mechanisms are incorrect. It merely indicates that the discovered
causal mechanisms are different (because of population or external
factor differences). The differences can be due to a variety of
technical factors, such as sample sizes, sampling bias in one or more of
the datasets, differences in data collection protocol, and differences
in measurements. They can also be due to genuine differences in the
causal mechanisms of the two populations. Nevertheless, assessing causal
mechanisms in multiple datasets that bear similarity is beneficial,
since it helps identify stable causal relationships across different
datasets and highlights different causal pathways.

Quality of the local causal neighborhood. The predictive performance for
a variable of interest can be used to assess the quality of the local
causal structure around the variable. This is related to the concept of
Markov boundary (chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of
Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”). Recall
that the Markov boundary of a variable of interest is the smallest
variable set that contains the maximum amount of (predictive)
information about the variable [1]. Under the faithfulness
condition, and with no latents, the Markov boundary consists of the
direct causes, direct effects and direct causes of the direct effects of
the variable of interest [37]. Therefore, one way to assess if our
causal structure discovered captures the Markov boundary of the response
variable, we can compare the predictive performance of the discovered
Markov boundary to the best predictive model (see chapters “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models,” “Overfitting, Underfitting and
General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best
Practices in Machine Learning and AI” for more details) we can build for
this variable given this dataset. If the predictive performance of the
discovered Markov boundary is statistically indistinguishable from that
of the best model, we can be assured that the Markov boundary variables
contain the true local causes and effects (subject to any confounding
due to latents). It is worth noting that, when target information
equivalency is present for the response variable of interest (which
constitutes a faithfulness violation), there are many variable sets
(Multiple Markov Boundaries) that are predictively equivalent and
contain the maximum amount of information regarding the variable of
interest, and are minimal. In this case, observing statistically
indistinguishable predictive performance of one Markov boundary vs. the
best model does not guarantee the causal role of that Markov boundary.
However one of the multiple Markov boundaries contains exactly the
direct causes, direct effects, and direct causes of direct effects of
the variable of interest (always subject to latent confounding).
Finally, a variable that appears in all members of the Markov boundary
equivalence class is guaranteed to be causal subject to confounding. An
example of applying this method is [31].

Experimental Validation. Another way to partially assess the validity of
the discovered causal relationships and effect sizes is experimental
validation. For example, one can select a variable to manipulate,
observe its effects on another variable, and compare the experimental
result with the effect estimated by the causal model. This form of
validation is in general costly and possibly not feasible. Experimental
results can also come from prior studies, such as RCTs. An example of
this is [38].

Implementation and Enhancement of Results

Causal Discovery Guided Experimentation. In many domains of medicine, it
is common practice to observe correlational relationships, hypothesize
that they are causal, and then test this hypothesis with
experimentation. This procedure is not efficient since numerous
correlational relationships are due to confounding and are not causal. A
more efficient approach is to use causal structure discovery algorithms
to eliminate the majority of correlational relationships that are
non-causal and resolve any false positives by experimentation. Hybrid
causal ML/experimental algorithms exist that are designed to minimize
the number of experiments needed for discovery [39].

Consideration for Clinical Translation. One of the main goals for causal
discovery applied to biomedical data is to discover novel treatments
that can benefit patients. Molecular and other targets that causally
affect patient outcomes are potential treatments. Key considerations for
which targets to select for treatment depend on their effectiveness,
robustness and safety. Causal modeling can help us evaluate these
aspects. For example, a causal factor with large effect size and small
variability indicates that a corresponding drug treatment would work
well and have consistent performance over the patient population. Also
in such cases, this potential treatment could be prescribed to patients
regardless of their characteristics. If a putative treatment’s effect
has large variability, however, this indicates that the response to the
treatment could benefit precision medicine administration [40, 41]).
Further, with the help of causal analysis, one can also evaluate not
only the effect of the treatment on outcomes but also side effects, and
select therapeutic targets that maximize patient benefit and minimize
side effects.

In summary, the goals for causal ML in health is to discover knowledge
that are (1) biologically and clinically relevant, (2) correct and
generalizable, and (3) can be translated into clinical application and
incorporated into the clinical workflow to benefit patients. A
multidisciplinary team consisting of clinical and biological domain
experts, health data scientists specialized in causal discovery,
clinical informaticists and implementation scientists working closely
together is well suited to achieve these goals.

Key Concepts Discussed in Chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”

Causal Inference, Causal Structure Discovery.

Graph, Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG).

Causal Model, Causal Markov Condition, Causal Probabilistic Graphical
Model (CPGM), Properties of CPGMs.

Distinction between predictive and causal ML models.

d-separation and Faithfulness.

Structural Equation Models (SEMs).

Causal Effect Estimation and Do-Calculus.

Causal Structure Discovery algorithms.

Acyclic Directed Mixed Graphs (ADMG).

Protocol for health science causal ML.

Pitfalls Discussed in Chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”

Pitfall 4.1. Popular and successful predictive ML methods are not
designed and equipped to satisfy the essential requirements of causal
modeling.

Pitfall 4.2.: Using SEMs to estimate causal effects with the wrong
causal structure.

Pitfall 4.3. Using regression to estimate causal effects without knowing
the true causal structure (and making assumptions about which are the
true measured confounders).

Pitfall 4.4. Discovering the correct variables to condition on can be
hard or even impossible in the presence of hidden variables. Discovering
the minimal blocking variable set may be computationally hard in
intractable in when the causal structure is large and complex.

Best Practices Discussed in Chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”

Best Practice 4.1. For predictive tasks (i.e., without interventions
contemplated) use of Predictive ML should be first priority. For causal
tasks (i.e., with interventions contemplated) use of Causal ML should be
first priority.

Best Practice 4.2. In order to estimate unbiased causal effects, control
variables that are sufficient to block all confounding paths. These
variables can be identified by causal structure ML algorithms.

Best Practice 4.3. Often there is a choice of multiple alternative
variable sets that block confounding paths. An applicable choice is to
control/condition on the set Pa(A) in order to block all confounding
paths connecting A and T. However this sufficient confounding blocking
variable set is not the minimal one and it is recommended to use the
minimal blocking variable set in order to maximize statistical power and
minimize uncertainty in the estimation of the causal effect.

Best Practice 4.4. A Protocol for health science causal ML.

1.  1.

    Define the goal of the analysis.

     

2.  2.

    Preprocess the data.

     

3.  3.

    Conduct causal structure discovery.

     

4.  4.

    Conduct causal effect estimation.

     

5.  5.

    Assess the quality and reliability of the results.

     

6.  6.

    Implementation and enhancement of results.

     

Classroom Assignments and Discussion Topics for Chapter “Foundations of
Causal ML”

1.  1.

    Give:
    1.  (a)

        2 examples of causal discovery problems and 2 examples of
        predictive problems in healthcare management.

         

    2.  (b)

        2 examples of causal discovery problems and 2 examples of
        predictive problems in clinical care.

         

    3.  (c)

        2 examples of causal discovery problems and 2 examples of
        predictive problems in health sciences research.

         

    4.  (d)

        Discuss how predictive modeling that does not take into account
        causality may lead to flawed decisions in each of the above
        causal example applications.

         

     

2.  2.

    Someone presented to you a model for predicting the probability of
    cancer relapse with high predictive performance, derived from
    observational data using a convolutional neural network. Can you
    deduce potential relapse prevention strategies from this model?

     

3.  3.

    Write a computer program in your favorite programming language to
    generate data based on the causal graph specified in Fig. 1.
    1.  (a)

        Based on the data you generated and the causal structure in Fig.
        1, estimate the causal effect for each cause-effect pair in Fig.
        1 (hint: you should obtain coefficients similar to what is
        specified in Fig. 1).

         

    2.  (b)

        Apply the PC algorithm or the FGES algorithm to the data you
        generated to discover the causal structure and compare it to the
        true causal structure specified in the figure.

         

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Pearl J. Causality. Cambridge University Press; 2009.Crossref

2.  2.

    Spirtes P, Glymour CN, Scheines R. Causation, prediction, and
    search. MIT Press; 2000.

3.  3.

    Kummerfeld E, Ramsey J. Causal clustering for 1-factor measurement
    models. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
    Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ‘16. New
    York, NY, USA: ACM; 2016. p. 1655–64.Crossref

4.  4.

    Kummerfeld E, Ramsey J, Yang R, Spirtes P, Scheines R. Causal
    clustering for 2-factor measurement models. In: Calders T, Esposito
    F, Hullermeier E, Meo R, editors. Machine learning and knowledge
    discovery in databases, volume 8725 of Lecture notes in computer
    science. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2014. p. 34–49.

5.  5.

    Kaplan D. Structural equation modeling: foundations and extensions,
    vol. 10. Sage Publications; 2008.

6.  6.

    Wright S. Correlation and causation. J Agric Res. 1921;20:557–85.

7.  7.

    Rubin DB. Matching to remove bias in observational studies.
    Biometrics. 1973;29:159–83.Crossref

8.  8.

    Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB. The central role of the propensity score in
    observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika.
    1983;70:41–55.Crossref

9.  9.

    Eberhardt, F., Glymour, C. & Scheines, R. On the number of
    experiments sufficient and in the worst case necessary to identify
    all causal relations among n variables. arXiv preprint,
    arXiv:1207.1389 (2012).

10. 10.

    Colombo D, Maathuis MH. Order-independent constraint-based causal
    structure learning. J Mach Learn Res. 2014;15:3741–82.

11. 11.

    Zhang J. On the completeness of orientation rules for causal
    discovery in the presence of latent confounders and selection bias.
    Artif Intell. 2008;172:1873–96.Crossref

12. 12.

    Chickering DM. Optimal structure identification with greedy search.
    J Mach Learn Res. 2002;3:507–54.

13. 13.

    Ogarrio JM, Spirtes P, Ramsey J. A hybrid causal search algorithm
    for latent variable models. In: Conference on probabilistic
    graphical models. PMLR; 2016. p. 368–79.

14. 14.

    Tsamardinos I, Brown LE, Aliferis CF. The max-min hill-climbing
    Bayesian network structure learning algorithm. Mach Learn.
    2006;65:31–78.Crossref

15. 15.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part I: algorithms and
    empirical evaluation. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(7):171–234.

16. 16.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part II: algorithms and
    empirical evaluation. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(8):235–84.

17. 17.

    Shimizu S. LiNGAM: non-Gaussian methods for estimating causal
    structures. Behaviormetrika. 2014;41(1):65–98.Crossref

18. 18.

    Statnikov A, Henaff M, Lytkin NI, Aliferis CF. New methods for
    separating causes from effects in genomics data. BMC Genomics.
    2012;13(8):1–16.

19. 19.

    Rawls E, Kummerfeld E, Mueller BA, Ma S, Zilverstand A. The
    resting-state causal human connectome is characterized by hub
    connectivity of executive and attentional networks. NeuroImage.
    2022;255:119211.Crossref

20. 20.

    Rosenbaum PR, Rosenbaum PR, Briskman. Design of observational
    studies, vol. 10. New York: Springer; 2010.Crossref

21. 21.

    Kramer MS. Clinical epidemiology and biostatistics: a primer for
    clinical investigators and decision-makers. Springer Science and
    Business Media; 2012.

22. 22.

    Botsis T, Hartvigsen G, Chen F, Weng C. Secondary use of EHR: data
    quality issues and informatics opportunities. Summit Transl
    Bioinform. 2010;2010:1–5.

23. 23.

    Weiskopf NG, Bakken S, Hripcsak G, Weng C. A data quality assessment
    guideline for electronic health record data reuse. Egems.
    2017;5(1):14.Crossref

24. 24.

    Shen X, Ma S, Vemuri P, Castro MR, Caraballo PJ, Simon GJ. A novel
    method for causal structure discovery from EHR data and its
    application to type-2 diabetes mellitus. Sci Rep.
    2021;11(1):1–9.Crossref

25. 25.

    Shen X, Ma S, Caraballo PJ, Vemuri P, Simon GJ. A novel method for
    handling missing not at random data in the electronic health
    records. In: 2022 IEEE 10th international conference on healthcare
    informatics (ICHI). IEEE; 2022. p. 21–6.Crossref

26. 26.

    Sanchez-Romero R, et al. Estimating feedforward and feedback
    effective connections from fMRI time series: assessments of
    statistical methods. Netw Neurosci. 2019;3(2):274–306.Crossref

27. 27.

    Ma S, Kemmeren P, Gresham D, Statnikov A. De-Novo learning of
    genome-scale regulatory networks in S. cerevisiae. PLOS ONE.
    2014;9(9):e106479.Crossref

28. 28.

    Statnikov A, Lemeir J, Aliferis CF. Algorithms for discovery of
    multiple Markov boundaries. J Mach Learn Res. 2013;14(1):499–566.

29. 29.

    Karstoft KI, Galatzer-Levy IR, Statnikov A, Li Z, Shalev AY.
    Bridging a translational gap: using machine learning to improve the
    prediction of PTSD. BMC Psychiatry. 2015;15(1):1–7.Crossref

30. 30.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF. Analysis and computational dissection of
    molecular signature multiplicity. PLoS Comput Biol.
    2010;6(5):e1000790.Crossref

31. 31.

    Kraus VB, Ma S, Tourani R, Fillenbaum GG, Burchett BM, Parker DC,
    Kraus WE, Connelly MA, Otvos JD, Cohen HJ, Orenduff MC. Causal
    analysis identifies small HDL particles and physical activity as key
    determinants of longevity of older adults. EBioMedicine.
    2022;85:104292.Crossref

32. 32.

    Kummerfeld E, Rix A. Simulations evaluating resampling methods for
    causal discovery: ensemble performance and calibration. In: 2019
    IEEE international conference on bioinformatics and biomedicine
    (BIBM). IEEE; 2019. p. 2586–93.Crossref

33. 33.

    Fan X, Thompson B, Wang L. Effects of sample size, estimation
    methods, and model specification on structural equation modeling fit
    indexes. Struct Equ Model Multidiscip J. 1999;6(1):56–83.Crossref

34. 34.

    Bentler PM. On tests and indices for evaluating structural models.
    Personal Individ Differ. 2007;42(5):825–9.Crossref

35. 35.

    Barrett P. Structural equation modelling: adjudging model fit.
    Personal Individ Differ. 2007;42(5):815–24.Crossref

36. 36.

    Pierce B, Kirsh T, Ferguson AR, Neylan T, Ma S, Kummerfeld E, Cohen
    B, Nielson JL. Causal discovery replicates symptomatic and
    functional interrelations of posttraumatic stress across five
    patient populations. Front Psychiatry. 2023;13:1018111.Crossref

37. 37.

    Guyon I, Aliferis C. Causal feature selection. In: Computational
    methods of feature selection. Chapman and Hall/CRC; 2007. p. 79–102.

38. 38.

    Maathuis MH, et al. Predicting causal effects in large-scale systems
    from observational data. Nat Methods. 2010;7(4):247–8.Crossref

39. 39.

    Statnikov A, Ma S, Henaff M, Lytkin N, Efstathiadis E, Peskin ER,
    Aliferis CF. Ultra-scalable and efficient methods for hybrid
    observational and experimental local causal pathway discovery. J
    Mach Learn Res. 2015;16(1):3219–67.

40. 40.

    Gunlicks-Stoessel M, Klimes-Dougan B, VanZomeren A, Ma S. Developing
    a data-driven algorithm for guiding selection between cognitive
    behavioral therapy, fluoxetine, and combination treatment for
    adolescent depression. Transl Psychiatry. 2020;10(1):1–11.Crossref

41. 41.

    Winterhoff B, Kommoss S, Heitz F, Konecny GE, Dowdy SC, Mullany SA,
    Park-Simon TW, Baumann K, Hilpert F, Brucker S, du Bois A.
    Developing a clinico-molecular test for individualized treatment of
    ovarian cancer: the interplay of precision medicine informatics with
    clinical and health economics dimensions. In: AMIA annual symposium
    proceedings, vol. 2018. American Medical Informatics
    Association; 2018. p. 1093.

42. 42.

    Janzing D, Mooij J, Zhang K, Lemeire J, Zscheischler J, Daniušis P,
    Steudel B, Schölkopf B. Information-geometric approach to inferring
    causal directions. Artif Intell. 2012;182:1–31.

Footnotes

1

 

2

 

3

 

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_5

Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems

Constantin Aliferis¹   and Gyorgy Simon¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

The chapter outlines a comprehensive process, governing all steps from
analysis and problem domain needs specification, to creation and
validation of AI/ML methods that can address them. The stages are
explained and grounded using existing methods examples. The process
discussed equates to a generalizable Best Practice guideline applicable
across all of AI/ML. An equally important use of this Best Practice is
as a guide for understanding and evaluating any ML/AI technology under
consideration for adoption for a particular problem domain.

Keywords

Method development and evaluation processProperties of AI/ML methods
(theoretical, empirical)AI/ML stacksProtocolsEnginesAI/ML method
properties map

Establishing Properties of AI/ML Methods During New Method Development and Evaluating Properties when Choosing the Best Method for the Problem at Hand

In chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal
and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in
Healthcare and Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML” we
reviewed major health AI/ML methods in common use in healthcare and the
health sciences. We examined how they work and summarized important
properties. We especially focused on the following theoretical
properties and corresponding conditions (if known) that guarantee these
properties:

1.  1.

    Representation power: can the models produced by the method
    represent all relevant problem instances and their solutions?

     

2.  2.

    Transparency: are the models produced by the method easy to
    understand (i.e., are they “transparent box”) and can they be easily
    understood by human inspection (i.e., are they explainable and human
    interpretable)?

     

3.  3.

    Soundness: When the methods output a solution to a problem instance,
    is this solution correct? If there is a degree of error (measured in
    some scale of loss, risk or other scale) how large is the error and
    its uncertainty?

     

4.  4.

    Completeness: Does the method produce correct answers to all problem
    instances? If only for a fraction of the problem space, how large or
    important is the fraction?

     

5.  5.

    Computational complexity for learning models: what is the exact or
    asymptotic computational complexity of running the method to produce
    models as a function of the input size (e.g., number of variables,
    or sample size)?

     

6.  6.

    Computational complexity for using models: what is the exact or
    asymptotic computational complexity of running the models produced
    by the method to answer problems as a function of the input size
    (e.g., number of input variables)?

     

7.  7.

    Other cost functions: for example, what is the cost to obtain and
    store input data and run analyses on a compute environment, either
    at model discovery or at model deployment time?

     

8.  8.

    Space complexity for learning models: what is the exact or
    asymptotic storage complexity of running the method to produce
    models as a function of the input size (e.g., number of variables,
    or sample size)?

     

9.  9.

    Space complexity for storing and using models: what is the exact or
    asymptotic storage complexity of running the models to answer
    problems as a function of the input size (e.g., number of variables,
    or sample size)?

     

10. 10.

    Sample complexity, learning curves, power-sample requirements: how
    does the error of the produced models varies as function of sample
    size of discovery data? How much sample size do we need in order to
    build models with a specific degree of accuracy and acceptable
    statistical error uncertainty, and how much sample size is needed to
    establish statistically superiority to random or specific models and
    performance levels?

     

11. 11.

    Probability and decision theoretic consistency: is the ML/AI method
    compatible with probability and utility theory?

     

We also discussed empirical performance properties which we can
differentiate for the purposes of the present chapter into:

1.  1.

    Comparative and absolute empirical performance in simulation
    studies: when we give the method discovery data produced by
    simulations, what is the empirical performance of the method?

     

2.  2.

    Comparative and absolute performance in real data with hard and soft
    gold standard known answers: when we give the method discovery data
    from real world sampling, what is the empirical performance of the
    method?

     

Chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal
and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in
Healthcare and Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML” made it
abundantly clear to the reader that the majority of widely-used formal
methods have known properties along the above dimensions. Ad hoc and
heuristic systems and methods do not, however, and thus are viewed in
this volume as pre-scientific or early-stage and preliminary, thus
carrying great risk of failure (at the present stage of scientific
knowledge about them). It also became obvious that knowing the above
properties is essential knowledge for determining which among several
available methods and corresponding libraries, tools and commercial
offerings are the ones that are best suited for a problem we wish to
solve using AI/ML.

In general, theoretical properties are stronger than empirical ones in
the sense that they describe very large parts of the problem-solving
domain more efficiently and with greater clarity than empirical studies.
Figure 1 shows the coverage and interpretation of sufficient conditions,
vs. those provided by sufficient and necessary conditions and vs.
necessary conditions. Sufficient and necessary criteria describe the
whole problem space, whereas sufficient conditions and necessary
conditions only part of it, but they are usually more difficult to
establish, thus usually theoretical analysis for AI/Ml methods is
provided in the form of sufficient conditions. It is not uncommon for
the set of sufficient conditions to grow over time so that the total
problem space is better understood.

[]

3 diagrams of A I or M L performance. Top. The problem space has
subspaces for everywhere here equals positive performance and
performance not met. Center. Subspaces for everywhere here equals
positive and negative performance. Bottom. Everywhere here equals
negative performance and performance met.

Notice that sufficient conditions point to parts of the problem space
where desired performance is achieved. So, if we establish that in some
domain a set of sufficient conditions hold, we can expect desirable
performance. In other words, sufficient conditions are constructive.
Necessary conditions point to parts of the problem space where undesired
performance will occur. They provide warnings against pitfalls, but do
not tell us the complete picture of how to obtain desirable results
(other than avoiding the pitfalls, i.e., safeguarding that necessary
conditions are not violated).

Even if we do not violate necessary conditions, we are not guaranteed
desired performance however (because additional sufficient conditions
may not hold). Necessary and sufficient criteria map out precisely the
totality of the problem space in which we will obtain desirable
performance and the space that we will not. Again, it is much harder in
practice to derive necessary and sufficient conditions.

By comparison to the above, empirical studies provide limited coverage
of the problem space as shown in Fig. 2. In the absence of theory it
would take an astronomical number of empirical studies to cover the
space that a single theorem can (assuming that the combinatorial space
of factors involved is non-trivial).

[]

A diagram for empirical studies. The circular problem space has 3
positive empirical studies and 4 negative empirical studies represented
by smaller circles with symbols, and uncertainty everywhere not covered
by empirical studies represented by a dark shade within the circle.

One caveat of applying theoretical analysis is that we may not know with
absolute certainty if sufficient, necessary, or sufficient and necessary
conditions are met in some problem domain. It is very important for
theoretical conditions to be testable. For example, we can easily test
whether the data is multivariate normal and thus we can know whether in
some domain we satisfy the relevant sufficient condition of OLS
regression (chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major
ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”). By comparison,
within classical statistics frameworks we do not know in general, and
cannot test practically, whether the strong ignorability sufficient
condition of propensity scoring method holds (chapter “Lessons Learned
from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In
Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring problems, and the role of
Best Practicess”). The existence of such a condition then just says that
it is theoretically possible for the method to work in some real or
hypothetical distribution (but we cannot tell whether it will work in
any real life data of interest with certainty).

In some situations it is also possible to fix violations of conditions.
For example, we can transform (some) non normal distributions so that
they become normal. Sometimes, violating sufficient conditions for
desired performance is mistaken to imply guranteed undesired
perfromance. This is not the case, always, since not meeting a set of
suffiecient conditions may still be followed by good performance (i.e.,
if other sufficient conditions exist and are met, aka “mitigation
factors” [1]).

There is a clear relevance of pitfalls and guidelines for best
practices, to the above concepts. These must describe sufficient,
necessary or sufficient and necessary conditions for desired or
undesired performance, and these conditions must be testable or
identifiable.

In Fig. 3 we demonstrate the importance of combining theoretical
analysis with empirical testing. If theory predicts that in some
identifiable part of the problem space - described in the example of the
figure by the subspace where sufficient conditions hold - we expect
there desirable behavior. But we may still be unsure about whether these
conditions were tested accurately. Or if no testing of conditions was
conducted, whether the theory applies to this particular problem space
and data sampled from it, that we are facing. By ‘sampling” this part of
the problem space we can obtain evidence strengthening or refuting the
appropriateness of the applicability of the methods in question.

[]

3 diagrams of problem spaces. Top. Subspaces everywhere here equals
positive performance with 4 positive empirical studies and performance
not met. Center. Everywhere here equals positive performance with 1
negative study. Bottom. Everywhere here equals positive performance with
4 negative studies.

To elaborate, if we obtain positive empirical verification of
theoretical expectations, we can be sure that the theoretical roadmap is
aligned with our practical problem solving setting. If, however we see
empirical results that violate the theoretical expectations, this is
evidence that we did not sufficiently test the preconditions for method
success, or that the means in our disposal for testing the preconditions
of the theoretical properties are not accurate and we need better ways
to test the suitability of our methods to the real-life problem.

Going back to Fig. 2, the reader may wonder: why don’t we dispense with
theory and treat the characterization of the problem space with regards
to performance of any set of methods, as an empirical ML problem itself?
For example, dispel with theory and base acceptance of, e.g., clinical
AI models by doing Clinical Trials? With enough methods and enough
trials/datasets over enough problem spaces we can circumvent the need to
derive complex theoretical analyses. The answer is three-fold:

1.  1.

    As indicated earlier, the number of empirical studies needed would
    be astronomical, as the number of studies needed grows
    combinatorially to the number of factors involved.

     

2.  2.

    In the absence of theory we do not even known which factors affect
    performance and thus lack the knowledge necessary to design a set of
    empirical studies that can cover the space of interest. This is a
    Theory Ladeness problem (i.e., scientific conclusions are affected
    by the framework determining what to study, how to measure it etc.
    [2, 3].

     

3.  3.

    This practice may jeopardize human subjects or waste valuable
    resources, and is thus unethical in such cases. Moreover,  as the
    field of ML matured, it has become evident that even thousands of
    datasets used for a variety of benchmarks across domains cannot
    cover the full space of possibilities of evaluating a single method.
    At most we can divide and conquer the full ML problem space into
    application areas and conduct large benchmark studies there. However
    for this endeavor in order to be efficient and practical, the
    specific choices of focused areas and datasets must be constrained
    and guided by a robust theoretical understanding of the factors
    affecting successful modeling.

     

In summary, theory and empirical study work synergistically together and
provide a concrete roadmap of which methods are suitable for what task,
by establishing the properties of AI/ML methods. The same is true for
individual models produced by such methods as detailed in the next
chapter on developing and validating AI/ML models. Knowing AI/ML
properties (theoretical and empirical) provides crucial information that
allows one to make informed decisions about the Performance, Safety and
Cost-effectiveness requirements and potential of corresponding AI/ML
approaches, methods and systems (and the decision models produced by
them). Successfully meeting requirements that ensure desirable AI/ML
behavior can then lead to building trust in the AI/ML solution (as
discussed in chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning
(ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need for Best Practices
Enabling Trust in AI and ML”) which encompasses: Scientific and
Technical Trust; Institutional Trust; System-of-science Trust;
Beneficiary Trust; Delivery Trust; Regulatory Trust; and Ethical Trust.
We can codify the above as 4 best practices:

Best Practice 5.1

Methods developers should strive to characterize the new methods
according to the dimensions of theoretical and empirical properties.

Best Practice 5.2

Methods developers should carefully disclose the known and unknown
properties of new methods at each stage of their development and provide
full evidence for how these properties were established.

Best Practice 5.3

Methods adopters and evaluators (users, funding agencies, editorial
boards etc.) should seek to obtain valid information according to the
dimensions of theoretical and empirical properties for every method,
tool, and system under consideration.

Best Practice 5.4

Methods adopters and evaluators should map the dimensions of theoretical
and empirical properties for every method, tool, and system under
consideration to the problem at hand and select methods based on best
matching of method properties to problem needs.

Major pitfalls can and do ensue when the above best practices are not
followed. In chapter “Lessons Learned from Historical Failures,
Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In Healthcare and the Health
Sciences. Enduring problems, and the role of Best Practices” we will
discuss many case studies of real-life dire consequences of failing to
follow these best practices.

Pitfall 5.1

Developing methods with theoretical and empirical properties that are:

1.  (a)

    Unknown, or

     

2.  (b)

    Poorly characterized in disclosures and technical, scientific or
    commercial communications and publications, or

     

3.  (c)

    Clearly stated (disclosed) properties but not proven, or

     

4.  (d)

    Not matching the characteristics of the problem to be solved at the
    level of performance and trust needed opens the possibility for
    major errors, under-performance, poor safety, unacceptable
    cost-effectiveness, and lack of trust in AI.

     

Best Practice Workflow to Establish the Properties of any New or Pre-Existing Method, Tool or System

In the remainder of the present chapter we will outline a best practice
workflow, shown in Figs. 4, and 5 that can be used to create new (Fig.
4) or establish the properties of any pre-existing (Fig. 5) method, tool
or system, so that a rational, effective and efficient solution to the
problem at hand can be identified as per the guidelines 5.1–5.4.

[]

A flow diagram for A I or M L methods. Rigorous problem definition is
followed by theoretical analysis, first-pass algorithms, theoretical
properties of algorithms, algorithm refinements, and empirically tested
algorithms in controlled conditions and real life with and without known
answers.

[]

A flow diagram for A I or M L method evaluation. Appraisal of operating
problem domain specification precision is followed by theoretical
analysis of domain, theoretical properties of methods, other
capabilities, extensions and derivatives, and empirical tests in
controlled and real-life conditions.

Throughout the description of the process details that follow, we will
highlight how the steps apply to several well-known methods (which
are detailed in chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”,
“An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal
ML”) and furthermore interleave a running in-depth example of putting
these principles to practice in a real-life method development context
(new method development for biomarker, signatures and biomedical pathway
discovery).

Step 1. Rigorous problem definition (in precise mathematical terms, and
with precise correspondence to health care or health science objectives)

It is always worthwhile to invest time to define the problem addressed
by new methods we plan to develop or evaluate, in very precise terms.
This enables an accurate and effective mapping of the data design and
modeling onto the most appropriate AI/ML methods if they exist, or
establishing the need for creating new methods (if methods do not exist
or their properties are not up to par with the specifications of the
problem solving effort at hand).

A mathematical-level description of the problem we wish to solve enables
theoretical (mathematical, algorithmic, information theoretic,
statistical, or other) appropriate analysis and proving that the problem
can or cannot be solved, within specific performance requirements. This
includes whether the problem can be solved in acceptably small time,
storage, or sample size and input costs. Or, if it cannot, whether, the
development effort needs to focus on subclasses of the broad problem
space that are solvable efficiently.

Unfortunately it is often the case that AI/ML is used by applying on
data and expecting that “useful” patterns will be revealed, or
“insights” will be generated without a precise description of what
constitutes a desired solution.

Real-life relevance. Characteristic examples of this pitfall in
healthcare AI/ML applications is seeking “useful patterns”, “anomalies”,
“practice variation”, “actionable insights”, “subpopulations”, or any
number of other fuzzy goals that are hard to critically and conclusively
evaluate in terms of meaningfully meeting the goals of the project.
Another common pitfall is in the risk and predictive modeling domains
where “accurate” algorithms (or models) are being sought without
reference to the degree of accuracy expressed in some evaluation scale,
that is required to advance the goals of the project at hand.

In the health sciences, a characteristic example of this pitfall is in
bioinformatics analyses of high-dimensional omic molecular data where
application of AI/ML methods is used to reveal “biological insights”,
“structure in data”, “shape of the data”, “clusters”, “pathways”,
“signatures”, “gene lists”, often with very imprecise or inconsistent
language about what exactly each one of these entities is meant to
encompass, or about how discovering them will enable a specific
scientific investigation, answer a concrete hypothesis, or generate
results with practical clinical, scientific or technological value.
Often such fuzzy goals and results are combined with ex post facto
narratives by the authors of the study that overlay meaning and
significance to the findings although they may inherently lack such
meaning.

The ability of experts to create explanations in their field is an
important component of their professional success [4]. A serious
possibility exists that the domain expert investigators may be prone to
creating (on the surface) convincing narratives around any set of
results, even random ones, however. The term Scientific Apophenia
describes the tendency to find evidence of order where none exists in
scientific results [5]. The human mind is a powerful recognizer of
patterns but is also subject to seeing patterns over random sequences
and conversely, believing that non-random patterns are random [6].

Moreover some pattern may emerge out of random structures as a result of
mathematical necessity as studied by Ramsey Theory [7]. For example, in
any group of 6 people, by mathematical necessity, either at least three
of them are (pairwise) mutual strangers or at least three of them are
(pairwise) mutual acquaintances. The reader can see the relevance of
this theorem to, e.g., interpreting bioinformatics analyses describing
clusters among genes or other molecules. Such clusters even, if randomly
generated, will contain structured patterns of known relationships and
in turn will give credence to the (false) validity of previously unknown
relationships.

The requirement for rigorous problem definitions prevents such problems
early in the discovery process, at a stage where the very methods used
for discovery are formulated and validated.

Another common pitfall of new method development related to defining the
goals of methods is to define them in mathematical terms but without
establishing how the mathematical goal maps to the health science
discovery goals, or clinical value, or how it addresses known
limitations of existing methods. For example, the problem of topological
clustering can be very precisely defined (and is a worthwhile and
non-trivial mathematical theoretical endeavor), however it is not clear
how solving this class of problems overcomes practical limitations of
existing methods for concrete health problems.

A related pitfall to imprecise problem definitions is that of
“re-inventing the wheel”, that is creating an unnecessary new solution
to a problem for which equally good or better solutions exist. In the
history and practice of AI/ML re-invention of solutions to problems with
established solutions is unfortunately rampant. For example, numerous
pathway reverse engineering methods have been proposed in bioinformatics
without leveraging or acknowledging the mathematically and
algorithmically robust literature on causal discovery or improving upon
their performance. Similarly the kernel regression method has been
re-discovered several times in recent decades. In yet another example,
numerous heuristic feature selection algorithms with “non-redundancy”
properties have been proposed well after several sound, complete and
efficient Markov Boundary algorithms (that solve this class of problem
optimally) had been previously introduced, validated and successfully
applied.

Pitfall 5.2

Evaluating the success of methods with poorly defined objectives, by
employing ex post facto expert narratives as a proxy of “validity”.

Pitfall 5.3

Defining the goals of methods in mathematical terms but without
establishing how the mathematical goals map to the healthcare or health
science discovery goals.

Pitfall 5.4

Reinventing the wheel: whereby a new method is introduced but it has
been previously discovered yet ignored (willfully or not) by the “new”
method developers.

Pitfall 5.5

Reinventing a method but make it worse to established methods
(…“reinventing the wheel and making it square”!).

- In-depth real-life example for step 1 (Rigorous problem definition):
  Development and evaluation of scalable discovery methods of biomarkers
  and molecular pathways from high dimensional biomedical data.

- Investigators started by asking: how can we make this problem
  concrete? Biomarkers are a diverse group of conceptual entities which
  across the literature includes the following: (1) substitutes (proxy
  outcomes) for outcomes in clinical trials; (2) downstream effects of
  interventions that are indicative of toxicity and adverse events; (3)
  complex computable models (aka “signatures”) that can be used to
  diagnose, prognosticate or precision-treat patients; Pathways, on the
  other hand, are causal subsystems in bigger healthcare or biological
  systems with defined functions and modularity. Pathways can be
  instrumental in revealing drug targets for new therapeutics.
  Biomarkers are involved in one or more drug target pathways [8–10].

- One can see that the general concepts of biomarkers and related
  disease or drug pathways includes, therefore, both predictive and
  causal modeling which indicates that one would need to develop methods
  that seamlessly support both types of reasoning. In addition, such
  development is sensitive to the need for discovery and modeling with
  very high dimensional and often low sample size datasets.

- One natural way to frame the predictive/prognostic/outcome surrogate
  biomarker discovery aspect is as a feature selection problem, and the
  causal aspect as a causal induction problem. Recall from chapters
  “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and
  Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
  and Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML” that the feature
  selection problem in its simplest standard form can be stated as:
  given a distribution P, with variable set V including a response
  variable (“target”) T, and data sampled iid from P, find the smallest
  set of variables S in V such that S contains all predictive
  information about T in P. The observational causal induction problem
  can be stated as: given a distribution P, generated by a causal
  process C comprising a variable set V including a response variable
  (“target”) T, and data sampled iid from P, without interventions on V,
  find the set of ordered relations (Vi,Vj) such that Vi directly causes
  Vj, whereby the causal semantics are as follows: Vi, temporally
  precedes Vj and a randomized experiment determining values of Vi
  yields changes in the distribution of Vj (compared to not manipulating
  Vi).

- These definitions directly point to three computational and
  mathematical frameworks for AI/ML modeling addressing the problem
  definitions: first, theory of relevancy; second, theory of causal
  graph induction; and third, theory of Bayesian Networks and in
  particular Markov Boundaries [11–14].

Step 2. Theoretical analysis of problem (complexity, problem space
characteristics etc.)

The second step, after the method goals are precisely defined, is to
conduct theoretical analysis that shows the characteristics of the
problem, across all possible AI/ML methods that could be employed. This
at first glance may seem to the non-expert exceedingly hard, or even
impossible, since there is an infinity of possible AI/ML algorithms that
one can devise. In practice, a precise and thoughtful problem definition
in step 1 of the development process presented, often makes it feasible
or even easy to derive properties by mapping the problem considered
(i.e., by establishing its correspondence) to known problems which
themselves have established properties.

For example, recall from chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML
Systems” one of the foundational achievements of computer science is the
theoretical toolkit to prove that a problem class has a certain
computational complexity. Similarly, the whole practice of Operations
Research relies on having a catalog of prototypical problems with
efficient solution algorithms such that practitioners can solve infinite
problems just by mapping them to the smaller set of pre-established
archetypal problem solutions [15].

If such mapping is not possible, the methods developers or evaluators
can apply other established more granular and general-purpose techniques
from the field of design and analysis of algorithms to understand the
feasibility and hardness of the problem space [16].

- Real-life example for step 2 (Theoretical analysis of problem).
  Development or evaluation of scalable discovery methods of biomarkers
  and molecular pathways from high dimensional biomedical data,
  CONTINUED.

- How one would go about characterizing the theoretical properties of
  the problem as formally defined in step1? Recall from chapters
  “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and
  Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
  and Health Science” that existing theory of relevancy includes the
  Kohavi-John framework (K-J) which differentiates between strongly
  relevant, weakly relevant and irrelevant features. Strongly relevant
  features in K-J theory are features that have unique information and
  can never be dropped by feature selection without loss of predictive
  signal. Weakly relevant features are predictive but lack unique
  signal, thus can be dropped by feature selection without loss of
  predictivity. Irrelevant features carry no signal so they are
  effectively noise (for the target T) and can be dismissed by feature
  selection. So there is a theory guiding the discovery of predictive
  biomarkers. What about the causal aspect?

- As we saw, the connective tissue between causation, feature selection
  and causal discovery is given, locally around a target variable T, by
  the Markov Boundary (MB) of T. Specifically, a Markov Blanket of T is
  any set of variables that renders all other variables in the data
  independent of T, once we know the Markov Blanket variables. A Markov
  Boundary is a minimal Markov Blanket which means that we cannot
  discard any member of the Markov Boundary without losing its Markov
  Blanket property. Moreover in a vast family of distributions (the
  majority of all possible distributions including all distributions
  modeled by classical statistics), called Faithful Distributions, and
  when no latent variables are present,: (a) there is always a single
  Markov Boundary and (b) the Markov Boundary comprises the direct
  causes, plus direct effects plus direct causes of the direct effects
  of T (so-called “spouses” of T). Thus, the Markov Boundary contains
  the local causal pathway around T (minus those spouses that lack
  causal edges to T). Moreover because BNs are probability and decision
  theoretically sound, MBs are also consistent with probability and
  decision theory. Finally, the Markov Boundary feature selection is
  connected with K-J relevancy since in Faithful distributions the
  strongly relevant features are the members of the Markov
  Boundary [11–14].

- So far the problem space was well-characterized, looked feasible and
  the natural next question was what are algorithms that solve it?

Step 3. First-pass algorithms solving problem

The third stage of new AI/ML method development is a first attempt at
identifying or (if none exists) creating an algorithmic method that
solves the problem as previously defined and analyzed. If the problem
has been precisely defined and its properties established in steps 1 and
2, then it is often easy to modify existing methods or put together a
first algorithm that solves the problem. Typically this first-pass
solution is not meant to be optimally efficient, as such optimization is
attempted in subsequent steps. Existing method evaluation may also apply
here if the existing method is an early-stage one.

- Real-life example for step 3 (First-pass algorithms solving the
  problem). Development or evaluation of scalable discovery methods of
  biomarkers and molecular pathways from high dimensional biomedical
  data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example, the theoretical specifications and analysis
  described above provide solid footing for moving to first-pass
  algorithm development. Algorithms that solve the example problem do
  exist (chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An
  Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable
  in Healthcare and Health Science”) and have solid properties, however
  for illustrative and pedagogical purposes we will consider their
  development at the time that they did not exist and had to be
  invented.

- Developing new such algorithms was a necessity in the early 00s
  because at the time there was no sound and scalable algorithms for
  discovery of Markov Boundaries from data. In principle, one could use
  existing causal graph induction algorithms to discover the whole graph
  and then extract the Markov Boundaries from it. However the algorithms
  were not scalable beyond approx. 100 variables in practice, and it had
  been shown that learning the causal graph with Bayesian search and
  score algorithms was NP-Hard, whereas the Conditional Independence and
  constraint-based algorithm family was worst case exponential (chapter
  “Foundations of Causal ML”). Heuristic algorithms introduced by Kohler
  and Sahami in 1996 and by Cooper et al. in 1997 were informative first
  attempts but not sound. In the Kohler-Sahami case they were also poor
  empirical performers, whereas the Cooper et al. algorithm was better
  performer in small data but was not scalable in compute time or sample
  size. Another recent (at the time) algorithm by Margaritis and Thrun
  was sound but not scalable and also not sample efficient. With these
  necessities in mind Tsamardinos and Aliferis invented a novel sound
  and scalable algorithm IAMB, and variants, that could be instantiated
  in a variety of ways (e.g. by combining it with full-graph algorithms
  for intermediate results pruning or post-processing) [18–21].

Step 4. Theoretical properties of first pass algorithms: focus on
representation power, soundness and completeness.

Once a first algorithm that prima facie solves the problem has been
created, its key theoretical properties should ideally be established,
typically under (a) sufficient or necessary conditions, or (b)
sufficient and necessary conditions. If analysis shows that no such
conditions exist, or that they are too narrow and unworkable in real
life conditions, then revisiting step 3 is mandated and steps 3 and 4
are iterated until a method has been identified that guarantees
soundness and completeness (or reasonable approximations thereof) under
real-life realistic conditions.

- Real-life example for step 4 (Theoretical properties of first pass
  algorithms: focus on representation power, soundness and
  completeness). Development or evaluation of scalable discovery methods
  of biomarkers and molecular pathways from high dimensional biomedical
  data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example and from the viewpoint of when the
  corresponding development steps were conducted, the IAMB algorithm
  family was theoretically sound and complete. In preliminary empirical
  analyses its inventors established that it is both sound and scalable.
  IAMB was however a definitional Markov Boundary algorithm meaning it
  would apply the definition of the Markov Boundary in each step of its
  operation. This entailed that it would conduct conditional
  independence tests with large sets of variables which increased its
  sample size needs to exponentially large to the number of conditioning
  variables. So, refinements and optimizations were needed which led to
  a second (more refined) family of algorithms (see below).

Step 5. Algorithm refinements, extensions and derivatives

Step 5 is a multi-faceted and critical step in the sense that its
success will determine the practical utility of the new method. This is
the step where various optimizations and adaptations to real life
performance requirements will take place. This step has several
sub-steps that may require many years’ worth of incremental
improvements. Hardly ever the full range of optimizations is
accomplished close to the first time a method appears in the literature.
It is not uncommon for such efforts to constitute a career-long research
program of the method innovators and their teams, as well as independent
researchers. The refinement sub-steps comprise:

Step 5.a. Performance Optimizations that cover achieving high
computational efficiency for learning and for using models;
optimizations for other costs (for example cost to obtain and store
input data and run analyses on a compute environment, either at model
discovery or at model deployment time); efficient space complexity for
learning, storing and using models; efficient sample complexity and
establishing learning curves and broad power-sample requirements.

- Real-life example for step 5.a. (Performance Optimizations - Sample
  efficient algorithms and going beyond local pathways). Development or
  evaluation of scalable discovery methods of biomarkers and molecular
  pathways from high dimensional biomedical data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example, the second-pass algorithms designed to
  overcome IAMB’s sample size inefficiency described earlier was HITON
  and MMMB. These were compositional algorithms, that is, instead of
  applying the definition of Markov Boundary, they composed it
  edge-by-edge (exploiting the link between graphical and
  probabilistic Markov Boundaries and causality).

- At the core of the causal discovery problem from observational data
  there is a foundational theorem (chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”)
  that states that to establish a direct edge between variables Vi and
  Vj one must establish the conditional dependence of these variables
  given every subset of the remainder of the variables in the data [13].
  This is clearly an exponential cost operation in both compute time and
  sample, which becomes super-astronomical in datasets with more than a
  few dozen variables. Thus smart algorithms are needed to exploit the
  sparsity of causal processes and identify quickly a single subset that
  shows independence so that the vast majority of tests can be
  omitted from computations.

- With this asymmetry in mind, the designers of HITON and MMMB sought to
  apply informed search functions that would identify quickly a single
  subset needed to establish that variable Vi was not directly linked to
  T, for every Vi in the data. Whereas the algorithms are still
  worst-case exponential (because the problem is itself worst-case
  exponential regardless of algorithm), their exponentiality is directly
  linked to the connectivity of the underlying causal structure. For
  sparse or predominantly sparse causal data generating processes (as
  most biological networks are, for example), the majority of the causal
  process can be identified fast if the algorithms’ time complexity is
  adaptive to the connectivity. Both HITON and MMMB are locally adaptive
  to the hardness of the causal problem at hand. Additional variants
  return direct causes and effects only (HITON-PC, MMPC) and Markov
  Boundaries (HITON-MB, MMMB).

- Because of the compositional nature of this second generation of
  algorithms these investigators and their collaborators were able to
  introduce algorithm variants that discover not just the Markov
  Boundary for T, but also the local causal pathways (causal
  neighborhood) only around T (i.e. without need to find spouses and
  remove them with post processing), also local causal regions of depth
  k (depth specified by the user), and the full causal graph by inducing
  all local causal edges around every variable in the data (algorithm
  MMHC and it generalized family LGL) [22–24].

Step 5.b. Parallelization, distributed/federated, sequential, chunked,
versions [25–27]. These are derivative and enhanced forms of the main
algorithmic solution with the following properties:

- Parallel algorithms: can be run in parallel computing architectures
  and environments whereby the computational steps are divided among
  many processors. The parallelization can be coarse, intermediate, or
  fine grain, depending on how large and complicated are the unit
  computations divided among the parallel processors.

- Distributed/federated algorithms: operate across federated and
  distributed databases which exist in diverse locations without the
  need to bring all data into a centralized database and computing
  environment.

- Sequential algorithms operate in steps corresponding to incremental
  availability of input data, for example with increasing sample size
  over time, or with increasing sets of variables over time. At each
  processing step, a different set of results is obtained that over time
  increases in quality (i.e., converges to the right solution or
  approximation thereof).

- Chunked algorithms address the situation where data is so large that
  overwhelms the memory limits of the computing environment. The data is
  divided then in chunks, each one of which fits in memory, and analysis
  proceeds across all chunks until all data is analyzed and final
  results obtained.

- Real-life example for step 5.b. (Performance Optimizations -
  Parallelization, distributed/federated, sequential, chunked,
  versions). Development or evaluation of scalable discovery methods of
  biomarkers and molecular pathways from high dimensional biomedical
  data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example, and motivated by the need to process datasets
  with vast numbers of variables not fitting in single-computer memories
  of the time, the investigator team was also forced to invent a chunked
  version of IAMB and HITON. Because of the nature of these algorithms
  it was immediately obvious that they can also be modified to obtain
  parallel, distributed, and sequential versions as well. Over the
  years, the investigator team conducted massive experiments in parallel
  compute clusters taking advantage of these algorithms. These
  algorithms also gave important insights on the feasibility and
  requirements for sound federated Markov Boundary and causal discovery.
  For example, it was established that for sound federated/distributed
  Markov Boundary discovery exactly two passes of local processing was
  required plus one global step with the results from the first two
  passes, and a subset of variables had to be shared among all nodes
  depending on intermediate results [1, 28].

Step 5.c. Relaxing assumptions/requirements. This step corresponds to
efforts to relax the assumptions guaranteeing its properties and broaden
the space of conditions under which the new or existing method will have
the desired guaranteed properties.

Real-life relevance. For example, extending Bayesian classifiers from
restricted distributions with Naive Bayes, to algorithms that can
operate on all discrete distributions. Other examples include: extending
from discrete to continuous decision trees, extending single tree models
to ensembles of trees (e.g., Random Forests) that are more robust to
sampling variance, extending artificial neural networks from linearly
separable functions to non linearly-separable ones, extending SVM binary
classification to multi-class classification, extending SVMs from
noiseless data to noisy data, extending linear to non-linear SVMs,
extending standard Cox Proportional Hazards regression to accommodate
time-dependent covariate effects, extending causal discovery algorithms
that require no hidden (aka latent) variables to ones that can operate
in the presence of latents, etc. (see chapters “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML” for details and more examples).

- In-depth example for step 5.c. (Performance Optimizations: Relaxing
  assumptions/requirements allowing equivalence classes, latent
  variables, guided experimentation). Development or evaluation of
  scalable discovery methods of biomarkers and molecular pathways from
  high dimensional biomedical data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example, the methods outlined so far depended on two
  fundamental assumptions: one is Faithful distributions and the other
  is causal sufficiency (i.e., no unmeasured confounders). To address
  the former, the development team introduced new algorithms addressing
  distributions with information equivalences, i.e., distributions where
  several variable groups can have the same information regarding the
  target response. Such situations are very common in omics data,
  complex survey data, clinical data, and many other types of biomedical
  data. The result of information equivalency is the existence of
  multiple (not just one) Markov Boundaries and ambiguity of the causal
  pathways.

- Specifically, in such distributions there is an equivalence class
  containing multiple statistically indistinguishable MBs and local
  causal edges and the size of this class can be exponential to the
  number of variables. Statnikov et al. introduced a family of
  algorithms called TIE* which extract from data all MBs and local
  causal neighborhoods. TIE* algorithm family members are sound,
  complete and adaptable to the distribution at hand by choice of
  conditional independence tests and component subroutines (used for
  single Markov Boundary induction).

- The second relaxation concerning latent variables was addressed by
  post-processing the main algorithms’ results with algorithms that can
  detect presence of hidden variables (e.g., IC* and FCI, see chapter
  “Foundations of Causal ML”). Such algorithms could not be used for
  end-to-end analysis because they are not scalable and in most cases
  they are also error prone empirically.

- Another important algorithmic extension addressing both equivalence
  classes and latent variables was the introduction of algorithms that
  resolve these ambiguities by limited algorithm-guided experimentation.
  Specifically the ODLP algorithm family combines using MB and local
  neighborhood algorithms plus equivalency class algorithms and guides
  an experimenter to conduct a series of experiments that resolve
  statistical ambiguity due to latents and equivalence class due to
  information equivalency. The ODLP algorithm attempts to minimize the
  number of experiments and has worst-case number of experiments that is
  at most the total number of variables in the equivalence class of the
  local pathway [29–31].

Step 5.d. Generalized frameworks (generalized family of algorithms and
generalized conditions for performance guarantees).

This step involves extending the new method to a more general family of
interrelated similar methods. It also involves establishing testable
rules for instantiating the family into specific methods in that class,
and testable rules for guaranteeing that the properties of the family
will be shared by every method in that family (without further need to
prove these properties of empirically test them).

It is not always obvious if such generalizations are possible, and if
yes how to accomplish them. Thus it is not always pursued, especially in
initial stages of developing a new method. But whenever it is possible,
it confers a number of important benefits which we summarize here.
Developing a generalization of a fundamental method explains in
mathematically precise terms how the core method can be modified so
that:

1.  (a)

    It can address slightly different problem instance classes and
    situations;

     

2.  (b)

    To allow for modifications that do not alter its foundational
    nature;

     

3.  (c)

    It will enable other method developers to create variations without
    having to undergo the whole development process from scratch and at
    the same time inherit the main performance and other properties of
    the core method;

     

4.  (d)

    It will help understand other methods and their properties by
    showing how they relate to the generalized core method;

     

5.  (e)

    It will prevent confusion about apparently similar methods with
    different properties or apparently different methods with same
    properties; and

     

6.  (f)

    It will protect scientific priority claims and commercial
    intellectual property, by establishing which methods are just
    variations or derivatives of the original core methods, especially
    when such variations and derivatives were anticipated by the
    generalized framework.

     

Real-life relevance. Examples of generalized families of inter-related
algorithms are many and include: the Best-First-Search algorithm family
(chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”), the General
Linear Model (GLM) family (chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science”), the penalty+loss regularized classifier family (chapter “An
Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable
in Healthcare and Health Science”), the Generalized Local Learning (GLL)
and Local to Global causal discovery (LGL) algorithm families (chapters
“Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
and Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML”), and the TIE*
family for equivalence class modeling (chapters “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science”).

- In-depth example for step 5.d. (Performance Optimizations: Generalized
  frameworks). Development or evaluation of scalable discovery methods
  of biomarkers and molecular pathways from high dimensional biomedical
  data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example, of developing principled and scalable
  biomarker and pathway discovery algorithms, it was realized within the
  team developing these algorithms, that infinite variations could be
  had that would preserve the soundness, completeness and other desired
  properties of the first algorithms introduced. To facilitate the study
  and further analysis and development of the families of the algorithms
  in a systematic way and minimizing confusion, Aliferis at al
  introduced a generalization of HITON-PC/HITON-MB and MMMP/MMMB, and of
  MMHC.

- The former was termed GLL family and the latter LGL. Around the same
  time Statnikov and Aliferis introduced the generalized TIE family
  termed TIE*, and later generalized versions of ODLP and of
  parallel/distributed/sequential and chunked variants. Aliferis et al.
  introduced the notion of a 2-part Generative Algorithm Framework
  comprising:
  1.  1.

      A general template statement of the algorithm family.

       

  2.  2.

      Admissibility rules for instantiation of the template components.

       

- If the admissibility rules are followed when instantiating components,
  then this guarantees that the instantiated algorithm have guaranteed
  properties without the need for de novo theory or proofs.

- Figure 6 illustrates one instantiation of the GLL-PC generative
  template algorithm (shown in 6.a) by the admissibility rules of the
  Generative Algorithm Framework (shown in 6.b) to yield an infinity of
  algortihms with guaranteed properties such as the original MMPC
  (presented in 6.c). Contrary to the intricacy of the original MMPC,
  however, the generative framework describes the whole family of
  algorithms by specification of a few simple components.

- Moreover, a Generative Algorithm Framework does not allow just the
  re-creation and compact representation of pre-existing algorithms, but
  as shown by these investigators, several new instantiations of the
  original generalized algorithms were demonstrated and they matched or
  exceed empirical performance of the original set of algorithms in
  validation data. One of the new algorithms is shown in part (6.d) of
  the figure. The new instantiations exhibited different traces of
  navigating the solution space toward the correct (same) output,
  demonstrating that they are not just a rehash of known algorithms [1,
  29–32].

[]

A pseudocode for G L L P C. Approximate P C of T without symmetry check
is followed by symmetry check, true set of parents and children, return
a subset of E P C of T and a superset of P C of T, initialization, apply
heuristic function, elimination and interleaving strategies, and return
T P C of T.

[][][]

Step 5.e. Nested algorithms, embedding protocols and stacks,
interactions with data design.

Real-life relevance. Per traditional computer science and AI/ML
practice, algorithms can be used as subroutines in higher complexity
algorithms. For example, decision tree induction algorithms can be used
inside Random Forests. Weak learning algorithms can be used as
components of boosting algorithms. Algorithms of various kinds can be
components of Stacked ML models, and so on.

Generative Algorithm Frameworks can also be used to create more
complicated and hierarchically- nested algorithms families, creating
nested systems of generalized algorithms tackling an increasingly
complex problem-solving AI/ML construct. For example the GLL-PC
generative family is nested in the GLL_MB family, which is nested in the
TIE* family, which is nested in the ODLP* family. The nesting does not
force use of the most complex level algorithm. To the contrary, the
algorithms with smallest complexity that solve a problem are
sufficient for that problem.

Algorithms and their implementations are the conceptual and scientific
backbone and “engines” of real-life AI/ML. Complicated tools and
systems, designed to solve health science and healthcare problems are
almost always organized in complex data science “stacks”.

AI/ML (or data science) Stack: a hierarchically-integrated architecture
for AI/ML software system delivery comprising data input management at
the lower level, going upward to model selection, to error estimation,
to error management, to decision support delivery and end-user
interfacing, to embedding and healthcare integration, to model
monitoring and full model lifecycle support (see chapter “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” for details).

At the core of the ML stack is the ML protocol (see chapter “Foundations
and Properties of AI/ML Systems” and “The development process and
lifecycle of clinical grade and other safety and performance-sensitive
AI/ML models” for details).

- ML Protocol. A ML system architecture implements a ML method which can
  be understood as a combination of data design, algorithm, and model
  selection procedure that ideally will incorporate an error estimator
  procedure. The higher-level algorithm that combines the ML algorithms,
  data processing subroutines, model selection strategies and error
  estimators used, is the ML protocol.

- AI/ML “Pipelines”, Automodelers, and Platforms. These represent
  discrete software implementation entities embodying implementation of
  the chosen algorithms and protocol, plus all other layers of the full
  AI/ML stack and are designed to be used reproducibly, in either fully
  automatic mode (“automodeler”) or semi-automatically, or as a
  component of a broader modeling system (a “pipeline”). Platforms refer
  to even more complex software systems with additional facilities for
  user experimentation, model sandboxing, training, model development,
  integration with other enterprise systems, etc.

Best Practice 5.5

The properties of a ML algorithm can be negatively or positively
affected by the ML protocol to extreme degrees (see chapter “Lessons
Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In
Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring problems, and the Role of
Best Practices” for several important case studies that show the
immense and often under-appreciated practical consequences). Similarly
the data design can negatively or positively affect the ML protocol and
its embedded algorithms to extreme degrees. Therefore, it is imperative
to design AI/ML methods taking into account any positive or negative
interactions of data design with the protocols and embedded algorithms
employed.

- In-depth example for step 5.e. (Performance Optimizations: Nested
  algorithms, embedding protocols and stacks, interactions with data
  design). Development or evaluation of scalable discovery methods of
  biomarkers and molecular pathways from high dimensional biomedical
  data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example, of developing principled and scalable
  biomarker and pathway discovery algorithms, a core choice was made to
  design the algorithms and ML protocols with a focus on nested
  balanced cross validation as a “canonical” preferred model selection
  and error estimation protocol (see chapter “The Development Process
  and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
  Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” for more details). The anticipated
  data designs were primarily case-control or natural, cross-sectional
  or longitudinal, i.i.d. sample designs. As long as distributions were
  faithful or TIE, the algorithms were guaranteed to exhibit
  well-defined and desirable soundness, completeness, computational and
  sample efficiency properties. Deviations from these “canonical”
  designs were also tolerated but would need careful tailoring of the
  methods to data designs outside these “canonical” specifications.

- Many of the produced algorithms were embedded in software with data
  ingestion/transform, model selection, error estimation and adaptive
  selection among the core methods and state of the art comparators.
  Examples include the GEMS auto modeler system for microarray analysis,
  the FAST-Aims auto modeler system for Mass Spectrometry analysis, and
  several psychiatry-oriented, as well as bioinformatics, clinical and
  translational predictive and causal modeling stacks and pipelines. The
  construction of the auto modelers was further guided by extensive
  benchmarking of these and comparator methods and cross-referencing to
  expert analyses in the literature on the same datasets. These
  empirical performance benchmark studies measured a level of
  performance that matched or exceeded that of faculty level experts in
  AI/ML with the added advantage of almost immediate analysis, at no
  cost other than an inexpensive laptop or desktop [33–36].

- Figure 7 shows components of the GEMS auto modeler.

[]

A flow diagram, a screenshot, and a line graph. a. Wizard user interface
is followed by computational engine, cross-validation, performance
computation, gene selection, and classification. b. GEMS wizard with
step 4 out of 9 and project summary. c. The accuracy of GEMS is more
than primary studies.

[]

Step 5.f. Explanation, clarity, and transparency

This step addresses the needs for transparency and clarity in the
method’s semantics, syntax, inference mechanisms and mode of operation,
and including its transparency, explainability, and ability for humans
to inspect and understand the models produced by the new AI/ML method
and of the operations that led to these models.

We frequently refer to AI/ML methods as being “black box, and
“transparent”, “explainable”, or “open box”.

For the purposes of the present book we will define:

- Black box AI/ML methods and/or models: are methods or models for which
  the user (and possibly even the developer) know only the inputs and
  outputs but not the internal operation; or, alternatively, the
  internal operation is accessible but it is not readily fully
  interpretable by humans.

- Transparent (aka explainable, open, or white, or clear box) are
  methods or models for which the user and the developer know not only
  the inputs and outputs but also the internal operation which is
  readily fully interpretable by humans.

The transparency of the new method and its models are critical for (a)
debugging the method and models (see chapter “Characterizing, Diagnosing
and Managing the Risk of Error of ML and AI Models in Clinical and
Organizational Application”), and (b) managing risks associated with its
use and establishing trust in the AI/ML method and its outputs (see
chapters “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) for
Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need for Best Practices Enabling
Trust in AI and ML” and “Characterizing, Diagnosing and Managing the
Risk of Error of ML and AI Models in Clinical and Organizational
Application”), as well as “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal
Implications (ELSI)”).

When AI/ML methods are transparent we can also explain and justify their
results including on a case-by-case, input-output basis. However there
is a somewhat subtle but important distinction between explanation by
translation and other forms of justification which is germane to the
purposes of best practices in AI/ML.

- Justification of a method or a model (and their outputs) is any
  argument that supports the validity of the method, the models produced
  by it, and the outputs produced by the models.

- Explanation of a method or model (and their outputs) by functional
  translation is a justification of the method or model’s logic by fully
  equivalent translation in humanly-understandable language.

- Where:

- Human understandable language includes natural language but also other
  formalisms readily understood by humans such as decision diagrams,
  decision trees, propositional and first order logic, etc.

A common pitfall in AI/ML is providing peripheral/oblique and thus
inadequate justifications of the model and its decisions which may be
persuasive in some settings, but do not “open” the black box in the
sense of creating a human-understandable and mathematically equivalent
model to the black box model. For example, consider a hypothetical
similarity-based “explanation” module of a neural network AI/ML model
using exemplars. The module attempts to justify model decisions on a
case C, by presenting a small number of cases similar to C,  with gold
standard labels same as the model’s prediction for C. Because the neural
network does not make decisions based on similarity to exemplars, this
whole justification exercise  amounts to a “sleight of hand”. It can
also be argued that local simple (e.g. linear) approximations to a
very complex decision functions underlying the black box models, attempt
to justify the decisions of the model are generally meaningful and
trustworthy by examining a simplified version of the local individual
decisions of the neural net but not explaining the global complex
inductive logic of the model and its generalization.

We also highlight the distinction between “open source” and “closed
source” software implementing AI/ML methods and models.

- Open source software is software whose source code is at minimum open
  for inspection. Depending on the specific licensing terms of open
  source software, it may or not come with other rights granted, such as
  the right to modify the source code and release such modifications
  under same or different licensing terms.

- Closed source (or proprietary) software is software with restrictions
  on code inspection, use, modifications/derivatives creation, sharing
  derivatives, or sharing the software.

A pitfall in AI/ML is conflating “open source” for open box” and “closed
source” for “black box” software.

In reality an open source implementation of a method or model does not
entail “open box” status, and a “closed-source” software does not entail
“black box status. Artificial neural Network models are notoriously
“black box” ones, yet this does not change if we have access to the code
implementing them, or the right to modify and
re-distribute implementation code. Conversely, a closed source
implementation of, for example the ID3 decision tree algorithm, can be
transparent in terms of both the algorithm used (which is well
understood and openly accessible in the literature, and may also be
accessible by licensed users), and the models it produces (i.e.,
decision trees which are intuitive and readily understood by
humans). The latter case requires that the disclosures of the algorithms
used by the software are (a) complete and (b) accurate.

Pitfall 5.6

Providing persuasive but peripheral/oblique justifications that lack
fidelity to the AI/ML method, the models produced by them and their
decisions.

Pitfall 5.7

Confusing “open source” for “transparent” and “closed source” for black
box”.

In this section we covered only introductory concepts about
explainability, since at the method development stage it is
typically quite clear whether the method and its models are
interpretable. In chapter “The development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”
we will delve into the details of explainable AI (XAI) [38],
interpretable ML [39] and some of the key techniques and nuances of
explaining back box models.

- In-depth example for step 5.f. (Performance Optimizations:
  Explanation, clarity, and transparency). Development or evaluation of
  scalable discovery methods of biomarkers and molecular pathways from
  high dimensional biomedical data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example, of developing principled and scalable
  biomarker and pathway discovery algorithms, a core choice was made to
  design the algorithms and ML protocols within a causal graphical
  modeling framework. Causal graphs are very intuitive representations
  of causality, and Markov Boundaries have an intuitive causal and
  probabilistic meaning and lead to very compact and transparent models
  as well. Depending on the classifier used (e.g., decision trees,
  conditional probability tables/heatpmaps, rules, regression) results
  can be readily reviewed by human non-experts. In addition, the team
  members devised a more sophisticated method whereby if the MB was used
  to create black box models (because they were optimally predictive) or
  for any black box model for that matter, data would be sampled from
  the black box model and then a meta learning step involving MB
  induction and learning decision tree models over the MB that were
  equivalent to the black box, but perfectly transparent to humans. This
  explanation method was used to understand the black box reasoning of
  human physicians in the diagnosis of melanoma by Sboner et al. [40,
  41]. More details are presented in chapter “The Development Process
  and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
  Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” in the context of general
  explanation of black box models.

Step 6. Empirically test algorithms in controlled conditions

The next stage in the development of new AI/ML methods is testing them
in controlled conditions whereby they are given data that comply with
the sufficient or necessary and sufficient conditions for their
theoretical performance properties to hold. In these empirical tests,
developers also vary parameters such as sample size, variable
measurement noise, strength of signal for the functions to be learnt,
dimensionality of the data as well as various parameters relevant to the
specific characteristics of the learning methods (as dictated by their
properties established in previous steps) The methods are also tested
with data where assumptions are violated to varying degree and the
effect on performance characteristics is studied.

There are four important types of controlled condition data testing:

1.  (a)

    Simulated data: where developers or other evaluators first define a
    mathematical or computational model representing the data generating
    function to be learned. Then they sample from this function via
    simulation, give the data to the AI/ML method and study its
    performance characteristics.

     

2.  (b)

    Label-reshuffled data: these are real data where evaluators randomly
    re-assign the response variable’s values (aka “labels”) across the
    dataset (Fig. 8). This has the effect of maintaining the real joint
    distribution of inputs, as well as the real marginal distribution of
    response variable, but decoupling the inputs from outputs, so that
    over multiple such label-reshuffled datasets, on average there is no
    signal to be learned. This type of simulation is essential for
    testing ML methods’ error estimation procedures. It is also a
    valuable tool for testing a learnt model against the hull hypothesis
    of no predictive signal in the data [42, 43]. See also chapter
    “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and
    Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning
    and AI” on model over confidence for more details.

     

3.  (c)

    Re-simulated data. Resimulation attempts to create controlled data
    simulations that are ideally hi-fidelity approximations of real data
    distributions of interest. Resimulation works as follows [32, 44]:
    - We start with one or more real life datasets D^(real) where all
      variables (including response variables) have known values.

    - Then we use a learning algorithm A to learn one or more models Mi
      capturing all or at least some desired characteristics of the
      real-life distribution from which the real data was sampled from.

    - Then we sample from the encoded distribution in Mi using
      simulation (“resimulation” in his context) creating resimulated
      data D^(resim).

    - Then we test the properties of D^(resim) against the real data
      D^(real). A variety of distribution similarity metrics can be used
      as well as custom predictive modeling, and custom tests of
      properties can be used for establishing that the resimulated data
      is a hi-fidelity representation of the real data.

    - If adjustments are needed, we can iterate between the second and
      fourth steps until sufficiently accurate resimulated data is
      obtained.

    - Once we have the hi-fidelity resimulated data we can now feed it
      in the new method, while varying parameters and obtain performance
      metrics just like in the case of simple simulation.

    A conceptual nuance about resimulation is that if the resimulated
    data is perfectly indistinguishable from real data in all modeling
    aspects of interest to us (not just modeling the joint
    distribution), that implies that algorithm A is an optimal algorithm
    for discovery for the data generating function of the real
    distribution. Algorithm A would then represent a correct discovery
    algorithm procedure, rendering further method development effort
    potentially unnecessary (barring efficiency considerations). In
    common practice, we rarely have a perfect algorithm A at hand when
    performing resimulations. Instead we use algorithms that capture
    simplified and controllable aspects of the real data and therefore
    the performance of our new method is (loosely) an upper bound on the
    performance with real data. The rationale being that, if a new
    method cannot learn the process that creates the simplified version
    of real data D^(real), i.e., D^(resim), then the new method will
    most likely not be able to learn much more complicated real life
    data generating functions. If a perfect algortihm A exists in terms
    of quality of output, then the new algorithms may be more efficient
    ones. 

     

4.  (d)

    Statistical tests for distributional or other conditions for method
    correctness. These typically encompass statistical tests that do not
    test the algorithms but the data per se. For example, if an
    algorithm is devised to create regression models under multivariate
    normality of the data, we can test the real data for conformance to
    this assumption. This type of test is an important supplement to
    simulation studies and may also serve as a preferred alternative if
    no credible simulation or resimulation can be designed, and the
    algorithm’s theory of correctness is well established.

     

[]

3 histograms. a. Frequency versus area under R O C. The bars have a
fluctuating normal distribution between 0.6 and 0.9, with uninformative
prediction at 0.5 on the x-axis. b and c. Probabilities of observing
versus A U C. Original is at around 0.7 and 0.5 for Beer et al and
Bhattacharjee et al.

- In-depth example for step 6 (Empirically test algorithms in controlled
  conditions). Development or evaluation of scalable discovery methods
  of biomarkers and molecular pathways from high dimensional biomedical
  data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example, of developing principled and scalable
  biomarker and pathway discovery algorithms, all of the algorithms
  discussed in section “Over- and Under-Interpreting Results”, were
  tested extensively with simulated and resimulated data. These
  experiments revealed a number of important properties including: (1)
  verifying the MB theoretical expectation of maximum compactness and
  maximum predicitivity; (2) verified causal consistency; (3) showed
  high stability; (4) showed large added value over comparators and over
  random selection; (5) showed the role of various hyperparameters; (6)
  established the natural false discovery rate control in the GLL
  algorithm family that protecting against false positives due to
  conducting massive numbers of conditional independence tests; (8)
  showed the role of inclusion heuristics for computational
  efficiency; (9) demonstrated how perilous is to use non causal
  comparator methods to infer causality (something that GLL algorithms
  accomplish very well); and (10) showed the relatively large
  insensitivity of the algorithms to hyperparameter choice [1, 32].

Step 7. Empirically test algorithms in real life data with known
answers/solutions

This testing involves real data where known gold standard answers have
been established by prior research. This is a very informative testing
stage because a myriad of factors may exist in real data that have not
been anticipated in theoretical analysis or in simulations. Conversely,
it is also possible for real data to exhibit higher simplicity than what
was anticipated by methods’ developers which if true, typically leads to
relaxing some of the related assumptions of the new method.

We re-iterate for emphasis that there are two reasons why we do not jump
directly to step 7 (i.e., omitting empirical testing under controlled
conditions):

First, real data does not afford full control of all relevant parameters
that may influence the new method’s performance. For example, we cannot
arbitrarily control sample size, or signal strength, or dimensionality,
or % of unmeasured variables, connectivity of the causal data generating
process, etc. in real data since these factors have fixed and in many
cases unknown characteristics in the available real datasets.

Second, real data with known high quality answers may be very limited
and we do not wish to overfit the new method development to a small
number of validation datasets (as will invariably happen, see chapter
“Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and
Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and
AI” on overfitting).

Empirically testing new and existing methods with real data with known
answers typically follows three designs:

1.  1.

    Centralized benchmark design. A small group of expert data
    scientists organize and execute a series of tests of a new or
    existing method using several datasets and several state of the art
    alternative methods. Ideally all reasonable alternatives and
    baseline comparators including the best known methods for this type
    of problem are included and are executed according to the best known
    specifications (e.g., the specifications provided by their
    inventors). The datasets used are sufficient to cover a wide range
    of data typically encountered in the application domain. A multitude
    of factors are varied and their effects studied. Simulated and
    resimulated data may also be included a priori or ante hoc (e.g., to
    shed light on behaviors in real data). Example such studies are [1,
    30–32, 37, 45–48, 51, 54–56, 59, 60].

     

2.  2.

    Distributed benchmark design. This design is a variation of the
    centralized benchmark and typically occurs in the context of a
    scientific or industry consortium or coalition. A central team of
    experts organizes a benchmark similar to design 1 however analyses
    are conducted by several groups within the consortium. Each group
    may employ different methods, protocols, etc., and this natural
    variation is studied by the organizers who analyze results across
    participating teams. For an example of this design see [49].

     

3.  3.

    Public challenge design. This design is a variation of the
    distributed benchmark and typically occurs in the context of a
    participatory science framework. A central team of experts or a
    challenge organization organizes the challenge typically with one or
    few datasets and a fixed data design. Analyses are conducted by
    volunteers across the globe. Each group may employ different
    methods, protocols, etc., and this natural variation is studied by
    the organizers who analyze results across participating teams. For
    an example of this design see [44].

     

Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of each design and points to
strengths and weakness.

Table 1

Empirical testing of AI/ML with real data and know answers: Three
alternative designs (green: positive characteristics, red: weaknesses)

[]

A table for empirical testing with real data and known answers. The
ideally-conducted challenges, centralized benchmark studies, and
distributed benchmark studies for 14 characteristics are listed. The
characteristics include led by, conducted by, and participatory and open
science.

ML challenges serve two fundamental purposes. One is the education of
scientists from different fields about the problems the challenge
addresses and giving them data, and a platform to experiment. The second
purpose is to explore which algorithmic methods are better at a
particular point in time for a particular problem. Well-designed
challenges can generate valuable information and enhance
interdisciplinary engagement. Poorly-designed challenges (which in our
estimation are the majority, currently) can be very misleading designs
with respect to evaluating AI/ML methods. We elaborate in the following
pitfall:

Pitfall 5.8

Issues and pitfalls of ML challenges. In many if not most cases,
challenges suffer from fixing the data design and the error estimation
thus removing from consideration two out of the three determinants of ML
success (i.e., data design, ML model selection and error estimation
protocol, algorithm).

Challenges also routinely restrict the design of modeling by
pre-selecting variables, and over-simplifying the statement of problems,
sometimes to meaningless extremes.

Challenges also often suffer from incomplete or highly biased
representation in the competitor pool. Typically participants in
challenges are either students or interested scientists who have
competencies in areas unrelated  to AI/ML.

Another limitation is that not all appropriate algorithms are entered in
a challenge and when they enter, they are not necessarily
executed according to optimal specifications.

Finally, challenges typically involve a very small number of datasets
that do not represent a large domain. Such representative coverage
typically requires dozens of datasets or more in the same comparison.

Despite these limitations, a select number of challenges that are
designed to a high degree of quality, when interpreted carefully and
with the appropriate qualifications, can provide valuable empirical
scientific information. For examples of well-designed, high quality, and
carefully interpreted challenges the reader may refer to the challenges
conducted by the ChaLearn organization [50].

Best Practice 5.6

The preferred design for validating AI/Ml methods with real life data
with known answers is the centralized benchmark design. Distributed
benchmark designs, whenever feasible, add value by exploring natural
variation in how methods are applied by experts. Finally competitions
have several intrinsic limitations and have to be interpreted carefully.

- In-depth example for step 7 (Empirically test algorithms in real life
  data with known answers/solutions). Development or evaluation of
  scalable discovery methods of biomarkers and molecular pathways from
  high dimensional biomedical data, CONTINUED.

- In our running example, of developing principled and scalable
  biomarker and pathway discovery algorithms all of the algorithms
  discussed in section “Over- and Under-Interpreting Results” were also
  tested extensively with real data where true answers were known or
  could be established via predictive verification. Statnikov et al.
  showed the superlative performance for biological local pathway
  discovery. Aphinyanaphongs et al. showed the performance in text
  categorization comparing with all major acedemic and commercial
  comparators of the time. Statnikov and Aliferis showed the massive
  gene expression signature equivalence classes in cancer microarray
  data. Alekseyenko, Statnikov and Aliferis evaluated in GWAS prediction
  signatures and causal loci discovery. Ma, Statnikov and Aliferis
  showed minimization of experiments in biological experimental data.
  Other benchmarks addressed additional microbiomic, cancer, and other
  types of data [1, 18, 22–24, 29–34, 37, 40, 41, 45–47, 52, 53].

Step 8. Empirically test algorithms in real life data without known
answers/solutions but where future validation can take place

In the final step of the new method development and validation process,
the AI/ML method and the models produced by it are tested in real data
where the correct answers can be obtained but only prospectively: If the
models are predictive we obtain true values and compare them to the
predicted values. In causal modeling we conduct randomized controlled
experiments and compare the effects of interventions against the
algorithmic estimates for such effects. Other forms of validation
designs are also possible depending on the nature of the AI/ML methods’
goals and intended outputs.

We caution the reader that only after successful completion of ALL prior
steps in the new or existing AI/ML method development or appraisal, is
applying the method in real-life problems with any risk, warranted. 

- In-depth example for step 8 (Empirically test algorithms in real life
  data with unknown answers/solutions). Development or evaluation of
  scalable discovery methods of biomarkers and molecular pathways from
  high dimensional biomedical data, FINAL.

- In our running example, the methods were deployed in several real-life
  projects related to basic and translational science discovery,
  experimental therapeutics, and healthcare improvements. Application
  areas included: (1) predicting risk for sepsis in the neonatal
  ICU; (2) diagnosing stroke from stroke-like syndromes using proteomic
  markers; (3) modeling the decision making and determining melanoma
  guideline non-compliance of dermatologists; (4) determining which
  patients with ovarian cancer will benefit from frontline Tx with
  bevacizumab; (5) understanding mechanisms and predicting outcomes in
  children with PTSD, (6) creating models that predict accurately
  citations of articles in deep horizons; (7) creating models that
  characterize the nature of citations; (8) creating models to classify
  articles for methodological rigor and content; (9) models that scan
  the WWW for dangerous medical advice; (10) models for diagnosis of
  psoriasis using microbiomic signatures from the skin; (11) multi-omic
  clinical phenotype predictions; (12) discovery of new targets for
  osteoarthritis; (13) detection of subclinical viral infection using
  gene signatures from serum; (14) analysis and modeling of longevity
  using clinical and molecular markers and (15) modeling of the
  mediating pathways between exercise and diet and cardiometabolic
  outcomes for drug target discovery [35, 36, 40, 51, 54–56, 59, 60–65].

- In conclusion, the above interrelated case studies give an “insider’s
  view” on, and showcase the feasibility and benefits of a complete
  rigorous development and validation approach for new methods using the
  example of local causal graph and MB algorithms and their extensions.

- Similar in-depth rigorous development efforts have characterized the
  history of Bayesian Networks, SVMs, Boosting, Causal inference
  algorithms, and other methods (see chapters “Foundations and
  Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and Operating
  Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and
  Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML”). However we do point
  out that unfortunately in many cases, widely-adopted methods and tools
  both in the academic and commercial realms lack many of the steps
  outlined here and therefore they have to be used with caution
  especially in high-stakes (high risk, high cost) application domains.
  The next section gives a highly condensed overview of properties of
  major AI/ML methods.

Best Practice 5.7

Develop and validate ML/AI methods using the following stages/steps:

- Step 1. Rigorous problem definition (in precise mathematical terms and
  establishing how the mathematical goals map to the healthcare or
  health science discovery goal).

- Step 2. Theoretical analysis of problem (complexity, problem space
  characteristics etc.).

- Step 3. First-pass algorithms solving the problem.

- Step 4. Theoretical properties of first pass algorithms: focus on
  representation power, soundness and completeness, transparency.

- Step 5. Algorithm refinements and optimizations.

- Step 6. Empirically test algorithms in controlled conditions .

- Step 7. Empirically test algorithms in real life data with known
  answers/solutions.

- Step 8. Empirically test algorithms in real life data without known
  answers/solutions but where future validation can take place.

Best Practice 5.8

Avoid evaluating methods by employing expert narratives showing
“validity”.

Best Practice 5.9

Do not reinvent the wheel. Verify that a new method does not solve a
problem previously solved by a better performing method.

Best Practice 5.10

Create open box methods to the full extent possible. Do not pursue weak
justifications that fail to translate the models to accurate human
readable representations.

Best Practice 5.11

Do not confuse “open source” for “transparent” and “closed source” for
black box”.

A Concise Overview of Properties of Major AI/ML Methods

Table 2 gives a high-level, very concise view on properties of key
families of AI/ML methods. A few observations are in order:

1.  1.

    Heuristic systems by definition lack well-defined, well-understood
    or confirmed properties. We include them in the table only to remind
    the reader that they are seriously handicapped in that regard, and
    should not be used in high-stakes applications (until a better
    understanding of their risk and benefits is achieved).

     

2.  2.

    Most methods that are widely used today have well understood
    properties, or at most a few gaps in the understanding of their
    properties.

     

3.  3.

    There is no perfect method across all properties and problem types:
    every method has weak spots.

     

4.  4.

    Some methods are compromised by being commonly used in problems that
    they should not (i.e., “user error”). In these cases there is always
    a better method for that problem category.

     

5.  5.

    Statistical machine learning methods have stronger/better studied
    properties in general.

     

6.  6.

    It is possible for some methods to have sub-optimal theoretical
    properties but exhibit excellent empirical performance in some
    problem categories and/or selected datasets.

     

Explanation of terms:

+:---------------------------------+:---------------------------------+
| Representation                   | What kind of relationships can   |
|                                  | the method represent? In case of |
|                                  | modeling methods, are the model  |
|                                  | assumptions restrictive?         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): Any relationship     |
|                                  | (e.g. Universal Function         |
|                                  | Approximator)                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (limited): Constrained         |
|                                  | functional form                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): Restrictive            |
|                                  | assumptions apply                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | D (Depends): Inherits property   |
|                                  | from an component method, has    |
|                                  | other kind of dependence (e.g.   |
|                                  | on an underlying distribution),  |
|                                  | or the properties varies across  |
|                                  | members of a broader category of |
|                                  | methods                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Semantic clarity                 | Is the method (or model)         |
|                                  | semantics clear? E.g. in case of |
|                                  | a predictive model, is the       |
|                                  | meaning of the model components  |
|                                  | clear?                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): Yes                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (moderate): Some parts are not |
|                                  | clearly defined                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): Not having clear       |
|                                  | meaning                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Transparency                     | Does the method semantics relate |
|                                  | to real-world entities in a      |
|                                  | clear manner?                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Is it easily understood by       |
|                                  | humans?                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): The relationship     |
|                                  | between real-world entities and  |
|                                  | method components can be         |
|                                  | explained. Humans easily         |
|                                  | understand method/models.        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): Method is difficult to |
|                                  | interpret, additional algorithms |
|                                  | are needed to interpret          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (moderate): Between ↑ and ↓    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Soundness                        | When the model assumptions are   |
|                                  | met, are the results correct?    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (E.g. for a predictive model, is |
|                                  | the model error optimal?)        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): Yes, guaranteed      |
|                                  | (e.g. convex problem, Optimal    |
|                                  | Bayes Classifier, etc);          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (medium): Trapped in local     |
|                                  | optima, only approximates target |
|                                  | function to some acceptable      |
|                                  | degree;                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): Output may             |
|                                  | considerably deviate from        |
|                                  | correct answer                   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Completeness                     | Will the method output correct   |
|                                  | answers for all problem          |
|                                  | instances?                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): Yes, will produce    |
|                                  | correct answers for full problem |
|                                  | space;                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (medium): considerable but not |
|                                  | full coverage of problem space;  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): only small portions of |
|                                  | problem space correctly          |
|                                  | answered, or very significant    |
|                                  | regions are omitted.             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Compute                          | Computational complexity. For    |
|                                  | predictive models, it includes   |
|                                  | the complexity of both model     |
|                                  | construction and prediction.     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): Very fast. E.g., for |
|                                  | executing predictive models,     |
|                                  | linear in number of variables,   |
|                                  | and with a small hyperparameter  |
|                                  | space                            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (medium): May build multiple   |
|                                  | models.                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): Requires extensive     |
|                                  | computing (e.g. immense          |
|                                  | hyper-parameter space,           |
|                                  | exponential in the number of     |
|                                  | variables, etc.)                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | D (depends): Typical and         |
|                                  | worst-case are very different;   |
|                                  | can take advantage of properties |
|                                  | of the problem (e.g. graph       |
|                                  | connectivity)                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Space                            | Storage complexity required for  |
|                                  | the computation, or for storing  |
|                                  | the model (if there is a model)  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): Approx. number of    |
|                                  | variables                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (medium): linear in the number |
|                                  | of variables                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): super-linear in the    |
|                                  | number of variables or           |
|                                  | proportional to the data set     |
|                                  | size (if data set size exceeds   |
|                                  | order of number of variables)    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Sample size                      | Sample size required to train    |
|                                  | the model (to an acceptable      |
|                                  | performance on problems that     |
|                                  | constitute the preferred use of  |
|                                  | this method)                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): small sample size is |
|                                  | sufficient (e.g. linear in the   |
|                                  | number of variables, in the      |
|                                  | number of effective parameters,  |
|                                  | support vectors, etc.)           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (medium): moderate (e.g., low  |
|                                  | order polynomial) sample sizes   |
|                                  | required to number of effective  |
|                                  | parameters                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): large sample sizes are |
|                                  | required (e.g., super- or higher |
|                                  | order-polynomial to number of    |
|                                  | effective parameters)            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Probabilistic consistency        | (1) Model can return             |
|                                  | probabilities (or output can be  |
|                                  | converted to probabilities) and  |
|                                  | (2) probabilistic output is      |
|                                  | calibrated or can be calibrated  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): designed to be       |
|                                  | probabilistically consistent     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (medium): output can be        |
|                                  | converted into probabilities     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): not meant to produce   |
|                                  | probabilities and there is no    |
|                                  | easy way to convert predictions  |
|                                  | into consistent probabilities    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Empirical accuracy in common use | In its common use, what is the   |
|                                  | method’s empirical performance   |
|                                  | in terms of result accuracy      |
|                                  | (e.g. accuracy or AUC for        |
|                                  | classification models)?          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): One of the strongest |
|                                  | among methods that are           |
|                                  | best-of-class for this problem.  |
|                                  | (E.g. DL for imaging; Cox PH for |
|                                  | time-to-event, etc.)             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (medium): Performs noticeably  |
|                                  | worse than the best, but still   |
|                                  | outperforms several methods.     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): Performs substantially |
|                                  | worse than most                  |
|                                  | applicable methods.              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Empirical accuracy in            | In its preferred use, what is    |
| recommended use                  | the method’s empirical           |
|                                  | performance in terms of result   |
|                                  | accuracy (e.g. accuracy or AUC   |
|                                  | for classification models)?      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↑ (strong): one of best-in-class |
|                                  | methods for this problem. (E.g.  |
|                                  | DL for images; Cox PH for        |
|                                  | time-to-event, etc.)             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | o (medium): performs noticeable  |
|                                  | worse than the best-in-class,    |
|                                  | but still useful in some cases.  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ↓ (weak): Performs substantially |
|                                  | worse than best and has no       |
|                                  | mitigating uses.                 |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Method misapplication in         | Common: The method is commonly   |
| practice                         | used for tasks that is not       |
|                                  | best-in-class                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Uncommon: The method is seldomly |
|                                  | used for tasks that is not       |
|                                  | best-in-class                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Table 2

Map of properties of major AI/ML methods

[]

A table for properties of 34 A I or M L methods. 9 thermal properties
include representational power, semantic clarity, transparency,
soundness, completeness, and computational complexity. 3 empirical
performances include empirical accuracy in 2 uses, and method
misapplication in practice.

Symbol Notation

+ = Properties are known.? = Properties are unknown

↑ = strong; o = medium; ↓ = weak;

D depends on choice of algorithm, or problem;

[.] depicts range of values.

Color Notation

Green = strong; orange = medium; red = weak or property is unknown;
gray = depends on choice of algorithm, or problem; white = not
applicable

We advise the reader to study this table and cross-reference with the
description of methods and guidance for their use in chapters
“Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
and Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML”.

A Worksheet for Use when Evaluating or Developing AI/ML Methods

It is highly recommended as new or existing methods are being evaluated
to use a chart such as the one shown in Table 3. There are three
purposes in this endeavor: (a) Remind the developer or evaluator about
the necessary dimensions of validation/appraisal. (b) Maintain a record
of progress as the various stages of evaluation are advancing. (c)
Enforce due diligence both in an absolute sense but also in comparison
to applicable alternatives. (d) Enforce honesty/reduce developer bias in
assessing the added value of the evaluated method over established
incumbents. (e) More objectively assess marketing claims about the
strengths of commercial products.

Table 3

Worksheet for evaluating new and existing AI/ML methods

+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|               | Theoretical properties                                                                                                    | Empirical performance                      |
+:==============+:=================+:=========+:=============+:==========+:=============+:==============+:===========+:=======+:============+:============+:============+:===============+
| Method        | Representational | Semantic | Transparency | Soundness | Completeness | Computational | Space      | Sample | Probability | Empirical   | Empirical   | Method         |
|               | Power            | clarity  |              |           |              | Complexity    |            | size   | Theory      | Accuracy(in | Accuracy    | misapplication |
|               |                  |          |              |           |              |               | Complexity |        | Compliance  | common use) | (in         | in practice    |
|               |                  |          |              |           |              |               |            |        |             |             | recommended |                |
|               |                  |          |              |           |              |               |            |        |             |             | use)        |                |
+---------------+------------------+----------+--------------+-----------+--------------+---------------+------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+----------------+
| Method to be  | OBTAIN BY THEORETICAL ANALYSIS PROPERTIES AND INSERT APPRAISAL IN EACH COLUMN                                             | OBTAIN BY EMPIRICAL EXPERIMENTATION AND    |
| evaluated     |                                                                                                                           | INSERT APPRAISAL IN EACH COLUMN            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| Best-in-class | SELECT FROM THE LITERATURE BEST KNOWN EXISTING METHOD FOR PROBLEM TYPE AND COPY ITS THEORETICAL PROPERTIES IN EACH COLUMN | COPY EMPIRICAL PROPERTIES IN EACH COLUMN   |
| known method  |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| #1 for that   |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| problem       |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| domain        |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| Best-in-class | SELECT FROM THE LITERATURE SECOND BEST KNOWN EXISTING METHOD FOR PROBLEM TYPE AND COPY ITS THEORETICAL PROPERTIES IN EACH | COPY EMPIRICAL PROPERTIES IN EACH COLUMN   |
| known method  | COLUMN                                                                                                                    |                                            |
| #2 for that   |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| problem       |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| domain        |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| Best-in-class | SELECT FROM THE LITERATURE THIRD BEST KNOWN EXISTING METHOD FOR PROBLEM TYPE AND COPY ITS THEORETICAL PROPERTIES IN EACH  | COPY EMPIRICAL PROPERTIES IN EACH COLUMN   |
| known method  | COLUMN                                                                                                                    |                                            |
| #3 for that   |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| problem       |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| domain        |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| Baseline      | SELECT FROM THE LITERATURE BASELINE EXISTING METHOD FOR PROBLEM TYPE AND COPY ITS THEORETICAL PROPERTIES IN EACH COLUMN   | COPY EMPIRICAL PROPERTIES IN EACH COLUMN   |
| comparator    |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| method for    |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| the problem   |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
| domain        |                                                                                                                           |                                            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+

Over-and Under-Interpreting Results

We conclude this chapter with a discussion of avoiding over-interpreting
and under-interpreting AI/ML results.

A major principle for the scientifically valid use of AI/ML models is
their proper interpretation for either driving healthcare decisions and
improvements as well as for driving discovery in the health sciences.
Two major and antithetical pitfalls are the over- and the
under-interpretation of results given the data design (see chapter “Data
Design”) and the properties of the algorithms and protocols employed.

Pitfall 5.9

Interpreting results of a method’s beyond what its known properties
justify.

Pitfall 5.10

Interpreting results of a method’s below what its known properties
justify.

A few examples of the over-interpretation pitfall include:

1.  (a)

    Interpreting weak predictive methods (and resulting models) as if
    they have much stronger accuracy (usually combined with omitting
    stating the weak aggregate signal of the method’s models e.g., in
    the context of regression analyses of biomarkers).

     

2.  (b)

    Assigning special biological or mechanistic significance to
    variables because they are stable in resampling or because they are
    ranked high according to univariate association with a response
    variable.

     

3.  (c)

    Generally interpreting causally the findings of predictive methods
    (and resulting models).

     

4.  (d)

    Failing to observe that some feature selection methods in omics data
    commonly do not, or marginally outperform random selection.

     

5.  (e)

    Ignoring the possibility of hidden (aka unmeasured or latent)
    variables distorting the observed effects of measured variables.

     

6.  (f)

    Ignoring effects of small sample size variation on results.

     

7.  (g)

    Assuming (without proof) that case matching according to
    hypothesized confounders has controlled all confounding. Assuming in
    SEM modeling that the domain causal structure is known with
    certainty.

     

8.  (h)

    Assuming that propensity scoring perfectly controls confounding.

     

9.  (i)

    Treating coefficient values in regularized regression methods (Lasso
    family, SVMs, and other “penalty+loss” algorithms) as if they are
    equivalent to statistical conditioning (e.g., in classical
    regression).

     

10. (j)

    Assuming (without testing) that the assignment of subjects to
    treatment arms in trials from existing datasets is perfectly
    randomized and without bias. Etc.

     

A few examples of the under-interpretation pitfall include:

1.  (a)

    Focusing on small individual variable effects without noticing that
    the aggregate signal over many variables is large (e.g., in GWAS
    studies).

     

2.  (b)

    Focusing on small coefficient of variation of a model (i.e., total
    response variance explained) and failing to notice that some
    variables have strong individual effects (this is the reverse of the
    previous under-interpretation problem).

     

3.  (c)

    Failing to pick up strong putative causal factors even when causal
    ML algorithms indicate their significance, because “correlation is
    not causation”.

     

4.  (d)

    Dismissing methods (and resulting models) because they are not
    statistically stable under resampling.

     

We will revisit these problems in subsequent chapters as they require a
holistic understanding of data design and proper AI/ML algorithm design
and execution. The best practice we will state at this point however is:

Best Practice 5.12

Interpret results of application of a method (and resulting models) at
the level justified by its know properties.

Key Messages and Concepts Discussed in Chapter “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”

1.  1.

    Establishing and knowing the properties of AI/ML methods enables
    informed assessments about the Performance requirements, the Safety
    requirements, and the Cost-effectiveness requirements of
    corresponding AI/ML solutions, and leads to building trust in the
    AI/ML solution.

     

2.  2.

    A best practice workflow was presented, that can be used to
    establish the properties of any new or pre-existing method, tool or
    system, so that a rational, effective and efficient solution to the
    problem at hand can be identified.

     

3.  3.

    The importance of rigorous problem definitions (in precise
    mathematical terms, and with precise correspondence to health care
    or health science objectives).

     

4.  4.

    Re-inventing the wheel and why it is undesirable.

     

5.  5.

    First-pass algorithms vs algorithm refinements and optimization.

     

6.  6.

    Parallel algorithms, Distributed/Federated, Sequential, and Chunked
    algorithms.

     

7.  7.

    Relaxing algorithmic assumptions/requirements.

     

8.  8.

    Generalized algorithm frameworks and generalized conditions for
    performance guarantees.

     

9.  9.

    What are AI/ML (or data science) Stacks.

     

10. 10.

    “Pipelines”, “Automodelers”, and “Platforms”.

     

11. 11.

    Explanation, interpretability, and transparency: Black box AI/ML
    methods and/or models; Transparent (or open, or white, or clear)
    box.

     

12. 12.

    Justification of a method or a model (and their outputs) vs
    high-fidelity explanation of a method or model (and their outputs)
    e.g., by functional equivalence.

     

13. 13.

    Human-understandable models and formalisms.

     

14. 14.

    Open source software vs Closed source (or proprietary) software.

     

15. 15.

    The importance of testing algorithms in controlled conditions.

     

16. 16.

    Simulated data; Label-reshuffled data; Re-simulated data, and their
    properties and use.

     

17. 17.

    Real-life examples of using the new method development process to
    establish the properties of well known (new or pre-existing)
    methods, tools or systems.

     

18. 18.

    Interpreting results of application of a method at the level
    justified by its known properties.

     

Pitfalls Discussed in Chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”

Pitfall 5.1.: Developing methods with theoretical and empirical
properties that are:

1.  (a)

    Unknown, or

     

2.  (b)

    Poorly characterized in disclosures and technical, scientific or
    commercial communications and publications, or

     

3.  (c)

    Clearly stated (disclosed) but not proven, or

     

4.  (d)

    Not matching the characteristics of the problem to be solved at the
    level of performance and trust needed.

     

Pitfall 5.2. Evaluating the success of methods with poorly defined
objectives, by employing expert narratives showing “validity”.

Pitfall 5.3. Defining the goals of methods in mathematical terms but
without establishing how the mathematical goals map to the healthcare or
health science discovery goal.

Pitfall 5.4. Reinventing the wheel: whereby a new method is introduced
but it has been previously discovered yet ignored (willfully or not) by
the “new” method developers.

Pitfall 5.5. Reinventing a method but make it worse to established
methods (…“reinventing the wheel and making it square”!).

Pitfall 5.6. Providing peripheral/oblique and thus inadequate
justifications of the model and its decisions which do not “open” the
black box.

Pitfall 5.7. Confusing “open source” for “transparent” and “closed
source” for black box”.

Pitfall 5.8. Issues and pitfalls of ML challenges. In many, if not most
cases, challenges suffer from fixing the data design and error
estimation thus removing from consideration, two out of the three
determinants of ML success (i.e., data design, ML model selection and
error estimation protocol, algorithm).

Challenges also routinely restrict the design of modeling by
pre-selecting variables, and over-simplifying the statement of problems,
sometimes to meaningless extremes.

Challenges also often suffer from incomplete or highly biased
representation in the competitor pool. Typically participants in
challenges are either students or interested scientists who have
competencies in areas unrelated to AI/ML.

Another limitation is that not all appropriate algorithms are entered in
a challenge and when they enter, they are not necessarily executed
according to optimal specifications.

Finally, challenges typically involve a very small number of datasets
that do not represent a large domain. Such representative coverage
typically requires dozens of datasets or more in the same comparison.

Pitfall 5.9.: Interpreting results of a method (and resulting models)
beyond what its known properties justify.

Pitfall 5.10.: Interpreting results of a method (and resulting models)
below what its known properties justify.

Best Practices Discussed in Chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development
and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”

Best Practice 5.1. Methods developers should strive to characterize the
new methods according to the dimensions of theoretical and empirical
properties.

Best Practice 5.2. Methods developers should carefully disclose the
known and unknown properties of new methods at each stage of their
development and provide full evidence for how these properties were
established.

Best Practice 5.3. Methods adopters and evaluators (users, funding
agencies, editorial boards etc.) should seek to obtain valid information
according to the dimensions of theoretical and empirical properties for
every method, tool, and system under consideration.

Best Practice 5.4. Methods adopters and evaluators should map the
dimensions of theoretical and empirical properties for every method,
tool, and system under consideration to the problem at hand and select
methods based on best matching of method properties to problem needs.

Best Practice 5.5. The properties of a ML algorithm can be negatively or
positively affected by the ML protocol to extreme degrees (see chapter
“Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of
AI/ML In Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring problems, and the
role of BPs.” for several important case studies that show the immense
and often under-appreciated practical consequences). Similarly the data
design can negatively or positively affect the ML protocol and its
embedded algorithms to extreme degrees. Therefore, it is imperative to
design AI/ML methods taking into account any positive or negative
interactions of data design with the protocols and embedded algorithms
employed.

Best Practice 5.6. The preferred design for validating AI/Ml methods
with real life data with known answers is the centralized benchmark
design. Distributed benchmark designs, whenever feasible, add value by
exploring natural variation in how methods are applied by experts.
Finally competitions have several intrinsic limitations and have to be
interpreted carefully.

Best Practice 5.7. Develop and validate ML/AI methods using the
following stages/steps:

- Step 1. Rigorous problem definition (in precise mathematical terms and
  establishing how the mathematical goals map to the healthcare or
  health science discovery goal).

- Step 2. Theoretical analysis of problem (complexity, problem space
  characteristics etc.).

- Step 3. First-pass algorithms solving problem.

- Step 4. Theoretical properties of first pass algorithms: focus on
  representation power, soundness and completeness, transparency.

- Step 5. Algorithm refinements and optimizations.

- Step 6. Empirically test algorithms in controlled conditions.

- Step 7. Empirically test algorithms in real life data with known
  answers/solutions.

- Step 8. Empirically test algorithms in real life data without known
  answers/solutions but where future validation can take place.

Best Practice 5.8. Avoid evaluating methods by employing expert
narratives showing “validity”.

Best Practice 5.9. Do not reinvent the wheel. Verify that a new method
does not solve a problem previously solved by a better performing
method.

Best Practice 5.10. Create open box methods to the full extent possible.
Do not pursue weak justifications that fail to translate the models to
accurate human readable representations.

Best Practice 5.11. Do not confuse “open source” for “transparent” and
“closed source” for black box”.

Best Practice 5.12. Interpret results of application of a method at the
level justified by its known properties.

Classroom Assignments and Discussion Topics, Chapter “Principles of
Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”

1.  1.

    Choose one ML/AI method of your choice and characterize it according
    to best practice 5.7. use any literature that is adequate for that
    purpose.

     

2.  2.

    Choose a well-cited paper from health sciences or healthcare that
    uses AI/ML. Characterize the primary methods using best practice
    5.7.

     

3.  3.

    Can you describe a real-life example of over- or under-interpreting
    a type of AI/ML analysis or modelling?

     

4.  4.

    Are there safeguards in human professional training and
    certification analogous to the best practices presented in this
    chapter?

     

5.  5.

    Revisit the question of chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
    Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need
    for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” stating: “The
    so-called No Free Lunch Theorem (NFLT) states (in plain language)
    that all ML and more broadly all AI optimization methods are equally
    accurate over all problems on average. Discuss the implications for
    choice of AI/ML methods in practical use cases” using the tools of
    the present chapter

     

6.  6.

    Revisit the question of chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
    Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need
    for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” stating: “’It is not
    the tool but the craftsman’. Does this maxim apply to health AI/ML?”
    using the tools of the present chapter.

     

7.  7.

    Revisit the question of chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
    Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need
    for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” stating: “Construct
    a ‘pyramid of evidence’ for health ML/AI similar to the one used in
    evidence based medicine.” using the tools of the present chapter.

     

8.  8.

    Revisit the question of chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
    Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need
    for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” stating:

    “You are part of an important university/hospital evaluation
    committee for a vendor offering a patient-clinical trial matching AI
    product. Your institution strongly needs to improve the
    patient-trial matching process to improve trial success and
    efficiency metrics. The sales team makes the statement that “this is
    a completely innovative AI/ML product; nothing like this exists in
    the market and there is no similar literature; we cannot at this
    time provide theoretical or empirical accuracy analysis however you
    are welcome to try out our product for free for a limited time and
    decide if it is helpful to you”. The product is fairly expensive
    (multi $ million license fees over 5 years covering >1,000 trials
    steady-state).

    What would be your concerns based on these statements? Would you be
    in position of making an institutional buy/not buy recommendation?”

    Use the guidelines of the present chapter to compose a brief report
    and recommendations.

     

9.  9.

    Revisit the question of chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
    Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need
    for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” stating:

    “A company has launched a major national marketing campaign across
    health provider systems for a new AI/ML healthcare product based on
    its success on playing backgammon, reading and analyzing backgammon
    playing books and human games, and extracting novel winning
    strategies, also answering questions about backgammon, and teaching
    backgammon to human players.

    How relevant is this impressive AI track record to health care? How
    would you go about determining relevance to health care AI/ML? How
    your reasoning would change if the product was not based on success
    in backgammon but success in identifying oil and gas deposits? How
    about success in financial investments?

    Use the guidelines of the present chapter to compose a brief report
    and recommendations.

     

10. 10.

    Revisit the question of chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
    Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need
    for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” stating:

    “Your university-affiliated hospital wishes to increase early
    diagnosis of cognitive decline across the population it serves. You
    are tasked to choosing between the following five AI/ML
    technologies/tools:
    - AI/ML tool A guarantees optimal predictivity in the sample limit
      in distributions that are multivariate normal.

    - AI/ML tool B has no known properties but is has been shown to be
      very accurate in several datasets for microarray cancer-vs-normal
      classification.

    - AI/ML tool C is a commercial offshoot of a tool that was fairly
      accurate in early (pre-trauma) diagnosis of PTSD.

    - AI/ML tool D is an application running on a ground-breaking
      quantum computing platform. Quantum computing is an exciting and
      frontier technology that many believe has potential to make AI/ML
      with hugely improved capabilities.

    - AI/ML tool E runs on a novel massively parallel cloud computing
      platform capable of Zettascale performance.

    What are your thoughts about these options?”

    Use the guidelines of the present chapter to compose a brief
    appraisal.

     

11. 11.

    Revisit the question of chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
    Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need
    for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” stating:

    “The same question as #10 but with the following additional data:
    - AI/ML tool A sales reps are very professional, friendly and open
      to offering deep discounts.

    - AI/ML tool B is offered by a company co-founded by a Nobel
      laureate.

    - AI/Ml tool C is offered by a vendor with which your organization
      has a successful and long relationship.

    - AI/Ml tool D is part of a university initiative to develop thought
      leadership in quantum computing.

    - AI/Ml tool E will provide patient-specific results in 1 picosecond
      or less.

    How does this additional information influences your assessment?”

    Use the guidelines of the present chapter to compose a brief
    appraisal.

     

12. 12.

    Comment on the representation power of the following methods and
    corresponding problems:
      ---------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------
       1. Decision Trees           ←→ predictive modeling
       2. KNN                      ←→ outlier detection
       3. Deep Learning            ←→ pathway reverse engineering
       4. Simple Bayes             ←→ simulating an arbitrary joint probability distribution
       5. SVMs                     ←→ predictive modeling with a random subset of the inputs missing
       6. Regularized repressors   ←→ evaluate similarity of distributions
      ---------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------

     

13. 13.

    Rank the transparency and interpretability of the methods of
    question 12 for their preferred context of use.

     

14. 14.

    Method X is correct whenever condition Y holds in the data. However,
    Y is not testable. Is X well characterized for soundness? Can it be?

    Bonus add-on: comment along the same lines on the soundness of the
    Aracne algorithm’ monotone faithfulness condition and of the
    Propensity Scoring’s “ignorability condition”.

     

15. 15.

    How the notions of “heuristic power” and soundness relate?

     

16. 16.

    A classifier model has acceptable error rate in 2/3 of the patient
    population. This subpopulation is identifiable by the model and its
    properties. What are its soundness and completeness? What would the
    soundness and completeness be if no one could identify the cases
    with unacceptable error margins?

     

17. 17.

    Why worst-case complexity is less useful than “complexity in x% of
    problem instances”?

     

18. 18.

    In some cases it is possible to use properties over the problem
    class to immediately determine properties of specific algorithms.
    Developer D introduces method M and claims it can solve a problem
    with known exponential worst case complexity in polynomial time.
    What can you immediately prove?

     

19. 19.

    Can clustering methods be used to discover causality soundly and
    completely? Use your observations on its computational complexity
    and representational power to disprove this notion.

     

20. 20.

    If discovering causal relations is worst-case exponential and
    regularized regression and SVMs are guaranteed quadratic time, what
    can you infer about the ability of regularized regression and SVMs
    for discovery of causality?

     

21. 21.

    A faculty in a university brings forward a proposal to
    administration for installing a large compute cluster that has the
    compute power of 10,000 desktop computers. The faculty wishes to use
    brute force algorithms to discover non-linear discontinuous
    functions in the form of parity functions that have average case
    exponential cost to model to the number of variables. If a single
    desktop can solve such problems for up to 3-way variable
    interactions, what maximum degree interactions can be discovered
    with the proposed cluster?

     

22. 22.

    How Bayesian Networks can reduce exponentially the model storage
    requirements compared to simple use of Bayes’ theorem?

     

23. 23.

    Suppose we store models that incorporate discrete conditional
    probability tables over binary variables. For a variable X that has
    parents P1, …, Pk how does the storage complexity grows, as k grows?
    How is this complexity self-limiting if available sample size is
    relatively small?

     

24. 24.

    In the 1980s a popular AI representation was the Certainty Factor
    Calculous (CFC, created by medical AI pioneers B.G. Buchanan and E.
    Shortliffe), a form of stochastic rules expert system
    representation. It was subsequently discovered by D. Heckerman et
    al. that unless limitations on the data distribution form were
    present, the CFC was not compatible with probability theory. Can you
    articulate when and why this might be a problem?

     

25. 25.

    A commercial product promises that it can find “valuable insights”
    for healthcare improvement. Can you translate this deliverable in
    mathematical computable terms? What does it mean in terms of
    guaranteed properties if this type of output cannot be formalized
    mathematically?

     

26. 26.

    Discuss the (humorous) maxim: “2 months in the lab will save one 2
    hours in the library”.

     

27. 27.

    Woods wrote a 1975 classic AI paper titled “What’s in a link”. In it
    he criticized the vague specification of the technical semantics of
    semantic networks (a prominent AI knowledge representation of his
    time derived from formal logic) and the impact that different
    semantics have on computability and complexity. Can you identify
    analogous problems in today’s AI/ML? For example, consider the
    causal semantics (or lack thereof) in the field of network science
    and of the numerous biological pathway reverse engineering methods.

     

28. 28.

    “Data Hubris” is described by the statement “Having lots of data is
    more important than choice of algorithm”. What does this maxim
    means? Can you comment on the validity of this statement? What about
    if you add consideration of data design?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part II: analysis and
    extensions. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(Jan):235–384.

2.  2.

    Shapere D. The concept of observation in science and philosophy.
    Philos Sci. 1982;49(4):485–525.

3.  3.

    Van Fraassen BC. Scientific representation: paradoxes of
    perspective, vol. 70; 2010. p. 511–4.

4.  4.

    Trujillo CM, Anderson TR, Pelaez NJ. A model of how different
    biology experts explain molecular and cellular mechanisms. CBE Life
    Sci Educ. 2015;14(2):ar20.

5.  5.

    Goldfarb B, King AA. Scientific apophenia in strategic management
    research: significance tests & mistaken inference. Strateg Manag J.
    2016;37(1):167–76.

6.  6.

    Wagenaar WA. Appreciation of conditional probabilities in binary
    sequences. Acta Psychol. 1970;34:348–56.

7.  7.

    Ramsey FP. On a problem of formal logic. Classic Papers in
    Combinatorics. 1987:1–24.

8.  8.

    Frank R, Hargreaves R. Clinical biomarkers in drug discovery and
    development. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2003;2(7):566–80.

9.  9.

    Fleming TR, DeMets DL. Surrogate end points in clinical trials: are
    we being misled? Ann Intern Med. 1996;125(7):605–13.

10. 10.

    Califf RM. Biomarker definitions and their applications. Exp Biol
    Med. 2018;243(3):213–21.

11. 11.

    Kohavi R, John GH. Wrappers for feature subset selection. Artif
    Intell. 1997;97(1–2):273–324.

12. 12.

    Pearl J. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems, vol. 88,
    No. 3. San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann; 2014.

13. 13.

    Spirtes P, Glymour CN, Scheines R, Heckerman D. Causation,
    prediction, and search. MIT press; 2000.

14. 14.

    Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF. Towards principled feature selection:
    relevance, filters, and wrappers. In: Proceedings of the Ninth
    International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics;
    2003.

15. 15.

    Winston WL. Operations research: applications and algorithms.
    Cengage Learning; 2022.

16. 16.

    Cormen TH, Leiserson CE, Rivest RL, Stein C. Introduction to
    algorithms. MIT press; 2022.

17. 17.

    Wolpert DH, Macready WG. No free lunch theorems for optimization.
    IEEE Trans Evol Comput. 1997;1(1):67–82.

18. 18.

    Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF, Statnikov A. Algorithms for large scale
    markov blanket discovery. In: Proceedings of the 16th International
    Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society (FLAIRS)
    Conference; 2003. p. 376–80.

19. 19.

    Koller D, Sahami M. Toward optimal feature selection. Stanford
    InfoLab; 1996.

20. 20.

    Cooper GF, Abraham V, Aliferis CF, Aronis JM, Buchanan BG, Caruana
    R, Fine MJ, Janosky JE, Livingston G, Mitchell T, Monti S.
    Predicting dire outcomes of patients with community acquired
    pneumonia. J Biomed Inform. 2005;38(5):347–66.

21. 21.

    Margaritis D, Thrun S. Bayesian network induction via local
    neighborhoods. Adv Neural Inf Proces Syst. 1999;12

22. 22.

    Aliferis CF, Tsamardinos I, Statnikov A. HITON: a novel Markov
    blanket algorithm for optimal variable selection. In: AMIA annual
    symposium proceedings; 2003. p. 21–5.

23. 23.

    Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF, Statnikov A. Time and sample efficient
    discovery of markov blankets and direct causal relations. In:
    Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
    Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining; 2003. p. 673–8.

24. 24.

    Tsamardinos I, Brown LE, Aliferis CF. The max-min hill-climbing
    Bayesian network structure learning algorithm. Mach Learn.
    2006;65(1):31–78.

25. 25.

    Upadhyaya SR. Parallel approaches to machine learning—a
    comprehensive survey. J Parallel Distrib Comput. 2013;73(3):284–92.

26. 26.

    Verbraeken J, Wolting M, Katzy J, Kloppenburg J, Verbelen T,
    Rellermeyer JS. A survey on distributed machine learning. Acm
    computing surveys (csur). 2020;53(2):1–33.

27. 27.

    Pérez-Cruz F, Figueiras-Vidal AR, Artés-Rodríguez A. Double chunking
    for solving SVMs for very large datasets. Proceedings of Learning;
    2004.

28. 28.

    Data Analysis Computer System and Method For Parallelized and
    Modularized Analysis of Big Data; Patent No.: US 9,720,940; August
    1, 2017.

29. 29.

    Statnikov A, Lytkin NI, Lemeire J, Aliferis CF. Algorithms for
    discovery of multiple Markov boundaries. J Mach Learn Res.
    2013;14(Feb):499–566.

30. 30.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF. Analysis and computational dissection of
    molecular signature multiplicity. (cover article). PLoS Comput Biol.
    2010;6(5):e1000790.

31. 31.

    Statnikov A, Ma S, Henaff M, Lytkin N, Efstathiadis E, Peskin ER,
    Aliferis CF. Ultra-scalable and efficient methods for hybrid
    observational and experimental local causal pathway discovery. J
    Mach Learn Res. 2015;16:3219–67.

32. 32.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part I: algorithms and
    empirical evaluation. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(Jan):171–234.

33. 33.

    Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Dosbayev Y, Aliferis CF. Gene expression
    model selector (GEMS): a system for automated cancer diagnosis and
    biomarker discovery from microarray gene expression data. Int J Med
    Inform. 2005;74(7–8):491–503.

34. 34.

    Fananapazir N, Statnikov A, Aliferis CF. The FAST-AIMS clinical mass
    spectrometry analysis system. Adv Bioinforma. 2009;2009:598241.
    http://​www.​hindawi.​com/​journals/​abi/​2009/​598241/​.

35. 35.

    Saxe GN, Ma SS, Ren J, Aliferis CF. Machine learning methods to
    predict child posttraumatic stress: a proof of concept study. BMC
    Psychiatry. 2017;17:article # 223.

36. 36.

    Saxe GN, Statnikov A, Fenyo D, Ren J, Li Z, Prasad M, Wall D,
    Bergman N, Briggs EC, Aliferis C. A complex systems approach to
    causal discovery in psychiatry. PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0151174.

37. 37.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF, Tsamardinos I, Hardin D, Levy S. A
    comprehensive evaluation of multicategory classification methods for
    microarray gene expression cancer diagnosis. Bioinformatics.
    2005;21(5):631–43.

38. 38.

    Gunning D, Aha D. DARPA’s explainable artificial intelligence (XAI)
    program. AI Mag. 2019;40(2):44–58.

39. 39.

    Murdoch WJ, Singh C, Kumbier K, Abbasi-Asl R, Yu B. Definitions,
    methods, and applications in interpretable machine learning. Proc
    Natl Acad Sci. 2019;116(44):22071–80.

40. 40.

    Sboner A, Aliferis CF. Modeling clinical judgment and implicit
    guideline compliance in the diagnosis of melanomas using machine
    learning. In: AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. American Medical
    Informatics Association; 2005. p. 664–8.

41. 41.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF, Hardin D, Guyon I. A gentle introduction
    to Support Vector Machines in biomedicine, vol. II. World Scientific
    Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd; 2013.

42. 42.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I. Challenges in the analysis
    of mass-throughput data: a technical commentary from the statistical
    machine learning perspective. Cancer Informat. 2006;2:133–62.

43. 43.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Schildcrout JS, Shepherd
    BE, Harrell FE Jr. Factors influencing the statistical power of
    complex data analysis protocols for molecular signature development
    from microarray data. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4922.

44. 44.

    Guyon I, Aliferis C, Cooper G, Elisseeff A, Pellet JP, Spirtes P,
    Statnikov A. Design and analysis of the causation and prediction
    challenge. In: Causation and prediction challenge. PMLR; 2008. p.
    1–33.

45. 45.

    Aphinyanaphongs Y, Fu LD, Li ZG, Peskin ER, Efstathiadis E, Aliferis
    CF, Statnikov A. A comprehensive empirical comparison of modern
    supervised classification and feature selection methods for text
    categorization. J Assoc Inf Sci Technol. 2014;65(10):1964–87.

46. 46.

    Statnikov A, Henaff M, Narendra V, Konganti K, Li ZG, Yang LY, Pei
    ZH, Blaser MJ, Aliferis CF, Alekseyenko AV. A comprehensive
    evaluation of multicategory classification methods for microbiomic
    data. Microbiome. 2013;1:23.

47. 47.

    Narendra V, Lytkin NI, Aliferis CF, Statnikov A. A comprehensive
    assessment of methods for de-novo reverse-engineering of
    genome-scale regulatory networks. Genomics. 2011;97(1):7–18.

48. 48.

    Statnikov A, Wang L, Aliferis CF. A comprehensive comparison of
    random forests and support vector machines for microarray-based
    cancer classification. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008;9(1):319.

49. 49.

    Shi L, Campbell G, Jones WD. The MicroArray quality control
    (MAQC)-II study of common practices for the development and
    validation of microarray-based predictive models. Nat Biotechnol.
    2010;28(8):827–38.

50. 50.

    ChaLearn. http://​www.​chalearn.​org.

51. 51.

    Winterhoff B, Kommoss S, Heitz F, Konecny GE, Dowdy SC, Mullany SA,
    Park-Simon TW, Baumann K, Hilpert F, Brucker S, du Bois A,
    Aliferis C. Developing a clinico-molecular test for individualized
    treatment of ovarian cancer: the interplay of precision medicine
    informatics with clinical and health economics dimensions. In: AMIA
    annual symposium proceedings, vol. 2018. American Medical
    Informatics Association; 2018. p. 1093.

52. 52.

    Ma SS, Kemmeren P, Aliferis CF, Statnikov A. An evaluation of active
    learning causal discovery methods for reverse-engineering local
    causal pathways of gene regulation. Sci Rep. 2016;6:22558.

53. 53.

    Ray B, Henaff M, Ma S, Efstathiadis E, Peskin ER, Picone M, Poli T,
    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A. Information content and analysis methods
    for multi-modal high-throughput biomedical data. Sci Rep.
    2014;4:4411. http://​www.​nature.​com/​articles/​srep04411

54. 54.

    Mani S, Ozdas A, Aliferis C, Varol HA, Chen QX, Carnevale R, Chen
    YK, Romano-Keeler J, Nian H, Weitkamp JH. Medical decision support
    using machine learning for early detection of late-onset neonatal
    sepsis. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2014;21(2):236–336.

55. 55.

    Fu LD, Aphinyanaphongs Y, Aliferis CF. Computer models for
    identifying instrumental citations in the biomedical literature.
    Scientometrics. 2013;97(3):871–82.

56. 56.

    Aphinyanaphongs Y, Fu LD, Aliferis CF. Identifying unproven cancer
    treatments on the health web: addressing accuracy, generalizability
    and scalability. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2013;192:667–71.

57. 57.

    Statnikov A, Alekseyenko AV, Li ZG, Henaff M, Perez-Perez GI, Blaser
    MJ, Aliferis CF. Microbiomic signatures of psoriasis: feasibility
    and methodology comparison. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2620.

58. 58.

    Alekseyenko AV, Lytkin NI, Ai JZ, Ding B, Padyukov L, Aliferis CF,
    Statnikov A. Causal graph-based analysis of genome-wide association
    data in rheumatoid arthritis. Biol Direct. 2011;6(1):25.

59. 59.

    Statnikov A, Lytkin NI, McVoy L, Weitkamp J, Aliferis CF. Using gene
    expression profiles from peripheral blood to identify asymptomatic
    responses to acute respiratory viral infections. BMC Res Notes.
    2010;3(1):264.

60. 60.

    Fu LD, Aliferis CF. Using content-based and bibliometric features
    for machine learning models to predict citation counts in the
    biomedical literature. Scientometrics. 2010;85(1):257–70.

61. 61.

    Kraus VB, Ma S, Tourani R, Fillenbaum GG, Burchett BM, Parker DC,
    Kraus WE, Connelly MA, Otvos JD, Cohen HJ, Orenduff MC. Causal
    analysis identifies small HDL particles and physical activity as key
    determinants of longevity of older adults. EBioMedicine.
    2022;85:104292.

62. 62.

    Saxe GN, Ma S, Morales LJ, Galatzer-Levy IR, Aliferis C, Marmar CR.
    Computational causal discovery for post-traumatic stress in police
    officers. Transl Psychiatry. 2020;10(1):1–12.

63. 63.

    Attur M, Krasnokutsky S, Statnikov A, Samuels J, Li Z, Friese O, Le
    MPH G-G, Rybak L, Kraus VB, Jordan JM, Aliferis CF, Abramson SB.
    Low-grade inflammation in symptomatic knee osteoarthritis:
    prognostic value of inflammatory plasma lipids and peripheral blood
    leukocyte biomarkers. Arthritis & Rheumatology. 2015;67(11):2905–15.

64. 64.

    Attur M, Statnikov A, Samuels J, Li Z, Alekseyenko AV, Greenberg JD,
    Krasnokutsky S, Rybak L, Lu QA, Todd J, Zhou H, Jordan JM, Aliferis
    CF, Abramson SB. Plasma levels of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist
    (IL1Ra) predict radiographic progression of symptomatic knee
    osteoarthritis. Osteoarthr Cartil. 2015;23(11):1915–24.

65. 65.

    Feig JE, Vengrenyuk Y, Reiser V, Wu C, Statnikov A, Aliferis CF,
    Garabedian MJ, Fisher EA, Puig O. Regression of atherosclerosis is
    characterized by broad changes in the plaque macrophage
    transcriptome. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39790.

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_6

The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models

Constantin Aliferis¹   and Gyorgy Simon¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

This chapter introduces the notion of “clinical-grade” and other
sensitive, mission-critical models and contrasts such models with more
fault-tolerant feasibility, exploratory, or pre-clinical ones. The steps
outlined span from requirements engineering to deployment and monitoring
and also emphasize a number of contextual factors determining success
such as clinical and health economic considerations. AI’s “knowledge
cliff” is discussed and the need to operationalize AI/ML
“self-awareness” and overcome its limitations to ensure generality and
safe use. This chapter introduces many core pitfalls and best practices.
The overarching concepts, pitfalls and BPs of the chapter will be
elaborated further and implementation will be presented across the book
and especially in chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML
Systems,” “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML
Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science,” “Foundations of
Causal ML”, “Model Selection and Evaluation”, and in chapter
“Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and
Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and
AI”.

Keywords

Clinical-grade AI/ML modelHigh-stakes/risk AI/ML modelLifecycle of and
development/validation process for AI/ML modelsDecision
support“Knowledge cliff”Transparency and explanationModel selection and
error estimation protocolsModel equivalence classes

Clinical-Grade and Other Mission-Critical AI/ML Models vs. Exploratory and Feasibility Models

As we have seen in chapter “Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need for Best Practices Enabling
Trust in AI and ML”, AI/ML is widely applicable across industries,
endeavors, and objectives. One of the differentiating characteristics of
biomedical AI/ML is the high cost of wrong decisions which is typically
not shared with many other types of commercial AI/ML.

Examples of non-biomedical AI/ML tasks that have typically low cost of
errors:

- Recommendation systems in online e-commerce platforms,

- Recommendation systems for digital media streaming,

- Ad dollar allocation to increase sales,

- Language filters in social media,

- Email spam detectors,

- Image recognition in search engines.

While some non-biomedical areas do have high-risk applications such as:

- Autonomous vehicles,

- Weapons and defense systems,

- Algorithmic trading,

these are relatively rare compared to healthcare and the health
sciences, that are replete with tasks that have very high cost of
failure, including in:

- Diagnosis of serious diseases,

- Choice of treatment in oncology and other life-threatening diseases,

- Differentiation of early signs of benign from malignant conditions or
  conditions that will progress to life-threatening stages or have other
  dire consequences if the right treatment is delayed,

- Generating hypotheses for re-organization of healthcare services and
  other interventions that may severely affect the cost-effectiveness
  and outcomes of a health system.

Even health science tasks that on the surface may seem tolerant of
errors have important serious unintended consequences, for example in:

- Discovery of drug targets which if having many false positives, will
  lead to failed novel pharmaceuticals pipelines with up to
  multibillion-dollar losses,

- Conflating correlative with causal factors leading to pursuing
  expensive and risky interventions that cannot possibly improve
  outcomes,

- Low signal-to-noise ratio in the biomedical literature due to massive
  production of false results which disrupts progress in the health
  sciences,

- Failure to discover novel effective treatments and practice
  interventions.

Because the requirements of high-stakes models are very different than
those of models with less severe costs and consequences, we
differentiate between the following very different classes of models and
place strong emphasis on the safe and effective development of high-risk
models. We first crystalize the related key concept definitions:

- Exploratory AI/ML models: models that test scientific hypotheses or
  generate new hypotheses but without linking critical patient, health
  system, or health sciences decisions to the quality of such models.

- Feasibility AI/ML models: models that test the feasibility of
  constructing a certain type of model but without linking critical
  patient, health system, or health sciences decisions to the quality of
  such models.

- Pre-clinical AI/ML models: models that test the feasibility of
  constructing (at a later stage) patient or health system critical
  models.

- Clinical-grade and mission-critical AI/ML models: models with
  performance characteristics that allow for effective and safe use for
  patient, population, health system or health sciences-level decisions
  [1].

The delineation between exploratory, feasibility and clinical grade
models is fundamentally a risk assessment process. Within the categories
of feasibility and clinical-grade (or other mission-critical) models,
further risk analyses will typically occur. These risks may involve
model inaccuracy related risks, legal risks, ethical risks, financial
risks, etc.

Risk assessment of health AI/ML models can greatly facilitated via
application of the risk management framework provided by the ISO 14971
standard and/or by application of the FDA criteria for regulated medical
devices (see chapter “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal
Implications (ELSI)” for detailed discussion). Another useful high-level
framework is the translational science spectrum [2] comprising steps T0
to T4. Exploratory and feasibility AI/ML would typically fall in stages
T0-T1, whereas T2 and beyond corresponds to clinical-grade AI/ML.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  T0 research: Basic biomedical research, including preclinical and animal studies, not including interventions with human subjects.
  T1 research: Translation to humans, including proof of concept studies, phase 1 clinical trials, and focus on new methods of diagnosis, treatment, and prevention in highly-controlled settings.
  T2 research: Translation to patients, including phase 2 and 3 clinical trials, and controlled studies leading to clinical application and evidence-based guidelines.
  T3 research: Translation to practice, including comparative effectiveness research, post-marketing studies, clinical outcomes research, as well as health services, and dissemination & implementation research; and
  T4 research: Translation to communities, including population level outcomes research, monitoring of morbidity, mortality, benefits, and risks, and impacts of policy and change.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notice that even if a model is not subject to regulatory oversight per
se, it may still pose very significant risks. Consider for example, a
model for forecasting resource utilization/needs used by a hospital’s
administration business planning; or a model used by health insurers for
contract pricing and reimbursability; or, finally a model that helps a
pharmaceutical manufacturer prioritize its drug pipeline. It is entirely
conceivable for errors in such models to lead to very substantial
financial losses and/or disruption of health services or of R&D and
production, affecting the well-being not only of such organizations but
of large populations of individuals as well.

Also notice that whereas a marketed/deployed AI/ML model may directly
affect patients’ outcomes and require regulatory approval, the
pre-cursors of such models that investigate feasibility will not
typically require such oversight (but be subject to other ethical and
legal constraints).

The major (high-level) pitfalls that the present chapter addresses are:

Pitfall 6.1.1

Treating the development of clinical-grade or mission-critical AI/ML
models as if they were exploratory, feasibility or pre-clinical ones.

Pitfall 6.1.2

Failing to establish and apply appropriate sufficient criteria and
enforce BPs for model development, validation, and lifecycle support
that will ensure safe and effective deployment in high risk settings.

Best Practice 6.1.1

Define the goals and process of AI/ML model building as either
feasibility/exploratory or as clinical-grade/mission-critical and apply
appropriate quality and rigor criteria and best practices.

In the remainder of this chapter (as well in related chapters diving
into technical details) we will expand and enrich these pitfalls and
present corresponding BPs.

The Lifecycle of Clinical-Grade and Other Mission-Critical AI/ML Models (with Indicative Real-Life Example References). A Development Process

Recall from chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning
(ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need for Best Practices
Enabling Trust in AI and ML” that learning and other AI methods produce
decision support models focused on specific problem solving tasks. In
chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and
AI Methods and Systems” we described a systematic process for designing
or evaluating learning methods (algorithms, algorithm families,
pipelines, and automodelers) in terms of desirable operating
characteristics.

Here we focus our attention to the development process, not of methods
but of models with desirable performance characteristics (aka
assurances) [3] across the lifecycle of the AI/ML models or systems [4].

Conceptually, and similar to the method development and evaluation
process of chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal
of ML and AI Methods and Systems,” the described model lifecycle process
combines elements of tested-and-true software and medical device
development processes: the modified waterfall development process where
iterative development is allowed (and here in addition, certain parts
are occurring in parallel); and the stage-gate development process
[5–7].

We will assume that the models will be based on existing or
newly-developed and validated methods and will introduce pitfalls and a
best practice process and steps, the purpose of which is to ensure that
performance and safety goals are met. We discuss real life examples to
ground the concepts in reality and make them clear. The overarching
concepts and BPs of the present chapter are complemented by additional
implementation details presented in chapters: “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems,” “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science,” “Foundations of Causal ML”, “Evaluation”, and “Overfitting,
Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and Under-performance
Pitfalls and Best practices in Machine Learning and AI” (Fig. 1).

[]

A flow diagram for A I and M L model development. Establishing
performance and safety requirements is followed by data design,
first-pass analysis and modeling, model optimization and validation,
production models, monitoring, ancillary benefits, and I P and other
considerations,

For each of the above steps/stages, we discuss where and how relaxing
the stringency of requirements is warranted for feasibility,
exploratory, or pre-clinical models.

Step 1. Establishing Performance and Safety Requirements

The first step of developing a new AI/ML model or system is deciding
what its intended goal is and what other constraints should be
considered. This step corresponds to the traditional requirements
engineering process familiar in the development of practically any
computer, IT or engineering system [8]. Requirements engineering for AI
and ML is currently an emerging field and many challenges exist in
identifying the categories of goals and the right processes for
conducting successful requirements engineering in health AI/ML [9–11].
Various desired properties, such as accuracy, explainability, safety
etc. are often discussed in this emerging literature. We will
incorporate in the components of step 1 these concepts - using a
healthcare and health sciences perspective - as well as concepts from
the related literature on healthcare and life sciences analytics,
clinical prediction modeling, and healthcare risk adjustment [12–14].

Step 1.1. Specifying Performance Targets

In order for AI/ML models to be effective there must be a clear minimum
set of performance goals that the successful models have to meet or
exceed. Typically these can be determined according to the need to meet
some desired clinical outcomes goal in either absolute or relative
terms. Indicative examples include: severe post-surgical infections less
than 1/100 in surgeries of some type; reducing adverse events for some
treatment used in patients with condition X by three-fold relative to
current incidence; achieving diagnostic accuracy for condition X that is
at least 50% better than current human error rates; improving
current hypertensive medication compliance of patients by 30%;
eliminating 1-month re-admissions in Medicare patients; controlling
false positive biomarker identification for some disease X such that no
more than 10% of newly identified biomarkers are statistical false
positives; improving the cost-effectiveness of existing diagnostics,
treatments, or other patient or population-level interventions by some
specific margin, etc.

The various metrics often used for these purposes are part of the
toolkit of AI/ML model evaluation and are discussed at length in chapter
“Evaluation”.

Step 1.2. Establishing and Evaluating Performance Targets in Real-Life and Multi-Objective Context of Use; Stakeholder Engagement

The target requirements represent meaningful goals in real-life
discovery and health care settings as a function of the needs of a
plurality of stakeholders and may be subject to objective or subjective
judgments and values. Such judgment may originate by clinical experts,
national guidelines, or may be tied to financial and payer expectations,
and may also incorporate patient’s and human subjects’ perspectives
(e.g., about subjective quality of life in various health states, or
expectations about privacy, health risks etc., respectively) and ELSI
(Ethical, Legal, Social Implications) as well as JEDI (social Justice,
health Equity, Diversity, Inclusion) criteria and desiderata (see
chapter “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal Implications
(ELSI))” for the importance and nature of ethical consideration and
goals including extensive discussion of the important elements of health
equity and elimination of unfair treatment of disadvantaged populations.

The context of these assessments has to be carefully constructed so that
it is well-defined and facilitates the subsequent model development. By
way of analogous examples, a well-defined context of model use may be
similar to patient inclusion criteria specification for a clinical trial
protocol, FDA contexts of use for biomarkers, FDA approved uses for
drugs, etc.

Stakeholders and sources of guidance for developing a well-specified
context of use of the sought models as well as performance requirements
include:

1.  (a)

    External (independent) or organizational (internal) clinical
    experts;

     

2.  (b)

    Clinical service directors;

     

3.  (c)

    The scientific literature, including science-driven hypotheses;

     

4.  (d)

    National, state and organizational guidelines;

     

5.  (e)

    Payers and contracts terms between providers and payers;

     

6.  (f)

    Regulatory bodies and legal compliance experts;

     

7.  (g)

    Ethics experts;

     

8.  (h)

    Community representatives;

     

9.  (i)

    Individual patients and patient advocacy groups;

     

10. (j)

    Professional and scientific societies;

     

11. (k)

    Scientific standards and standards groups;

     

12. (l)

    It is also possible for goals to be generated by data-driven
    opportunity identification by prior application of AI/ML technology.

     

The above serve as the most common important sources for setting quality
and cost improvement initiatives in the context of QCI of health
systems, Learning Health Systems initiatives, and academic and industry
R&D initiatives where AI/ML can be an enabling technology. Especially
with regards to general data and science standards, models and their
underlying data both at development, validation and deployment stages
ideally must follow:

1.  (m)

    FAIR principles for scientific data and software (Findable
    Accessible Interoperable and Reusable data and software).

     

2.  (n)

    TRUST data principles (Transparency, Responsibility, User focus,
    Sustainability, and Technology).

     

3.  (o)

    Open Science practices including open access, open data, open
    source, and open standards for software, data and scientific
    findings.

     

4.  (p)

    Data security and HIPAA and other compliance requirements for data
    privacy by virtue of state of the art IT security,
    de-identification, and secure management of all sensitive EHR, RCT
    and other data.

     

5.  (q)

    Use of shareable and standardized terminologies and common data
    models (e.g., RxNorm, ICD9, ICD10, SNOMED CT, CPT, LOINC, HL7, OMOP,
    PCORnet CDM, i2b2, for research with clinical data; and OBI, GO,
    VariO, PRO, GO, CL, etc. for research with molecular data. See
    chapter “Data Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and Management” for
    detailed discussion and references for data requirements and
    practices).

     

An appraisal and synthesis of the above requirements may typically be
undertaken by institutional AI/ML governance and oversight committees
[15, 16].

Step 1.3. From Accuracy to Value Proposition and Health Economics

AI/ML loss functions and the general theory that governs AI/ML are
typically constructed around predictivity measures (e.g., AUC, weighted
accuracy, MSE etc., see chapter “Evaluation”). A translation step is
typically needed to map predictivity measures and other model properties
(e.g., cost of inputs to the model per application of the model) into
downstream value.

In healthcare, generally there are four key business drivers of value:
(a) revenue growth, (b) operating margins, (c) asset efficiency, and (d)
organizational effectiveness. These drivers in turn impact three main
business goals: (1) clinical performance, (2) operational performance,
and (3) financial performance [4].

There are many metrics used to measure these goals and chapter
“Evaluation” discusses both clinical outcome oriented metrics as well as
health economic ones. We will briefly mention here that metrics exist
that combine clinical with economic value, for example the metric of
Incremental Cost Effectiveness Ratio (ICER) which is a typical and
widely-used value assessment health economics tool based on economic
cost (e.g., expenditure in dollars) per unit of effectiveness typically
measured in Quality Adjusted Life Years (QUALYs) gained by use of some
intervention, technology, medication, or in our case AI/ML model. The
ICER and other cost-effectiveness metrics have several useful
properties:

1.  (a)

    They allow placing a variety of wildly heterogeneous possible
    improvements on current practices, in clinical care or science, in
    direct comparison to one another.

     

2.  (b)

    They allow optimal allocation of limited resources to maximize the
    expected benefit across all possible mixtures of interventions.

     

3.  (c)

    They enable specifying minimum performance requirements that are
    necessary for making the decision of incurring the costs required
    for developing and/or deploying the envisioned or existing AI/M
    model. See chapter “Evaluation” for details.

     

Step 1.4. System-Level Goals and interactions vs.” Tunnel-Vision” Model Development

A common shortcoming of AI/ML model development practice is that they
have performance requirements that are meaningful in a narrow context
but are blind to system-level consequences and interactions.

As an example in clinical settings, consider the need to decide whether
patients with COVID-19 infections should be admitted in the ICU versus
the hospital clinic and the related problem of whether milder COVID
cases should be hospitalized or sent home. AI/ML models focusing
exclusively on eliminating the risk of bad outcomes for these patients
would tend to overwhelm the hospital and ICU beds to the detriment of
patients with other conditions. If a fixed number of hospital beds can
be made available in some time horizon, and patients with different
risks for dire outcomes are “competing” for the limited beds, sound
development and evaluation of Covid admission models should take into
account the patients with different conditions and the system of care
holistically. As of the time this book is written, the literature on
AI/Ml decision support models strongly indicates that such system-level
interactions are typically not considered, yet they are critical for the
health system holistically.

Step 1.5. Relaxing the Stringency of Requirements for Feasibility, Exploratory, or Pre-clinical Models. Proper Level of Interpretation

The above requirements can be relaxed when dealing with feasibility,
exploratory or preclinical models. It is entirely appropriate for such
models to have a combination of the following:

- Unspecified performance targets,

- Open-ended application contexts,

- To be driven by scientists’ curiosity,

- To omit system-level interactions,

- To forego incorporation of health economics, and

- To not consider clinical-grade compliance and risk management.

However, even for such early efforts, the closer they are to the ideal
specifications of clinical-grade and mission-critical models, the more
informative and the closer they are to eventually leading to significant
contribution to health care and the health sciences. Additionally,
serious caution is warranted regarding the problem of producing too much
“noise” in the literature resulting from models lacking or with loose
requirements and purpose.

Finally, creators of feasibility, exploratory and pre-clinical models
should not over-interpret them and exaggerate their significance. The
reader is referred to chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems,” for guidance on over and
under interpreting methods and models produced by them, which applies
exactly here as well, and will not be repeated as it applies precisely
as stated in section “Over-and Under-Interpreting Results,” in the
same chapter.

We can therefore refine and expand pitfall 6.1. by including:

Pitfall 6.2.1.1

Failure to specify and evaluate meaningful performance targets and
real-life context of use.

Pitfall 6.2.1.2

Failure to engage all appropriate stakeholders.

Pitfall 6.2.1.3

Failure to establish value targets and translate predictivity and other
technical model characteristics into real-world value assessments.

Pitfall 6.2.1.4

Failure to consider broader interactions of envisioned models with the
health system or with the system of science and of R&D. “Tunnel vision”
evaluation with blind spots to the broader implications and
consequences.

Pitfall 6.2.1.5

Failure to consider ELSI and JEDI desiderata and consequences.

Pitfall 6.2.1.6

Interpreting results of models beyond what their properties justify.

Pitfall 6.2.1.7

Interpreting results of models below what their known properties
justify.

The corresponding best practices are:

Best Practice 6.2.1.1

When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive model development, specify
concrete model performance targets for well-defined care or discovery
settings.

Best Practice 6.2.1.2

When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive model development, engage
all appropriate stakeholders.

Best Practice 6.2.1.3

When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive model development,
translate model accuracy to value, establish value targets and translate
predictivity and other technical model characteristics into real-world
value assessments.

Best Practice 6.2.1.4

When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive model development,
carefully consider and plan for system-level goals and interactions.
Avoid too narrow (“tunnel vision”) model development.

Best Practice 6.2.1.5

When pursuing clinical-grade and risk-sensitive model development,
carefully consider ELSI and JEDI desiderata and consequences.

Best Practice 6.2.1.6

When pursuing feasibility, exploratory, or pre-clinical models, relax
stringency of requirements applicable to clinical-grade models.

Best Practice 6.2.1.7

When pursuing clinical-grade and risk-sensitive model development,
interpret models and models’ decisions exactly as their known properties
justify.

Step 2. Data Design and Collection

The second stage in the clinical-grade and mission-critical model
development process is the careful data design that will facilitate data
collection and modeling to enable meeting the model performance
requirements. In chapter “Data Design” we cover extensively the most
relevant data designs and their relative strengths and weaknesses, their
connection to modeling methods, their biases, their effect on
performance, and other important characteristics.

One of the fundamental premises of this book and of chapter “Data
Design” in particular (also discussed in chapters “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems,” “Principles of rigorous development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems,” and “Lessons Learned from
Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In Healthcare
and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of
Best Practices”), is that the data design is, generally speaking, as
important as the actual algorithms and AI/ML analytic protocols and
stacks and many failures occur when the data design is deficient. In
particular, powerful data designs may render the choice of algorithms
inconsequential, and conversely a poor data design will increase the
modeling work and difficulty exponentially, up to rendering the whole
model development workflow infeasible.

Pitfall 6.2.2.1

Failure to create a rigorous and powerful data design which facilitates
modeling that will meet performance and safety requirements.

For feasibility, exploratory, or pre-clinical modeling, on the other
hand, developers can and often do utilize “convenience” datasets without
extensive efforts for bespoke and optimized data sampling. In such cases
the feasibility modeling has to be tailored to the limitations of the
convenience datasets and the interpretation has to be careful to not
overstate what can be developed with imperfect data designs.

Pitfall 6.2.2.2

Failure to consider and judiciously interpret the limitations of
convenience data designs on the performance and meaning of feasibility
and exploratory models.

Best Practice 6.2.2.1

When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive model development, create a
rigorous and powerful data design which facilitates modeling that will
meet performance and safety requirements.

Best Practice 6.2.2.2

When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive model development,
judiciously interpret the limitations of convenience data designs for
the performance and meaning of feasibility and exploratory models.

Step 3. First-Pass Analysis and Modeling

The next stage of clinical grade and mission-critical AI/ML model
development is that of “first-pass” modeling before final optimized
models are attempted. This stage essentially asks “how much signal seems
to be in the data for the problem at hand, using the
immediately-available data?”. If the preliminary signal is high, then
transition to high performance/low risk models will be easier, faster,
and cheaper. If the preliminary signal is small, then major efforts may
be needed in data collection, new method development, sophisticated
modeling, etc. and still these efforts may not meet target requirements.
In R&D designs where alternative projects compete for the same limited
R&D funds, this stage may be the point where some of the projects will
be “weeded out” in favor of more promising ones.

The first-pass modeling therefore must be rigorous and involves a number
of activities that to large extent mirror aspects of rigorous methods
development previously discussed in chapter “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”:

(a) Literature review of what has been accomplished, and how, and what
level of performance was reached by prior efforts;

(b) Theoretical analysis of the problem space and its characteristics;

(c) Available or easy /cheap to collect data for initial development and
testing;

(d) Approaches and results previously explored both in terms of data
design, algorithms and models;

(e) Verifying and reproducing prior literature findings/claims;

(f) Variation of data/populations used to derive prior models and how
they match the population for the intended new models; and

(g) Preliminary estimates of predictivity of the first pass models and
whether they meet requirements.

These considerations collectively establish that first pass modeling
does not imply a haphazard and “anything goes” approach to modeling.
Several criteria apply that sharply differentiate feasibility modeling
(which is not tied to a clinical-grade or mission-critical modeling)
with first pass modeling (which is part of a R&D chain that intends to
achieve, eventually, clinical-grade and mission-critical performance).

Finally an important consideration is to avoid overfitting, which as we
see in detail in chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model
Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in
Machine Learning and AI”, will occur when repeated rounds of modeling
with additional methods in same data are conducted without appropriate
over-fitting avoidance protocols being in place.

The steps in this stage can also serve, at the discretion of the data
scientists and the project leaders, as a blueprint for strong
exploratory modeling (always remembering that if exploration is the sole
goal, then much lower data and performance and safety requirements can
be pursued).

Pitfall 6.2.3.1

Failure to ensure the successful transition from first pass modeling to
optimized clinical grade models by ignoring: the problem space
characteristics; data available for development and testing; prior
literature on approaches and results previously explored both in terms
of data design, algorithms and models; forfeiting verification and
reproducing prior literature findings/claims; and failure to obtain
robust preliminary estimates of predictivity of the first pass models
and whether they meet requirements.

Pitfall 6.2.3.2

Succumb to overfitting when repeatedly analyzing data from first pass to
optimized modeling stages.

Best Practice 6.2.3.1

When moving from first pass modeling to optimized clinical grade models
take into account: the problem space characteristics; data available for
development and testing; prior literature on approaches and results
previously explored both in terms of data design, algorithms and models;
verification and reproducing prior literature findings/claims; obtaining
robust preliminary estimates of predictivity of the first pass models
and whether they meet requirements.

Best Practice 6.2.3.2

Avoid overfitting due to repeatedly analyzing data from first pass to
optimized modeling stages.

An Important Protocol for Over-Fitting Resistant Model Selection, and Unbiased Model Error Estimation

Critical to a successful ML method is the choice of model selection and
error estimation protocol. Such a protocol should support the following:

1.  (a)

    Unbiased error estimation (i.e., estimate accurately the
    generalization error of the model in the large sample population).

     

2.  (b)

    Avoiding overfitting the model to the training data, especially if
    dimensionality is high, sample size is small, and many methods are
    applied.

     

3.  (c)

    Avoid missing strong models for the task at hand (i.e., avoid
    under-fitting).

     

Figure 2 depicts the core concept and simplified pseudo-code for a
powerful such protocol that has great applicability across a wide range
of biomedical ML modeling problems: the Repeated Nested Balanced N-fold
Cross Validation (RNBNFCV) protocol [17]. The bottom part shows
pseudocode for a bare-bones RNBNFCV. The top part demonstrates a simple
example of operation of a three-fold cross validation optimizing two
values (1,2) of one hyper-parameter (C) for one algorithm.

[]

A diagram and a pseudocode for R N B N F C V. Top. A dataset has
predictor and outcome variables, and the outer and inner loops have
cross-validation for performance estimation and model selection. Bottom.
The training set is repeated N times to test the classifier and record
average performance.

As can be seen the data is split randomly in 3 equal parts P1, P2, P3.
Each part is stratified so that has equal number of positive and
negative values of the binary response (i.e., the splits are balanced).
For each of the P1, P2, P3 datasets, two parts are used for model
selection and the remainder (third part) is used for error estimation.
For example in split 1 {P1, P2} will be used for model selection and P3
for error estimation. We say that the error estimation occurs in the
outer loop and the model selection in the inner loop. This is evident
from both the graphic and the pseudocode.

Within each model selection part of a split, we use a random part for
fitting a model and the rest for evaluating its performance. For example
in inner split 1, P1 will be used to fit a model with hyper parameter
C = 1 and tested on P2. Then in inner split 2, P2 will be used to fit a
model with C = 1 and evaluated in P1. The average accuracy over the
inner splits informs the merit of C = 1. We do the same for C = 2 and
find out that C = 1 is the best value for the hyper-parameter. This
terminates this most simplistic model selection. Now we join P1 and P2
and train a model with C = 1. We evaluate in P3 in the outer loop and
record the accuracy (=89%).

We repeat this procedure for the other outer cross validation splits
(i.e., P1,P3/P2 and P2,P3/P1). The trace of the model selection for
these splits is not shown, but we can see that the best C for the second
split was 2 and for the third split was 1. Based on these values for C,
models are fit on {P1, P3} and {P2, P3} respectively, and accuracies
estimated on P2, P1, respectively.

The average of these outer loop accuracies are then averaged to provide
a final unbiased estimate of the accuracy that this protocol can
identify (83%). What is not shown in this simplified figure is:

1.  1.

    The final model is a model that we will fit from all data {P1,P2,P3}
    using C = 1. The estimated accuracy of 83% applies to this final
    model.

     

2.  2.

    We can use many algorithms and many hyper-parameters with many
    values and let the protocol find the best model.

     

3.  3.

    We can further reduce the variance of the final estimates and of the
    model selection by repeating the whole procedure and averaging the
    error estimates.

     

Step 4. Model Optimizing and Validation

Step 4.1. Modify or Enhance Data Design, Algorithms, and Protocols

Once a first-pass analysis has been completed and the data scientists
have collected important information about the sufficiency of data
(e.g., is there need to collect more variables, or larger sample size,
to clean up and transform variables etc., or alter other data design
aspects), as well as modeling (e.g., whether the algorithm and protocols
applied seem sufficient or require inclusion of additional analytic
methods and in some cases enhancing methods with new method development
efforts), they can proceed with optimized model building and validation.
This includes the following key steps:

Step 4.2. Obtain Performance Metrics and Meeting Targets

This is accomplished using model selection and error estimation and
evaluation designs and procedures for appropriate performance metrics as
explained in chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”
(fundamental methods), “Model Selection”, “Evaluation”, and the chapter
on overfitting. The performance metrics can be estimated with purely
statistical methods and/or with collection of new data and prospective
validations. See chapter “Evaluation” for pros and cons of these
approaches.

In case that further refinements are needed because performance targets
are not fully met, this will trigger revisiting and iterating between
steps 4.1.-4.2, and possibly new method development (chapter “Principles
of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and
Systems”). It is also possible that targets cannot be met despite
efforts and therefore relaxing the original model specifications and
re-architecting the whole problem solving effort toward more feasible
goals, may be necessary.

Step 4.3. Uncertainty and Error

This step involves a thorough characterization of the optimized model’s
decision uncertainty and goes beyond establishing the main performance
metrics. Examples of this step may include calculating: the robustness
of model and its structure and parameters as a function of sampling
variation (via resampling); sensitivity to modeling decisions (e.g.,
similarity distance metrics, kernel functions, algorithm families
considered etc.); calibration; predictive intervals (measuring
uncertainty of decisions). A related procedure at this stage is to
“curve out” subpopulations in the model’s inputs distribution space or
the model’s output using thresholding, clustering and other methods so
that to define decision regions and populations that are characterized
by high or low confidence. These steps are essential for managing
misclassification risk and discussed further in chapter “Characterizing,
Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML and AI Models in
Clinical and Organizational Application”.

Step 4.4. Model Explanation/Interpretation

AI/ML Models are much more likely to be adopted and used if human
stakeholders can understand their function and why they make the
decisions they do. It is a critical element in making sure that AI/ML is
safe and also commonly important for regulatory approvals. It is
essential that model explanations have high fidelity (i.e., correspond
precisely to how the AI/ML functions, and are not just persuasive but
inaccurate justifications of the models [18]).

We have seen in previous chapters that some AI/ML methods are inherently
understandable (e.g., logic, rule based systems, Bayes Nets, causal
graphs, decision trees, linear regression etc.) while many other methods
produce models that are black box and hard to understand.

The fields of explainable AI (XAI) and interpretable ML and their
incarnations in health domains study methods to make black box models
interpretable [19].

In this section we will delve into essential concepts and techniques for
AI/ML interpretation.

Murdock et al. [20] define interpretation, in the context of ML, as
producing insight from ML models. Specifically, they define
interpretable machine learning as the extraction of relevant knowledge
from a machine-learning model concerning relationships either contained
in data or learned by the model. Other definitions include
“Interpretability is the degree to which a human can understand the
cause of a decision” [21].

Benefits of interpretable machine learning methods include: [21–23].

- Model interpretability allows the user of the model to investigate and
  understand why an unexpected prediction was made by the model.

- By extension, model interpretability allows us to debug models: the
  model developer can track down why the model made an erroneous
  prediction.

- Model interpretability can shed light on the data-generating
  mechanisms of the domain that is being modeled.

- Interpretable models offer a level of safety in that the user can
  anticipate model behavior.

- In the absence of strict standards that govern the interoperability of
  ML models (or ML models and humans), understanding exactly how the
  individual ML models operate, can increase trust in their effective
  co-operation.

As we discuss in Chapter “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal
Implications (ELSI)”, interpretable models also allow for the detection
of biases present in the training data and are required for equitable
and fair models.

A Taxonomy of AI/ML Interpretability

Methods for model interpretation can be categorized along the following
dimensions [21, 24]:

- Inherently interpretable vs. post hoc. Models such as linear
  regression models, k-NN classifiers, decision trees are inherently
  interpretable; their language (see chapters “Foundations and
  Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and Operating
  Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and
  Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML”) is particularly
  suitable for human interpretation unless their size (e.g., number of
  leaves or number of variables) is excessive. In contrast, models such
  as kernel-SVM or Deep Learning are not easily interpretable, and the
  models are explained post hoc, after they have been constructed.

- Global vs. local interpretability. Global interpretation of a model
  attempts to explain the model in the entirety of the input space;
  local interpretation attempts to explain how the model operates in
  small part of the input space, possibly for individual instances.
  “Interpretation” generally refers to explaining how the model
  operates, while “explanation” generally refers to explaining how a
  model made a decision (or prediction) for a particular instance.

- Model-agnostic vs. model-specific interpretation. Model-specific
  interpretation techniques require that the model to be interpreted is
  a specific type of model, while model-agnostic interpretation methods
  aims to explain any type of models.

Properties of Interpretation Methods

Numerous properties for interpretation methods have been defined [24,
25]. Below we list some; the reader is referred to [24, 25] for a more
complete list.

- Accuracy is the extent to which the explanation model accurately
  predicts unseen instances.

- Fidelity refers to the extent to which the model is able to accurately
  imitate the black-box predictor to be explained.

- Consistency (among explanation methods) shows how similar explanations
  are from different methods for the same task.

- Stability is the degree to which similar explanations are generated
  for similar instances.

Figure 3 depicts the taxonomy of interpretation method. We have already
discussed the inherently interpretable methods in chapters “Foundations
and Properties of AI/ML Systems,” “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science,” and “Foundations of Causal ML”. We will provide some
additional detail on the local and global model-agnostic methods and
their properties.

[]

A classification chart of interpretation methods. Inherently
interpretable includes k N N, G L M, and D T. Post-hoc interpretation
has global model agnostic that includes P D P and feature importance,
local model agnostic that includes I C E and line, and model-specific
that includes Tree SHAP.

Partial Dependence Plots (PDPs) [26] is a methodology for visualizing
the effect of predictor variables on an outcome in a reduced feature
space. For a feature S of interest, and for each unique value s it
takes, the partial dependence is the average effect of the remaining
variables (keeping S = s fixed). The partial dependence plot depicts the
predicted outcome as a function of S and can be converted into feature
importance by computing the feature’s deviation from the average effect
or by taking the difference between the maximal and minimal effects.

Properties. PDP is a global method. The marginalization is over the
remaining variables, which prevents the user from detecting “local”
effects, that is relationships between S and the outcome that hold true
only in a subspace. PDP is a plot, offering an intuitive interpretation.
The method makes the assumption of independence between S and the
remaining variables. Under this assumption, the interpretation is that
the partial dependence is the marginal effect of S on the outcome.

Individual Conditional Expectation (ICE) [27] plot visualizes the
dependence of the predicted outcome on a feature S for each instance i
separately, resulting in one line per instance. The curve for instance i
is created by fixing all features except S at their actual values and
varying the value for S according to a grid of feature values. The
predicted outcomes for different i’s at the minimal value of S can
differ, making it difficult to visually inspect a large set of curves at
the same time. The centered ICE brings all the curves together to a
common starting point.

Properties. ICE is a local method, providing a curve for each individual
instance. Relationships that only hold true in parts of the input space
can be detected. This is a plot, so the key method of explanation is
visualization. Too many curves in a plot can create visual clutter. The
partial dependence plot can be viewed as the average of the ICE curves
and can be superimposed on the plot.

Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME) [28] and Anchors
[29]. Rationale: (a) Even if a modeling method produces inherently
interpretable models (e.g. linear regression), having a large number of
variables erodes interpretability. The explainer model should only have
few variables. (b) LIME assumes that in the local context of a
particular instance, only few variables are particularly impactful.
These locally impactful variables can differ from variables that are
locally impactful in a different part of the input space. The explainer
model should then have high local fidelity. The explainer model is
constructed locally on records generated randomly in the neighborhood of
the record to be explained, the query record q, and the records are
weighted according to their proximity to q. The explainer model is an
inherently interpretable model, such as linear regression, trained on
the weighted records. The explanation for q is obtained by explaining
the explainer model.

Anchors is an extension to LIME, which instead of building a local
surrogate model, constructs an IF-THEN rule. They are called “anchors”,
because they sufficiently “anchor” the prediction locally – such that
changes to the rest of the feature values of the instance do not matter;
i.e., similar instances covered by the same anchor have the same
prediction outcome. Two advantages of anchors over LIME include (1) the
improved interpretability the rules and (2) scoping: while the scope of
a LIME explanation is not always clear, anchors have a clearly
delineated scope.

Properties of LIME. It is a local, model-agnostic method. The explainer
model can be any interpretable model; the choice of model can be
tailored to the audience. The explainer model can utilize features that
the original model does not. These features must use the same instances
(sampling units) as the original data set.

Permutation Feature Importance. Rationale: if information in features
that are useful for prediction is destroyed by randomly shuffling the
feature values, the predictive performance of the model should decrease.
If the decrease is small, then the information in the original predictor
wasn’t very impactful; if the decrease is large, then the information in
the original predictor had a large impact on the predictions. A model is
constructed on the training set and the importance of feature S is
estimated by comparing the predictive performance (or error) of the
model on a test set with and without permuting S.

Note. Many variants of the method exist depending on (1) whether they
use the training or test set, and (2) whether they re-train the model
after permuting the feature values. Originally, Breiman [30] used the
out-of-bag samples for variable importance estimation.

Properties. This is a global, model-agnostic method. It is
computationally efficient: the model does not need to be retrained. This
definition of importance relates to predictive performance instead of
the effect of the variable on the outcome. The feature importance
depends on how the underlying learning method attributes the effect of
sets of collinear features to the individual features. Whether the model
is retrained after feature value permutation or not, will particularly
affect the importance of collinear features.

Conversion of black model to decision trees of other interpretable
global surrogate model via meta-learning. This is a global
model-agnostic method whereby the black box model is sampled for a large
number of inputs (that must follow a modeled joint distribution of
inputs or from a random sample from the population) and a new dataset,
Dsam, is created. The response in this new dataset is the black box
model’s predictions (not the original response variables). This dataset
is then processed with a Markov Boundary feature selector so that the
input variables are reduced to the smallest set of features that carry
maximum explanatory signal for the black box model’s behavior. Then
decision trees or other interpretable models are built on the projection
of Dsam on the Markov Boundary features. The method can be used to
explain human decision as well, (if we first construct an accurate model
of the human decision which we can sample as much as we need). Figure 4
demonstrates the process and resulting decision trees in a project where
the goal was to explain physician diagnostic decisions for
differentiating melanomas from benign skin lesions [31]. The method can
be combined with equivalence class modeling of all equivalent Markov
Boundaries so that an unbiased and complete view of the black model can
be generated. Notice that separate interpretable models have been
constructed for each physician. Moreover we can use the interpretable
models to identify guideline compliance for each physician. Caveats and
caution when using this approach are: we may not be able to create an
accurate approximation of the original black box model (or the human
subjects we are studying). Application of Markov Boundary feature
selection may not retain all original signal. Decision trees are
sensitive to the order of variables so we need ensure that when some
variables do not appear in a subtree that they are indeed ignored
locally. Finally when equivalence classes exist, we need examine all
equivalence classes. These caveats apply in general to all
model-agnostic surrogate methods, however.

[]

A diagram, 2 decision trees, and a table. Top. F S is followed by S V M
black box with regular learning, apply S V M, meta-learning, and build D
T. Center. A table lists blue veil, irregular border, and streaks for
patient 001. Bottom. 2 decision trees for benign or malignant by experts
1 and 3.

Explaining human decision making. Once we create accurate models of
human decision making, in principle all XAI methods discussed in this
chapter can be used to explain human decision making (not just AI/ML
models). This is a valuable technique that should be kept in mind when
“Human-in-the-loop” systems are at play [32, 33]. See also chapter “From
‘Human versus Machine’ to ‘Human with Machine’”.

Pitfalls of Using Shapley Values (and Derivative Methods) for AI/ML Explanation

Shapley Values (SVs) is a framework for allocating rewards among agents
who participate in collaborative coalitions to produce economic value
that needs to be distributed fairly. This framework was devised by Lloyd
Shapley who received the Nobel prize in economics for his discovery
[34]. In economic game theory it has been shown that this framework has
a number of desirable and unique properties and its value is undisputed.
However it has been adopted rather uncritically first for explaining
regression models [35] and then, more recently for explaining ML models
[36]. As shown in an important recent work by Ma and Tourani [37]
Shapley Values exhibit a number of severe shortcomings when it comes to
explaining ML models:

1.  1.

    SVs do not explain properly even linear models.

     

2.  2.

    To calculate SVs one needs to build models that are unrelated to the
    model that needs be explained.

     

3.  3.

    If SVs are calculated by data imputation and not de novo model
    rebuilds, the choice of imputation greatly affects the calculated
    values.

     

4.  4.

    SVs for variables conditionally independent of T given blocking
    variable sets are (falsely) non zero.

     

5.  5.

    SVs for variables not in the Markov Boundary of the response are non
    zero.

     

6.  6.

    Causal effects of variables given their confounders are not
    monotonic to SVs.

     

7.  7.

    SVs do not respect the causal Markov Condition and thus cannot be
    used to explain causal models.

     

8.  8.

    SVs for a variable set L with less information content than that of
    set S can be larger than those of S. SVs are thus not monotonic to
    information content.

     

9.  9.

    SVs are an improper measure of feature relevance (i.e., weakly
    relevant features can have higher SV than strongly relevant
    features).

     

Pitfalls of using feature-importance methods. In general these, just
like Shapley Values methods, attempt to summarize the importance of
features using a single summary value. This is a very problematic
endeavor when dealing with complex multi-faceted models. For example,
they do not separate the unique, overlapping, and non-linear interaction
information content of the variables in conjunction with other features
in the model with which they may have overlapping content, or interact
non-linearly to produce strong signal when jointly observed. See chapter
“Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” (section on feature
selection, for more insight). They also cannot explain the causal
effects of features under different conditioning, manipulation and
observational setups (see chapter “Foundations of Causal ML” for
insight). Finally these methods are not modeling effects of equivalence
classes in the models.

Pitfalls of Explaining Transparent But Very Large Models

While a method may be entirely transparent for small scale models, the
produced models may be very hard to interpret when they grow very large,
because of the limits of human memory and cognition. Examples include
large causal graphs, large decision trees, linear models with numerous
variables with each one having a very small coefficient, large bagged
model ensembles, boosted models, etc. Explaining such large models can
be tailored to the specifics of each model family, or addressed with the
usual array of surrogate models (i.e., as if the original model was a
black box model). Table 1. shows example approaches, as indicative
examples of the former approach.

Table 1

Interpretation strategies for interpretable but very large models

+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Very large model family         | Interpretation strategies          |
+:================================+:===================================+
| Linear regression and other GLM | • Group variables and examine      |
|                                 | their aggregate effects.           |
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 | • Create composite scores from     |
|                                 | large number of variables using    |
|                                 | dimensionality reduction or        |
|                                 | supervised regressors.             |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Decision trees                  | • Pre-process with maximally       |
|                                 | compact feature selection.         |
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 | • Prune trees to trade off         |
|                                 | accuracy with simplicity.          |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Causal graphs                   | • Eliminate all variables not      |
|                                 | leading to outcomes of interest.   |
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 | • Extract local causal             |
|                                 | neighborhoods and Markov           |
|                                 | Boundaries.                        |
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 | • Extract causal paths from        |
|                                 | exposures of interest to outcomes  |
|                                 | of interest.                       |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Bagged models                   | • Median, average, and ranges of   |
|                                 | distribution (across the model     |
|                                 | bag) of variable contributions to  |
|                                 | predictions within each model.     |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+

Pitfalls of humans explaining models. Humans experts are often engaged
(especially in the health sciences) for interpreting models. It is
important to verify generalizable fidelity of human expert surrogate
models.

Pitfalls 6.2.4.1 in Explanation of AI/ML

1.  1.

    Using black box models is an obstacle to adoption and trust.

     

2.  2.

    Shapley values (and derivative methods) have several severe
    shortcomings for AI/ML explanation.

     

3.  3.

    Feature importance methods, that attempt to compress complex model
    behaviors into single values per variable, lack the necessary
    information capacity and may be inconsistent with feature selection
    theory and causality.

     

4.  4.

    Inherently transparent but very large models often resist
    interpretability.

     

5.  5.

    Human experts explaining models must be evaluated for validity just
    like ML surrogate models.

     

Best Practices for Explanation of AI/ML:

Best Practice 6.2.4.1. Everything else being equal, prefer interpretable
model families when interpretability is desired.

Best Practice 6.2.4.2. Use standardized coefficients (if applicable)
when comparing feature contributions in linear models.

Best Practice 6.2.4.3. Very large models, even when produced with
intrinsically interpretable methods, may still be hard to interpret
because of sheer scale. Isolating critical information from large models
or simplification are recommended.

Best Practice 6.2.4.4. Apply feature selectors that maximally reduce
dimensionality without loss of predictivity. Compact models are always
easier to explain. Combine with interpretable model families or
surrogate models as appropriate.

Best Practice 6.2.4.5. If accuracy is of paramount importance and if the
black box models have significant accuracy advantages over the best
interpretable models you can build, then use the black box model but
apply explanation methods:

- Global surrogate models aiming to have high fidelity everywhere in the
  input space over all patterns that will be classified by the model.
  Verify generalizable fidelity of surrogate model before using.

- Local surrogate models aiming to have high fidelity in the local input
  space for every pattern pi that will be classified by the model.
  Verify generalizable fidelity of surrogate model before using.

- Human expert surrogate models which must be high fidelity everywhere
  in the input space and over-fitting resistant. Verify generalizability
  and fidelity of human expert explanations of models.

Best Practice 6.2.4.6. Shapley values, Shapley value approximations and
feature importance methods that try to summarize complex model behaviors
in one or few values are not advised as general or routinely used
methods for explaining ML models.

A Note on Over- and Under-Interpreting Models

The structure and operating characteristics of AI/ML models offer
important information about the data generating processes they model.
This is especially important for discovery in the health sciences but
also instrumental when we try and understand and improve systems and
processes of healthcare. The appropriate interpretation of models refers
to not deriving more or less (or more or less general or specific)
conclusions than what the actual models entail. Because the appropriate
model interpretation stems directly from the properties of the model
family, knowledge of the model families (chapters “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems,” “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science,” and “Foundations of Causal ML”) is essential for proper model
interpretation. See chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems” also for examples of
appropriate and inappropriate model interpretation.

Step 4.5. Modeling Equivalence Classes

An extremely common pitfall in AI/ML modeling practices is that of
ignoring equivalence classes of models. In order to understand the
nature of this pervasive problem, and how to address it, we will present
a simplified example.

Consider Fig. 5 where a system under study has the causal structure
depicted. The outcome of interest is depicted in green. This is a
terminal variable which means that no variables relevant to the system
are measured (or have importance) after it (e.g. of such a biological
terminal variable is death). Red variables are measured direct causes.
Purple variables are measured indirect causes. Grey variables are
unmeasured (“hidden” aka “latent”) variables. Uncolored variables are
confounded variables to the outcome (via measured or unmeasured
confounders). Finally “‘ ” (prime) variables (A’, C1’, C2’) have the
same information about the outcome as (i.e., they are information
equivalent with) the corresponding non-prime variables, e.g. A and A’
are information equivalent about the outcome.

[]

A decision tree for equivalence classes. True indirect causes of
outcomes E, F, and C are followed by confounded variables with outcome
L, C 1 prime, C 2 prime, A prime and K, true direct cause of outcomes A
and B, unmeasured variables H 1 and H 2, information equivalent
variables, and outcome.

Formally, information equivalency of two variables with respect to a
third variable is defined as follows:

Definition

Target Information Equivalency (TIE) of variables A, A’ with respect to
variable T, (simplified definition that can be used to understand the
example presented, adapted from [38]):

A TIE_(T) A’ ↔ [(A []Not independent. T), (A’ []Not independent. T), (A
⫫ T | A’), (A’ ⫫ T | A’) 

↔ denoting equivalence

[]Not independent. denoting dependence

⫫ denoting independence

In words:

Information_equivalent (A, A’) with respect to T iff:

- Not Independent (A, T),

- Not Independent (A’, T),

- Independent (A, T), given A’ and

- Independent (A’, T) given A.

In other words, A and A’ have exactly the same (and non-zero)
information about T.

Note 1:A, A’ do not need to be strongly correlated (i.e., co-linear) or
strongly associated. They can be TIE with respect to T even with small
mutual association or correlation.

Note 2:A, A’ may have different information content for other
variables (different than T).

As can be seen in the example of Fig. 5, the minimum set of maximally
predictive features in the data generating function is {A, B, H1, H2}
and its equivalent {A’, B, H1, H2}. This is because we can substitute A
with A’ and vice versa since they are equivalent with respect to the
outcome. In the measured data (because of hidden variables) there are 6
Markov Boundaries and this set can be precisely discovered also (Fig.
6).

[]

2 diagrams for equivalence classes. Top. Inferred Markov boundaries
equivalence class with 6 sets of variables K, A, B, A prime, C, C 1
prime, and C 2 prime. Bottom. True Markov boundaries equivalence class
in measured data. Sets 1 and 4 have C, 2 and 5 have C 1 prime, and 3 and
6 have C 2 prime.

Note 3: In [38] more general definitions of information equivalency are
presented that admit sets of equivalent variables, equivalences
involving more than two equivalent sets, conditional independence with
respect to arbitrary sets, and context-Independent equivalence (holding
given any subset of other, non-equivalent variable sets). The simplified
form of information equivalency covered here for conveying the basic
idea of predictive equivalence, is considerably simpler than these more
general cases.

The situation is similarly complicated for causal discovery. As seen in
Fig. 7 direct causes of the outcome are {A, B, H1, H2}. In the measured
data the apparent direct causes (barring successful application of
latent variable detection algorithms) has an equivalence class with 3
members.

[]

3 diagrams for equivalence classes. Inferred direct causes sets
equivalence class has 3 sets of variables where the sets on the left,
center, and right have C, C 1 prime, and C 2 prime. True direct causes
in measured data have A, B, and C. True direct causes in system have A,
B, and 2 H 1 variables.

When the outcome is a terminal variable (e.g., death), and if no
unmeasured confounders exist, and no information equivalencies, then the
(single) Markov Boundary contains precisely the set of direct causes of
the outcome.

If information equivalencies exist, without unmeasured variables, then
one Markov Boundary member of the equivalence class will contain the
direct causes precisely. When unmeasured variables exist in addition to
equivalences, Markov Boundaries will contain a mixture of direct causes,
indirect causes and non-causal confounded variables. Notice that when a
variable appears in all Markov Boundaries then in the absence of latents
it is guaranteed to be a direct cause (e.g. B).

As a reminder of earlier material (Chapters “Foundations and Properties
of AI/ML Systems” and “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of
Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”), the
following predictive modeling errors may occur when not employing
optimal feature selection:

1.  1.

    Predictivity less than optimal predictivity achievable with the
    measure data.

     

2.  2.

    Predictor model size larger than most parsimonious model among
    maximally predictive ones.

     

The following additional causal modeling errors may occur when not
employing causal methods:

1.  3.

    Including variables that are not causal although their confounders
    are fully measured (e.g., E, L, A and B in a SVM or PCA model
    although causal algorithms detect that only A, B (and their
    equivalents) can be direct causes and E, L (and their equivalents)
    may be indirectly causal or confounded.

     

2.  4.

    Discarding maximum causal effect variables in favor of ones with
    smaller causal effects (e.g. preferring E over A and B because it
    may have larger effect than either A or B alone, known as
    “information synthesis”, for example in decision trees and other
    machine learning methods).

     

3.  5.

    Failure to discover confounding by latents although it is
    discoverable.

     

We can now see the importance of not modeling equivalence classes which
adds to the above errors:

Pitfall 6.2.4.2

Additional predictive modeling errors in analyses where the equivalence
class of the optimal feature sets (Markov Boundaries) are not inferred.

1.  1.

    The predictor model will be a random member of the Markov Boundary
    equivalence class. This may not be the cheapest, easiest or most
    convenient model to deploy clinically.

     

2.  2.

    In domains with large equivalence classes, intellectual property
    cannot be defended since a third party can use an equivalent Markov
    Boundary and easily bypass a patent or other IP protections.

     

Pitfall 6.2.4.3

Additional causal modeling errors in analyses where equivalence classes
of Direct Causes are not inferred.

1.  1.

    Discarding causal variables in favor of non-causal ones (e.g.,
    discarding A because its correlation with outcome vanishes when we
    include non-causal but information equivalent A’ in a regression
    model).

     

2.  2.

    Over-interpreting models: e.g., believing that because A’ is a model
    returned by an algorithm, without equivalence class modeling, and A
    is not, then A’ is biologically more important than A.

     

Because the size of the equivalence classes can be immense (i.e.,
exponential to number of variables see chapters “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems” and “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
Science”) finding the true causes when selecting a random member (as all
algorithms not equipped for equivalence class modeling do) amounts to
“playing a lottery ticket” with astronomical odds against the analyst.
Similarly, finding the feature set that is most suitable for clinical
application is astronomically unlikely if the Markov Boundary
equivalence class is large and is not modeled.

Best Practice 6.2.4.7

1.  (a)

    Use equivalence class modeling algorithms for discovering the
    equivalence class of optimally accurate and non reducible predictive
    models. E.g. TIE* instantiated with GLL-MB or other sound Markov
    boundary subroutines [38] (see chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
    Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and
    Health Science”).

     

2.  (b)

    Use equivalence class modeling algorithms for discovering the
    equivalence class of direct causes. E.g. TIE* instantiated with
    GLL-PC or other sound local causal neighborhood subroutines (chapter
    “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
    Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”).

     

3.  (c)

    When experiments can be conducted, consider using ML-driven
    experimentation algorithms that model equivalence classes.
    Experimentation may be needed to resolve the equivalence classes and
    unmeasured confounding. Such algorithms minimize the number of
    experiments needed. E.g., ODLP* algorithm [39].

     

Pitfall 6.2.4.4

Omit important steps in optimizing model performance and characterizing
error and other properties that are essential for safe and effective
deployment.

Best Practice 6.2.4.8

When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive model development: optimize
model performance verifying that targets are met; otherwise modify or
enhance data design, algorithms, and protocols, or relax requirements;
once modeling is complete characterize error and other properties that
are essential for safe and effective deployment and explain models and
check their face validity.

Step 5. IP Considerations

Throughout the model development process, and depending on
organizational policies regarding intellectual property (IP), close
collaboration with commercialization experts and IP legal counsel may be
needed. These experts may decide to file for patents and other forms of
IP protection at various steps of the model development effort (and the
same applies as well to method development efforts). The data scientists
are essential part of this process as they have to provide technical
details, text, data, and to teach the working of methods and models to
the IP experts. This process involves several challenging aspects:

1.  1.

    First the potential tension (and occasional controversy) between
    open science and open access principles with inventor or
    institutional desires for IP protection. On one extreme, lies the
    position that all IP protection must be avoided. On the other
    extreme, lies a very strict sense of proprietary ownership of
    methods and models and complete lack of transparency about how
    methods and models work.

    In between these extremes lie more balanced approaches where, for
    example, it may be acknowledged that certain inventions can work
    best (e.g. reach patients most effectively) via productization which
    requires commercial investment, which in turn often relies on some
    form of robust IP.

    Simultaneously, this does not preclude, for example, allowing
    non-profit use of methods and models openly and without
    restrictions.

    Patents (and patent applications even when not issued) of algorithms
    and models typically require “opening up” the new technology to
    scrutiny and understanding. This is true even if the patent
    applications are rejected by the USPTO or other (international)
    patent-issuing bodies. On the contrary, if a patent application is
    not pursued, the “trade secret” nature of the technology (unless of
    course disclosed openly) hides critical details from scientific
    inspection and opens up the possibility for errors and risk that
    would be entirely avoidable.

    To complicate matters further, sound science and technology requires
    the ability to stabilize methods and model implementations such that
    they are not perpetually subject to unavoidable re-implementation or
    modification errors. Open source is, unfortunately, particularly
    vulnerable to such errors. “Locking” models and methods and their
    implementation is necessary if absolute certainty that their
    properties hold exactly as established by their validation studies.

     

2.  2.

    If patent protection of AI/ML algorithms is desired, the inventors
    must understand that in recent years it has become increasingly hard
    to obtain such protection (i.e., ~5% issuance rate) since the SCOTUS
    has issued rulings that impose significant hurdles on grounds that
    the patentable inventions are not seen by patent examination as
    abstract ideas, or laws of nature. The USPTO has become increasingly
    resistant to granting patents on highly mathematical inventions such
    as AI/ML ones and often these have to be filed, e.g., in the form of
    tangible systems.

     

3.  3.

    While AI/ML models and systems are much easier to patent than
    algortihms, a major hurdle lies with the (occasionally vast)
    equivalence classes of models with optimal or near –optimal
    performance. As explained previously, ML model M1 for optimal
    treatment of condition X may have an equivalence class with infinite
    size (just the number of fully information equivalent optimal and
    minimal predictor variables sets grows exponentially to the number
    of variables in the data). In such cases IP protection of the
    general methodology of producing the models may be pursued.
    Alternatively, a much newer approach relies on filing for IP
    protection of the equivalence class of optimal and near-optimal
    models. This latter approach requires specialized algorithms that
    derive the full equivalence class such as the ones described in (see
    comparisons of multiple methods in [38] and also discussion in
    chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” and “An
    Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
    Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”).

     

Pitfall 6.2.5.1

Establish and exercise IP rights that defy fundamental principles of
scientific reproducibility, openness to model and method scrutiny, and
validation.

Pitfall 6.2.5.2

Failing to establish IP rights that are critical for successful
dissemination and benefit from AI/ML innovation.

Pitfall 6.2.5.3

Failing to protect IP rights from bypassing IP by exploiting model
equivalence classes.

Best Practice 6.2.5.1

Do not establish and exercise IP rights in ways that undermine
fundamental principles of scientific reproducibility, openness to model
and method scrutiny, and validation.

Best Practice 6.2.5.2

Establish IP rights that are critical for successful dissemination and
patient and society benefit from AI/ML innovation.

Best Practice 6.2.5.3

Protect IP rights from “bypassing” that exploits model equivalence
classes.

Step 6. Regulatory, Bias, ELSI, JEDI Considerations

Throughout all stages in the design, development, validation and
deployment of clinical-grade and error-sensitive AI/ML models there are
important considerations that cover legal compliance, and social and
ethic dimensions. These are covered in chapter “Regulatory Aspects and
Ethical Legal Societal Implications (ELSI)”. At a high level in addition
to regulatory approval, major legal issues are liability, and
conformance to data privacy laws. With regards to ethics and health
equity, access by all patients who might need the technology,
eliminating various racial and other medically unjustified biases from
the data and the models, are major concerns and specific techniques and
practices (detailed in chapter “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal
Societal Implications (ELSI)”) should be used to address these important
dimensions.

As usual, these requirements can be relaxed (but not ignored) for pure
feasibility and exploratory models.

Pitfall 6.2.6.1

Failing to address regulatory, legal, bias, ethical, social justice, and
health equity requirements from design to clinical-grade and
mission-critical model development validation and deployment.

Best Practice 6.2.6.1

When developing clinical-grade and mission-critical models address
regulatory, legal, bias, ethical, social justice, and health equity
issues.

Step 7. Production Models and Model Delivery. Health Economic and Implementation Science Considerations

Step 7.1. Converting Optimized Models to Production-Level Models

Very often, development of models is conducted with vast numbers of data
inputs and resulting models may be impractical to deploy either because
of the sheer complexity of the resulting decision support, or because of
cost of measuring necessary inputs or cost of extracting those with
bespoke interfaces to the EHR or other data sources. An essential aspect
is the application of strong feature selection that maintains the full
information content of the data, but discards all unnecessary
information. This leads to more cost-effective and easy to deploy CDS
(clinical decision support) or RDS (research decision support).

Another aspect of model inputs is whether they are objective or
subjective. Examples of objective data inputs are: body measurements
(e.g., weight, height) taken with standardized instruments and protocols
or obtained from formal sources (e.g., age, death status, marital
status); clinical labs; medications prescribed; psychological, cognitive
and other questionnaires/instruments; gene and protein measurements;
genetic polymorphisms (germline) or tumor mutations; and so on.

Subjective data inputs examples include: surgeon’s assessment of degree
by which all tumor tissue was removed; radiology interpretative reports
(although many radiological findings can be very objectively measured);
psychiatric mood evaluation; determination by dermatologist of color or
smoothness of a skin lesion, etc.

In many situations it is possible for AI/ML model developers to choose
between objective and subjective data inputs that convey the same
information. Such choice then can be driven by how practical is the use
of each data element, what is the cost, whether there are concerns that
a model user may attempt to (intentionally or due to implicit biases)
“game” the model by skewing subjective data inputs, whether the use of
models needs to be fully automated and reproducible, or whether it is
used in conjunction with human judgment, and so on.

Especially in the research realm, the effort to use as much objective
data inputs as possible, is crucial to the reproducibility of the
model’s encapsulated knowledge and scalable application for discovery.

Step 7.2. Workflow Integration

Integrating AI/ML models to clinical or research workflows is another
important element of successful deployment. The classical example often
mentioned in “informatics 101” courses or discussions, is that of a care
provider who has to stop and spend hours to input numerous data elements
about a patient in a decision support AI/ML tool. Such a setup is
entirely disruptive and unworkable and will lead to failure of adoption
of that tool with very high degree of probability. Newer developments in
digital health data harmonization and interoperability address this
issue by use of standardized terminologies, and protocols that use those
to provide seamless access to EHR so that AI/ML and other clincial
decision support (CDS) can be integrated in practice easily. Still,
there are many aspects of workflow integration that need be addressed
and these require close collaboration of the AI/ML team with the
clinical teams and the IT departments of care provider organizations.

Along these lines the sought integration may be “loose integration”, or
“tight integration”. Loosely-integrated CDS often exists in the form of
web-services that are being contacted by a hospital or other provider IT
system using an asynchronous query-response protocol. More
tightly-integrated CDS is typically part of the EHR, the computerized
provider order entry (CPOE), the various alerting and guideline systems
in active use, and may support both “push” and “pull” operating modes.

Step 7.3. Sandboxing

Sandboxing refers to the safe pre-deployment testing of an AI/ML model
decision support in real-life settings but without affecting directly or
indirectly critical patient care decisions. The sandboxing ensures both
integration aspects, especially for proper data access, and many other
elements of prospective validation and risk management (see chapter
“Characterizing, Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML and AI
Models in Clinical and Organizational Application”). Recent regulatory
efforts in the EU have elevated sandboxing into a legal requirement
serving as a precursor to safe delivery of health AI/ML (see chapter
“Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal Implications (ELSI)”).

Step 7.4. Scaling of CDS

The ability to scale the deployment of a CDS is critical when large
numbers of patients are to be managed with input by the AI/ML model or
when many providers across geographical regions are supported, and when
the response time and availability of the decision support are critical.
Fundamental aspects of scalability include horizontally and vertically
scalable architectures. An overview of these and many other aspects of
scalability are described in [40] and will not be elaborated here
further.

Step 7.5. Implementation Science Aspects and Checklist

Another lens to successful deployment of AI/ML model is that of
Implementation Science (IS), [41] a new field aiming to improve the
speed of innovation adoption. Some notable IS key elements that we have
covered in this chapter and throughout the book include:

1.  1.

    Ensuring that the various models have been built to the
    specifications of stakeholders,

     

2.  2.

    User and stakeholder education,

     

3.  3.

    Cost-effectiveness and value of AI/ML decision support,

     

4.  4.

    Sustainability, and

     

5.  5.

    Rapid but rigorous validation in increasing degrees of proximity to
    the ultimate deployment setting.

     

The above requirements of step 7 are typically not strictly needed for
feasibility, exploratory, or pre-clinical models.

Pitfall 6.2.7.1

Failing to pay attention to critical issues of implementation including:
(1) conversion to practical, inexpensive, objective production models;
(2) ensuring sustainability via reimbursement, cost reductions etc.; (3)
demonstrating to stakeholders of meeting clinical or research needs and
adding value; (4) providing user education and support; (5) ensuring
community and patient buy-in; (6) sandboxing CDS while it is evaluated
in care environment; (7) ensuring scaling of CDS; (8) integration to
clinical, research and R&D workflows as appropriate.

Best Practice 6.2.7.1

When developing clinical-grade and mission-critical models, address
critical issues of implementation including: (1) conversion to
practical, inexpensive, objective production models; (2) ensuring
sustainability via reimbursement, cost reductions etc.; (3)
demonstrating to stakeholders of meeting clinical or research needs and
adding value; (4) providing user education and support; (5) ensuring
community and patient buy-in; (6) sandboxing CDS while it is evaluated
in care environment; (7) ensuring scaling of CDS; (8) integration to
clinical, research and R&D workflows as appropriate.

Step 8. Model Monitoring and Safeguards

From the very early AI research years, and especially expert system
research, the problem of the AI’s “knowledge cliff” was defined as a
major problem with AI systems and a major departure from how humans
think and solve problems.

“Knowledge cliff” of an AI system: the boundary of expertise, knowledge
or problem solving ability of that system. Within this boundary the
system will perform well, while outside this boundary performance may
drop significantly and abruptly.

Pitfall 6.2.8.1

Creating and deploying AI/ML models and related decision support that
lacks protections against falling out of the model’s knowledge cliff.

In the chapters discussing data quality and management and
characterizing, and managing the risk of error of ML and AI Models, we
will describe in detail practical strategies for creating and deploying
AI/ML that stays within their knowledge boundaries. We will also cover
important concepts such as: outliers, safe and unsafe decision regions,
calibration and recalibration, incorporating patient preferences, data
shifts and model performance shifts & monitoring, distribution checking,
causes of data shifts and how to address them, population mixture
changes, seasonality and trends, epidemic dynamics, various
interventional externalities (e.g., changes in standards of care, new
vaccines, new populations, new treatments). We will also address data,
and model variants and invariants, pristine vs. noisy inputs, model
input mapping and harmonization, missing input values and rebuilding
models.

Best Practice 6.2.8.1

When developing clinical-grade and mission-critical models ensure that
the AI/ML models will stay within their knowledge boundaries by
addressing: outliers, safe and unsafe decision regions, calibration and
recalibration, incorporating patient preferences, managing data shifts
and model performance shifts, population mixture changes, seasonality
and trends, epidemic dynamics, various interventional externalities
(e.g., changes in standards of care, new vaccines, new populations, new
treatments). Carefully consider how models can successfully generalize
from the original data/populations used for model development and
validation to other populations and settings and address pristine vs.
noisy inputs, model input mapping and harmonization, missing input
values and rebuilding models.

Step 9 Ancillary Benefits and Work Products

During the course of architecting modeling efforts to address clinical
and research problems, creating data designs and collecting data,
developing, validating and deploying models several ancillary, several
secondary objectives and work products can be produced including:
mechanistic studies, reusable data gathering, drug target and biomarker
discovery. Ideally there should be a plan on how to benefit from those,
staring from capturing and eventually sharing the underlying data and
findings for future or parallel use by the same groups and others.

Pitfall 6.2.9.1

Creating and deploying AI/ML models without consideration of ancillary
and secondary objectives, benefits and work products preservation and
management.

Best Practice 6.2.9.1

When developing clinical-grade and mission-critical models ensure that
ancillary and secondary objectives, benefits and work products are
managed and preserved.

Best Practices 6.2.9.2

Documentation. Throughout the model development process complete and
thorough documentation must be maintained. Key elements of this
documentation include:

1.  1.

    Model goals.

     

2.  2.

    Risk assessments.

     

3.  3.

    Key interactions and input from stakeholders.

     

4.  4.

    AI/ML governance and oversight committee deliberations.

     

5.  5.

    Software documentation.

     

6.  6.

    Data design documentation.

     

7.  7.

    Data documentation.

     

8.  8.

    IP documentation.

     

9.  9.

    Legal and compliance documentation.

     

10. 10.

    User guides and training documentation.

     

11. 11.

    Ancillary work products documentation.

     

12. 12.

    Checklists and worksheets (e.g., ones provided in this book to keep
    track of following relevant best practices).

     

Ideally the above documentation should include both raw information and
distilled summaries, time-indexed and observing data privacy, and other
appropriate laws and regulations.

This concludes the description of AI/Ml lifecycle stages and related
pitfalls and best practices. Chapters “Foundations and Properties of
AI/ML Systems” (foundational methods), “Evaluation” (evaluation metrics
and designs), “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model
Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in
Machine Learning and AI” (overfitting) and “Characterizing, Diagnosing
and Managing the Risk of Error of ML and AI Models in Clinical and
Organizational Application” (model debugging and managing risk)
elaborate practically and theoretically on how one can implement them.

Key Concepts Discussed in Chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle
of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-SensitiveAI/ML
Models”

Exploratory AI/ML models.

Feasibility AI/ML models,

Pre-clinical AI/ML models,

Clinical-grade and mission-critical AI/ML models,

Lifecycle of clinical-grade and other mission-critical AI/ML models,

Targeting model accuracy vs. targeting value proposition,

First-pass analysis and modeling,

IP considerations and tradeoff of different IP strategies,

Ancillary work products,

Health economic and implementation science considerations,

Production-level models,

Clinical and other decision support encapsulating AI/MLM models,

Sandboxing models,

Workflow integration,

Scaling model-based decision support,

Implementation science aspects and checklist,

Monitoring models,

“Knowledge cliff” of an AI system,

Model interpretability and explanation strategies,

Modeling equivalence classes,

Documentation practices.

Pitfalls Discussed in Chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”

Pitfall 6.1.1: Treating the development of clinical-grade or
mission-critical AI/ML models as if they were exploratory, feasibility
or pre-clinical ones.

Pitfall 6.1.2.: Failing to establish and apply appropriate sufficient
criteria and enforce BPs for model development, validation, and
lifecycle support that will ensure safe and effective deployment in high
risk settings.

Pitfall 6.2.1.1: Failure to specify and evaluate meaningful performance
targets and real-life context of use.

Pitfall 6.2.1.2.: Failure to engage all appropriate stakeholders.

Pitfall 6.2.1.3.: Failure to establish value targets and translate
predictivity and other technical model characteristics into real-world
value assessments.

Pitfall 6.2.1.4.: Failure to consider broader interactions of envisioned
models with the health system or with the system of science and of R&D.
“Tunnel vision” evaluation with blind spots to the broader implications
and consequences.

Pitfall 6.2.1.5.: Failure to consider ELSI and JEDI desiderata and
consequences.

Pitfall 6.2.1.6.: Interpreting results of models beyond what their
properties justify.

Pitfall 6.2.1.7: Interpreting results of models below what its known
properties justify.

Pitfall 6.2.2.1: Failure to create a rigorous and powerful data design
which facilitates modeling that will meet performance and safety
requirements.

Pitfall 6.2.2.2: Failure to consider and judiciously interpret the
limitations of convenience data designs on the performance and meaning
of feasibility and exploratory models.

Pitfall 6.2.3.1.: Failure to ensure the transition from first pass
modeling to optimized clinical grade models by ignoring: the problem
space characteristics; data available for development and testing; prior
literature on approaches and results previously explored both in terms
of data design, algorithms and models; forfeiting verification and
reproducing prior literature findings/claims; and failure to obtain
robust preliminary estimates of predictivity of the first pass models
and whether they meet requirements.

Pitfall 6.2.3.2.: Succumb to overfitting when repeatedly analyzing data
from first pass to optimized modeling stages.

Pitfalls 6.2.4.1 in Explanation of AI/ML

1.  1.

    Using black box models is an obstacle to adoption and trust.

     

2.  2.

    Shapley values (and derivative methods) have several severe
    shortcomings for AI/ML explanation.

     

3.  3.

    Feature importance methods, that attempt to compress complex model
    behaviors into single values per variable, lack the necessary
    information capacity and may be inconsistent with feature selection
    theory and causality.

     

4.  4.

    Inherently transparent but very large models often resist
    interpretability.

     

5.  5.

    Human experts explaining models must be evaluated for validity just
    like ML surrogate models.

     

Pitfall 6.2.4.2: Additional predictive modeling errors in analyses where
the equivalence class of the optimal feature sets (Markov Boundaries)
are not inferred.

1.  1.

    The predictor model will be a random member of the Markov Boundary
    equivalence class. This may not be the cheapest, easiest or most
    convenient model to deploy clinically.

     

2.  2.

    In domains with large equivalence classes, intellectual property
    cannot be defended since a 3rd party can use an equivalent Markov
    Boundary and easily bypass a patent or other IP protections.

     

Pitfall 6.2.4.3.: Additional causal modeling errors in analyses where
equivalence classes of Direct Causes are not inferred:

1.  1.

    Discarding causal variables in favor of non-causal ones (e.g.,
    discarding A because its correlation with outcome vanishes when we
    include non-causal but information equivalent A’ in a regression
    model).

     

2.  2.

    Over-interpreting models: e.g., believing that because A’ is a model
    returned by an algorithm, without equivalence class modeling, and A
    is not, then A’ is biologically more important than A.

     

Pitfall 6.2.4.4.: Omit important steps in optimizing model performance
and characterizing error and other properties that are essential for
safe and effective deployment.

Pitfall 6.2.5.1.: Establish and exercise IP rights that defy fundamental
principles of scientific reproducibility, openness to model and method
scrutiny, and validation.

Pitfall 6.2.5.2.: Failing to establish IP rights that are critical for
successful dissemination and benefit from AI/ML innovation.

Pitfall 6.2.5.3.: Failing to protect IP rights from bypassing IP by
exploiting model equivalence classes.

Pitfall 6.2.6.1.: Failing to address regulatory, legal, bias, ethical,
social justice, and health equity requirements from design to
clinical-grade and mission-critical model development validation and
deployment.

Pitfall 6.2.7.1.: Failing to pay attention to critical issues of
implementation including: (1) conversion to practical, inexpensive,
objective production models; (2) ensuring sustainability via
reimbursement, cost reductions etc.; (3) demonstrating to stakeholders
of meeting clinical or research needs and adding value; (4) providing
user education and support; (5) ensuring community and patient buy-in;
(6) sandboxing CDS while it is evaluated in care environment; (7)
ensuring scaling of CDS; (8) integration to clinical, research and R&D
workflows as appropriate.

Pitfall 6.2.8.1: Creating and deploying AI/ML models and related
decision support that lacks protections against falling out of the
model’s knowledge cliff.

Pitfall 6.2.9.1: Creating and deploying AI/ML models without
consideration of ancillary and secondary objectives, benefits and work
products preservation and management.

Best Practices Discussed in Chapter “The Development Process and
Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive
AI/ML Models”

Best Practice 6.1.1.: Define the goals and process of AI/ML model
building as either feasibility/exploratory or as
clinical-grade/mission-critical and apply appropriate quality and rigor
criteria and best practices.

Best Practice 6.2.1.1: When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive
model development specify concrete model performance targets for well
defined care or discovery settings.

Best Practice 6.2.1.2: When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive
model development engage all appropriate stakeholders.

Best Practice 6.2.1.3: When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive
model development translate model accuracy to value, establish value
targets and translate predictivity and other technical model
characteristics into real-world value assessments.

Best Practice 6.2.1.4: When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive
model development carefully consider and plan for system-level goals and
interactions. Avoid too narrow (“tunnel vision”) model development.

Best Practice 6.2.1.5: When pursuing clinical-grade and risk-sensitive
model development, carefully consider ELSI and JEDI desiderata and
consequences.

Best Practice 6.2.1.6: When pursuing feasibility, exploratory, or
pre-clinical models relax stringency of requirements applicable to
clinical-grade models.

Best Practice 6.2.1.7: When pursuing clinical-grade and risk-sensitive
model development interpret models and models’ decisions exactly as
their known properties justify.

Best Practice 6.2.2.1: When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive
model development create a rigorous and powerful data design which
facilitates modeling that will meet performance and safety requirements.

Best Practice 6.2.2.2: When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive
model development judiciously interpret the limitations of convenience
data designs on the performance and meaning of feasibility and
exploratory models.

Best Practice 6.2.3.1.: When moving from first pass modeling to
optimized clinical grade models take into account: the problem space
characteristics; data available for development and testing; prior
literature on approaches and results previously explored both in terms
of data design, algorithms and models; verification and reproducing
prior literature findings/claims; and obtaining robust preliminary
estimates of predictivity of the first pass models and whether they meet
requirements.

Best Practice 6.2.3.2.: Avoid overfitting due to repeatedly analyzing
data from first pass to optimized modeling stages.

Best Practice 6.2.4.1. Everything else being equal, prefer interpretable
model families when interpretability is desired.

Best Practice 6.2.4.2. Use standardized coefficient (if applicable) when
comparing feature contributions in linear models.

Best Practice 6.2.4.3. Very large models even when produced with
intrinsically interpretable methods may still be hard to interpret
because of sheer scale. Isolating critical information from large models
or simplification are recommended.

Best Practice 6.2.4.4. Apply feature selectors that maximally reduce
dimensionality without loss of predicivity. Compact models are always
easier to explain. Combine with interpretable model families or
surrogate models as appropriate.

Best Practice 6.2.4.5. If accuracy is of paramount importance and if the
black box models have significant accuracy advantage over the best
interpretable models you can build, then use the black box model but
apply explanation methods:

1.  (a)

    Global surrogate models aiming to have high fidelity everywhere in
    the input space over all patterns that will be classified by the
    model. Verify generalizable fidelity of surrogate model before
    using.

     

2.  (b)

    Local surrogate models aiming to have high fidelity in the local
    input space for every pattern pi that will be classified by the
    model. Verify generalizable fidelity of surrogate model before
    using.

     

3.  (c)

    Human expert surrogate models which must be high fidelity everywhere
    in the input space and over-fitting resistant. Verify
    generalizability and fidelity of human expert explanations of
    models.

     

Best Practice 6.2.4.6. Shapley values, Shapley value approximations and
feature importance methods that try to summarize complex model behaviors
in one or few values, are not advised as general or routinely used
methods for explaining ML models.

Best Practice 6.2.4.7.

1.  (a)

    Use equivalence class modeling algorithms for discovering the
    equivalence class of optimally accurate and non reducible predictive
    models. E.g. TIE* instantiated with GLL-MB or other sound Markov
    boundary subroutines [38] (see chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
    Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and
    Health Science”).

     

2.  (b)

    Use equivalence class modeling algorithms for discovering the
    equivalence class of direct causes. E.g. TIE* instantiated with
    GLL-PC or other sound local causal neighborhood subroutines (chapter
    “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
    Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”).

     

3.  (c)

    When experiments can be conducted, consider using ML-driven
    experimentation algorithms that model equivalence classes.
    Experimentation may be needed to resolve the equivalence classes and
    unmeasured confounding. Such algorithms minimize the number of
    experiments needed. E.g., ODLP* algorithm [39].

     

Best Practice 6.2.4.8. When pursuing risk and performance-sensitive
model development: optimize model performance verifying that targets are
met; otherwise modify or enhance data design, algorithms, and protocols
or relax requirements; once modeling is complete characterize error and
other properties that are essential for safe and effective deployment
and explain models and check their face validity.

Best Practice 6.2.5.1.: Do not establish and exercise IP rights in ways
that undermine fundamental principles of scientific reproducibility,
openness to model and method scrutiny, and validation.

Best Practice 6.2.5.2.: Do establish IP rights that are critical for
successful dissemination and patient and society benefit from AI/ML
innovation.

Best Practice 6.2.5.3.: Protect IP rights from “bypassing” that exploit
model equivalence classes.

Best Practice 6.2.6.1.: When developing clinical-grade and
mission-critical models address regulatory, legal, bias, ethical, social
justice, and health equity issues.

Best Practice 6.2.7.1.: When developing clinical-grade and
mission-critical models address critical issues of implementation
including: (1) conversion to practical, inexpensive, objective
production models; (2) ensuring sustainability via reimbursement, cost
reductions etc.; (3) demonstrating to stakeholders of meeting clinical
or research needs and adding value; (4) providing user education and
support; (5) ensuring community and patient buy-in; (6) sandboxing CDS
while it is evaluated in care environment; (7) ensuring scaling of CDS;
(8) integration to clinical, research and R&D workflows as appropriate.

Best Practice 6.2.8.1.: When developing clinical-grade and
mission-critical models ensure that the AI/ML models will stay within
their knowledge boundaries by addressing: outliers, safe and unsafe
decision regions, calibration and recalibration, incorporating patient
preferences, managing data shifts and model performance shifts,
population mixture changes, seasonality and trends, epidemic dynamics,
various interventional externalities (e.g., changes in standards of
care, new vaccines, new populations, new treatments).

Carefully consider how models can successfully generalize from the
original data/populations used for model development and validation to
other populations and settings and address pristine vs. noisy inputs,
model input mapping and harmonization, missing input values and
rebuilding models.

Best Practice 6.2.9.1.: When developing clinical-grade and
mission-critical models ensure that ancillary and secondary objectives,
benefits and work products are managed and preserved.

Best Practices 6.2.9.2. Documentation. Throughout the model development
process complete and thorough documentation must be maintained. Key
elements of this documentation include:

1.  1.

    Model goals.

     

2.  2.

    Risk assessments.

     

3.  3.

    Key interactions and input from stakeholders.

     

4.  4.

    AI/ML governance and oversight committee deliberations.

     

5.  5.

    Software documentation.

     

6.  6.

    Data design documentation.

     

7.  7.

    Data documentation.

     

8.  8.

    IP documentation.

     

9.  9.

    Legal and compliance documentation.

     

10. 10.

    User guides and training documentation.

     

11. 11.

    Ancillary work products documentation.

     

12. 12.

    Checklists and worksheets (e.g., ones provided in this book to keep
    track of following relevant best practices).

     

Classroom Assignments and Discussion Topics, Chapter “The Development
Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”

1.  1.

    How does training of human clinical experts teach them to understand
    the limits of their expertise and how to refer problems outside
    their expertise to other experts? Which of these approaches could be
    incorporated in clinical grade AI/ML systems?

     

2.  2.

    How does training of human scientist experts teach them to
    understand the limits of their expertise and how to refer problems
    outside their expertise to other experts? Which of these
    approaches could be incorporated in mission-critical AI/ML systems
    supporting health science discovery?

     

3.  3.

    Conversely, some human experts (including physicians) are
    notoriously miscalibrated. How does AI/ML models can address human
    cognitive decision making errors?

     

4.  4.

    You are a study section member reviewing a study proposal that reads
    like the following vignette:

    “The PI of the present proposal has devoted her career in exploring
    Boosting-based predictive models in healthcare. Our overarching goal
    is to create powerful models to predict readmissions. We will use
    our novel methodology of BoostedBoostBoosting (B³) on readmission
    data from the ED of Hospital X. Deploying such models in practice
    has the potential to reduce the readmissions for a range of
    disorders reducing thus the costs and increasing the quality of
    care.”

    Would you say this proposal is:
    1.  (a)

        Biased in its choice of methods?

         

    2.  (b)

        Well thought-out?

         

    3.  (c)

        Compelling in its logic?

         

    4.  (d)

        Likely to succeed in its stated goals?

         

    5.  (e)

        Likely to yield useful results for clinical science?

         

    6.  (f)

        Likely to yield useful results for patients?

         

    7.  (g)

        Likely to yield useful results for AI/ML science (methods)?

         

    8.  (h)

        Has hedged its bets on the new methods in case they are not as
        successful as hoped for?

         

    Use what you learnt in chapters “Foundations of Causal ML” and
    “Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI
    Methods and Systems” to answer the above.

     

5.  5.

    Can you improve the proposal vignette description to address any
    problems you identified in #4?

     

6.  6.

    Consider a publication that describes a AI/ML regression model for
    risk of developing high blood pressure using a number of
    risk factors as inputs to the model. The overall explained variance
    (aka coefficient of variation) of the model is low, however one of
    the risk factors X has an odds ratio of 10 for high blood pressure.
    Is this model and risk factor X useful?

     

7.  7.

    Consider an AI/ML risk model for developing Rheumatoid Arthritis
    incorporating GWAS data inputs (polymorphisms). None of the
    polymorphisms has an odds ratio with absolute value larger than 1.5
    (i.e., the univariate effects are very small). Can this model be
    useful? How?

     

8.  8.

    Consider the case of a very rare outcome Ox for patients with
    condition X. The probability of Ox in patients with X is 0.001. A
    new AI/ML model M has been developed recently that identifies
    patients with X who will develop Ox with probability 0.01 (i.e. a
    ten-fold increase in risk). At the same time the model has a false
    positive probability of 0.01. What are the challenges of
    incorporating this model in clinical practice?

     

9.  9.

    Your university-affiliated hospital wishes to increase early
    diagnosis of cognitive decline across the population it serves. You
    are tasked to help choose between the following AI/ML
    technologies/tools for early detection of cognitive decline:
    1.  (a)

        AI/ML tool A is 99% accurate.

         

    2.  (b)

        AI/ML tool B has sensitivity 99% and specificity 99%.

         

    3.  (c)

        AI/ML tool C has AUC 99%.

         

    4.  (d)

        AI/Ml tool D has physician satisfaction 99%.

         

    5.  (e)

        AI/ML tool E has 99% uptime.

         

    Do you have a preference for these tools? Which one will be most
    useful clinically? If you need additional information, what this
    might be?

     

10. 10.

    An AI/ML classifier model has acceptable error rate in 2/3 of the
    patient population. This subpopulation is identifiable by the model
    and its properties. How would you address decisions in the 1/3 of
    the population for which the model is insufficiently accurate?

     

11. 11.

    As explained in chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML
    Systems” Bayesian Networks (BNs) have great flexibility in
    expressing flexible-input queries:
    1.  (a)

        How can this be used to deal with incomplete evidence at
        decision making time?

         

    2.  (b)

        For the same type of outcome, depending on the inputs used, the
        same model can have a wide range of errors. How would you
        characterize them as safe or not when there are so many of them?

         

    3.  (c)

        How would you create safeguards for clinical-grade use of a BN
        model?

         

     

12. 12.

    Some critics of Bayesian classifiers have criticized them on grounds
    that they may impose unrealistic data assumptions (for example the
    simple Bayes classifier), and that the error of output is
    multiplicative to errors of parameter specification (e.g., in BNs).
    How, in general, does the accuracy of model parameters relate to
    overall model error? Demonstrate cases where these criticisms are
    valid and cases where they are not.

     

13. 13.

    Claim: it is always desirable to “bag” a variety of AI/ML models
    (i.e., build several models using repeated sampling or resampling
    and average them out). Similarly, any new model X should be a bagged
    classifier over all model families we can fit with our data.

    Are these statements true or false?

     

14. 14.

    Claim: it is theoretically optimal to use Bayesian Model Averaging
    (BMA) over all possible models. Thus our new model X should be the
    BMA over the top 100 models (by predictivity or posterior
    probability given the data). True or false?

     

15. 15.

    Friedman has proposed the following adage which he coined “the
    fundamental theorem of informatics”: “A computer decision model +
    human expert is better than either one of them” (paraphrased here
    for clarity).

    Strictly speaking, this statement is neither a mathematical theorem
    nor it is always true in the absence of well-defined premises (see
    chapter “From ‘Human versus. Machine’ to ‘Human and Machine’” for
    details).

    However, this statement implies useful guidance about:
    1.  (a)

        The need to consider the success of models in a human
        system/context.

         

    2.  (b)

        The need to integrate models in a workflow.

         

    Can you elaborate?

     

16. 16.

    Identify 3 serious negative consequences that new knowledge
    discovery AI/ML model errors may have on each one of the following
    areas:
    1.  (a)

        Scientific literature.

         

    2.  (b)

        Drug discovery and Pharma.

         

    3.  (c)

        Environmental policy.

         

    4.  (d)

        Health crisis management.

         

    5.  (e)

        Vaccination hesitancy and adoption.

         

     

17. 17.

    Among the various stakeholders (patients, providers, health systems,
    payers, regulators) in development of AI/ML models, the same model
    errors may have asymmetrical costs (i.e., a large cost for
    stakeholder A may be small for B and medium for C and so on). The
    same is true for benefits.
    1.  (a)

        Can you think of examples?

         

    2.  (b)

        What principles and what methods do you think could/should be
        used to reconcile asymmetrical costs and asymmetrical benefits
        across multiple stakeholders?

         

     

18. 18.

    AI/ML models with errors often translate to important opportunity
    costs (i.e., costs incurred by not taking a particular action such
    as administering useful medical interventions). Can you think of
    examples of opportunity costs stemming from model errors in the
    healthcare domain as well as in the research domain?

     

19. 19.

    In engineering, machines, buildings, electronics, and other
    artifacts are expected to have well-defined parameters of safety and
    function. For example:
    1.  (a)

        Bridges, have well specified weight loads, structural integrity
        in case of winds, earthquakes etc.

         

    2.  (b)

        Cars have well-defined fuel efficiency, braking ability,
        acceleration, collision safety etc.

         

    3.  (c)

        Electronics have well-defined power supply inputs, are
        guaranteed to not cause fires, and so on.

         

    4.  (d)

        Maintenance schedules describe how long engineering artifacts
        can go without service, when they need replacement, what the
        service should be at specific intervals, etc.

         

    5.  (e)

        Warrantees ensuring that in case of failure, the seller of the
        technology will incur replacement or repair costs.

         

    6.  (f)

        In case of negligent construction of the products, the
        manufacturers are liable.

         

    7.  (g)

        Similarly drugs come with labels that specific the intended
        usage, dosage, side effects, etc.

         

    In 2023 commercial and academic AI/ML models as well as AI/ML
    model-producing methods do not typically come with such well-defined
    and regulated guarantees. Consider the following questions:
    1.  (a)

        Would the users of AI/ML models benefit if they would come with
        precise performance and safety guarantees?

         

    2.  (b)

        Are there downsides to that?

         

    3.  (c)

        What would it take to transition the current way AI/ML is
        marketed and used, into a better-regulated, and
        guarantees-driven technology?

         

    4.  (d)

        If, hypothetically, at this time some of the AI/ML technologies
        and products cannot be provided with performance and safety
        guarantees, does this imply that they are pre-scientific? What
        might be the consequences of such a state of affairs?

         

     

20. 20.

    As mentioned in chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine
    Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need for Best
    Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML”, one of the most important
    and impressive AI effort was the INTERNIST-I expert system (by
    Miller, Myers and Pople Jr) which performed diagnosis across the
    full spectrum of internal medicine with accuracy meeting or
    exceeding those of attendant-level diagnosticians in very
    challenging diagnostic cases (NEJM’s clinico-pathologic challenge
    cases). Neither this system or its successor QMR (Miller et al) or
    offshoots such as DxPlain, (Barnet et al) managed to gain wide and
    long-lasting traction among working internists and health systems,
    however.
    1.  (a)

        If one considers these systems as clinical-grade, then explain
        this failure in terms of relevant pitfalls discussed in the
        present chapter.

         

    2.  (b)

        Provide an alternative evaluation of these weaknesses If one
        considers these efforts as exploratory, feasibility, or
        pre-clinical AI/ML.

         

     

21. 21.

    A non-profit health system has operating margin of $10million in the
    last financial year and its Board of Directors decides to use it to
    improve health outcomes in the next financial year. The available
    options are as follows:
    1.  (a)

        Intervention 1, is a AI/ML-based precision medicine test for
        breast cancer treatment with ICER=$50,000 per QUALY gained. The
        applicable population is forecasted to be 500 individuals in the
        next FY. Each test (ordered once per patient) costs $5000.

         

    2.  (b)

        Intervention 2, is a new Covid-19 infection antiviral with
        ICER=$100,000 per QUALY gained. The applicable population is
        forecasted to be 300 individuals in the next FY (which will be
        the frame of decision making for this exercise). Each treatment
        regime (administered once per patient) costs $50,000.

         

    3.  (c)

        Intervention 3, is an AI/ML intervention to increase compliance
        to high blood pressure medication with ICER=$10,000 per QUALY
        gained. The applicable population is forecasted to be 1000
        individuals in the next FY. Each intervention (applied once per
        patient) costs $1000.

        Answer the following:
        1.  1.

            How many QUALYs would be gained by applying these
            interventions if unlimited funds were available?

             

        2.  2.

            Describe an optimal allocation of the available
            (limited) funds so that QUALYs gained are maximized.

             

        3.  3.

            If a new AI/ML technology would be employed that would lead
            to a new ICER of $25,000 for intervention 1, how would that
            affect the optimal allocation policy of funds and
            improvement in total QUALYs gained?

             

        4.  4.

            Comment on the interaction of technology improvement in the
            AI/ML of intervention 1 with the benefits from intervention
            3 in the context of the global optimal funds allocation of
            (3).

             

        5.  5.

            Not all patients that could benefit from each intervention
            will receive them because of limited funds. What may be
            ethical and social justice principles to decide which
            patients receive a particular intervention and which do not?

             

        6.  6.

            The health system’s AI/ML unit proposes an R&D project that
            will improve the accuracy of the models yielding new ICER
            for improved intervention 1 of $20,000. The cost of the
            project is a one-time $1million to be covered by the
            $10million funds pool. The project can be executed
            immediately if funded.
            - Should this R&D proposal be approved?

            - What if the estimated risk for failure to obtain the
              targeted improvement is 50%?

            - What is the break-even point of the risk of failure for
              the proposed R&D?

             

        7.  7.

            Can you outline a possible process and give a concrete
            numerical example of how the AI/ML unit may have calculated
            the expected ICER for intervention 1 based on anticipated
            model predictivity improvements?

             

         

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    da Silva LM, Pereira EM, Salles PG, Godrich R, Ceballos R, Kunz JD,
    Casson A, Viret J, Chandarlapaty S, Ferreira CG, Ferrari B.
    Independent real-world application of a clinical-grade automated
    prostate cancer detection system. J Pathol.
    2021;254(2):147–58.Crossref

2.  2.

    National Center for Advancing Translational Science (NCATS), NIH.
    Translational Science Spectrum.
    https://​ncats.​nih.​gov/​translation/​spectrum.

3.  3.

    Ashmore R, Calinescu R, Paterson C. Assuring the machine learning
    lifecycle: desiderata, methods, and challenges. ACM Computing
    Surveys (CSUR). 2021;54(5):1–39.Crossref

4.  4.

    De Silva D, Alahakoon D. An artificial intelligence life cycle: from
    conception to production. Patterns. 2022;3(6):100489.Crossref

5.  5.

    Munassar NMA, Govardhan A. A comparison between five models of
    software engineering. IJCSI. 2010;7(5):94.

6.  6.

    Ruparelia NB. Software development lifecycle models. ACM SIGSOFT
    Software Engineering Note. 2010;35(3):8–13.Crossref

7.  7.

    Pietzsch JB, Shluzas LA, Paté-Cornell ME, Yock PG, Linehan JH.
    Stage-gate process for the development of medical devices. J Med
    Device. 2009;3(2):021004.Crossref

8.  8.

    Van Lamsweerde A. Requirements engineering in the year 00: a
    research perspective. In: Proceedings of the 22nd international
    conference on software engineering; 2000. p. 5–19.Crossref

9.  9.

    Belani H, Vukovic M, Car Ž. Requirements engineering challenges in
    building AI-based complex systems. In: 2019 IEEE 27th international
    requirements engineering conference workshops (REW). IEEE; 2019,
    September. p. 252–5.Crossref

10. 10.

    Villamizar H, Escovedo T, Kalinowski M. Requirements engineering for
    machine learning: a systematic mapping study. In: 2021 47th
    Euromicro conference on software engineering and advanced
    applications (SEAA). IEEE; 2021, September. p. 29–36.Crossref

11. 11.

    Vogelsang A, Borg M. Requirements engineering for machine learning:
    perspectives from data scientists. In: 2019 IEEE 27th international
    requirements engineering conference workshops (REW). IEEE; 2019,
    September. p. 245–51.Crossref

12. 12.

    Steyerberg EW, Steyerberg EW. Applications of prediction models. New
    York: Springer; 2009. p. 11–31.Crossref

13. 13.

    Duncan IG. Healthcare risk adjustment and predictive modeling. Actex
    Publications; 2011.

14. 14.

    McNeill D. Analytics in healthcare and the life sciences:
    strategies, implementation methods, and best practices. Pearson
    Education; 2013.

15. 15.

    Cihon P, Schuett J, Baum SD. Corporate governance of artificial
    intelligence in the public interest. Information.
    2021;12(7):275.Crossref

16. 16.

    Cihon P, Maas MM, Kemp L. Should artificial intelligence governance
    be centralised? Design lessons from history. In: Proceedings of the
    AAAI/ACM conference on AI, ethics, and society; 2020. p.
    228–34.Crossref

17. 17.

    Statnikov A. A gentle introduction to support vector machines in
    biomedicine: theory and methods, vol. 1. World Scientific; 2011.

18. 18.

    Papenmeier, A., Englebienne, G. and Seifert, C., 2019. How model
    accuracy and explanation fidelity influence user trust. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:1907.12652.

19. 19.

    Payrovnaziri, S.N., Chen, Z., Rengifo-Moreno, P., Miller, T., Bian,
    J., Chen, J.H., Liu, X. and He, Z., 2020. Explainable artificial
    intelligence models using real-world electronic health.

20. 20.

    Murdoch WJ, Singh C, Kumbier K, Abbasi-Asl R, Yu B. Definitions,
    methods, and applications in interpretable machine learning. Proc
    Natl Acad Sci. 2019;116(44):22071–80.Crossref

21. 21.

    Molnar C. Interpretable machine learning. 2nd ed. Leanpub; 2022.

22. 22.

    Afchar D, Guigue V, Hennequin R. Towards rigorous interpretations: a
    formalisation of feature attribution. In: International conference
    on machine learning. PMLR; 2021, July. p. 76–86.

23. 23.

    Kim, B., Khanna, R. and Koyejo, O.O., 2016. Examples are not enough,
    learn to criticize! Criticism for interpretability. Adv Neural Inf
    Proces Syst, 29.

24. 24.

    Guidotti R, Monreale A, Ruggieri S, Turini F, Giannotti F,
    Pedreschi D. A survey of methods for explaining black box models.
    ACM computing surveys (CSUR). 2018;51(5):1–42.Crossref

25. 25.

    Robnik-Šikonja M, Bohanec M. Perturbation-based explanations of
    prediction models. In: Zhou J, Chen F, editors. Human and Machine
    Learning, Human–Computer Interaction Series, Chapter 9. Springer;
    2018.

26. 26.

    Friedman JH. Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting
    machine. Ann Stat. 2001;29:1189–232.Crossref

27. 27.

    Goldstein A, Kapelner A, Bleich J, Pitkin E. Peeking inside the
    black box: visualizing statistical learning with plots of individual
    conditional expectation. J Comput Graph Stat.
    2015;24(1):44–65.Crossref

28. 28.

    Ribeiro MT, Singh S, Guestrin C. “Why should i trust you?”
    Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In: Proceedings of the
    22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
    data mining; 2016, August. p. 1135–44.Crossref

29. 29.

    Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S. and Guestrin, C., 2018. Anchors:
    high-precision model-agnostic explanations. In Proceedings of the
    AAAI conference on artificial intelligence 32(1).

30. 30.

    Breiman L. Random forests. Mach Learn. 2001;45:5–32.Crossref

31. 31.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF, Hardin DP, Guyon I. Gentle introduction to
    support vector machines in biomedicine, A-volume 2: case studies and
    benchmarks. World Scientific Publishing Company; 2013.Crossref

32. 32.

    Zanzotto FM. Human-in-the-loop artificial intelligence. J Artif
    Intell Res. 2019;64:243–52.Crossref

33. 33.

    Stead WW. Clinical implications and challenges of artificial
    intelligence and deep learning. JAMA. 2018;320(11):1107–8.Crossref

34. 34.

    Shapley LS. A value for n-person games. Princeton University Press.
    1953;2(28):307–17.

35. 35.

    Lipovetsky S, Conklin M. Analysis of regression in game theory
    approach. Appl Stoch Model Bus Ind. 2001;17(4):319–30.Crossref

36. 36.

    Erik Štrumbelj and Igor Kononenko. “Explaining prediction models and
    individual predictions with feature contributions”. In: Knowledge
    and information systems 41.3 (2014), pp. 647–65.

37. 37.

    Ma S, Tourani R. Predictive and causal implications of using Shapley
    value for model interpretation. In: Proceedings of the 2020 KDD
    workshop on causal discovery. PMLR; 2020, August. p. 23–38.

38. 38.

    Statnikov A, Lemeir J, Aliferis CF. Algorithms for discovery of
    multiple Markov boundaries. The Journal of Machine Learning
    Research. 2013;14(1):499–566.

39. 39.

    Statnikov A, Ma S, Henaff M, Lytkin N, Efstathiadis E, Peskin ER,
    Aliferis CF. Ultra-scalable and efficient methods for hybrid
    observational and experimental local causal pathway discovery. The
    Journal of Machine Learning Research. 2015;16(1):3219–67.

40. 40.

    Adam T, Aliferis C. Personalized and Precision Medicine Informatics.
    Health Informatics Series. Basel, Springer Nature Switzerland; 2020.

41. 41.

    Bauer MS, Damschroder L, Hagedorn H, Smith J, Kilbourne AM. An
    introduction to implementation science for the non-specialist. BMC
    Psychol. 2015;3(1):1–12.Crossref

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_7

Data Design in Biomedical AI/ML

Gyorgy Simon¹   and Constantin Aliferis¹  

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

Data Design refers to the systematic choice of what data are modeled for
analysis and how these data and the model output(s) are mapped between
the Problem Space (real-world) and the Model Space (features for the ML
modeling). ML data design is an essential element of ML modeling. ML
data design differs from classical statistical, epidemiological etc.
study designs in that (a) ML data design relies heavily on the existence
of digital data repositories that are created independently of the
problem solving intent at hand, (b) ML modeling is highly scalable and
mostly automated, (c) when using experimental data, ML data design may
be used to guide the experiments conducted, (d) uses a richer set of
data representations that transcend the classical design matrices such
as text, relational databases, graphs etc.; and (e) ML modeling has its
own distinct capabilities, limitations and other properties and these
are reflected in the data design choices. The present chapter covers
tried and tested strategies and protocols that contribute to successful
data designs and addresses a number of important biases that threaten
validity and generalizability of results. Lower level data
transformations, data storage, and security aspects are covered in the
“Data Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and Management” chapter.

Data Design Overview

Figure 1. provides the context for Data Design by depicting the process
of problem solving via ML modeling. Elements in black outlines are
naturally occurring phenomena (i.e. occurring outside the control of
problem solving team); elements in green outlines are controllable by
the analyst/scientist involved in the ML-based problem solving. ML-based
problem solving involves two steps. The first one is high-level data
design, where one or more problem solving data sets are constructed.
These data contain the subjects and data elements relevant to the
problem, and are either extracted from a repository of
naturally-collected data (i.e. without the control of the ML-based
problem solving team—top branch in the figure) or collected specifically
for the purpose of the modeling (lower branch). In the second step,
modeling data sets are constructed, upon which machine learning
algorithms can operate.

[]

A flow diagram of the M L design begins with natural processes and
population. One sequence includes large-scale data collection,
problem-specific data extraction and data set, transformation, modeling,
and model. The other sequence is similar but excludes large-scale data
collection.

The goal of data design. A ML model can be viewed as a function that
maps inputs to outputs. The inputs to the ML model are ML features,
which exist in the ML model space. ML features don’t always have
one-to-one correspondence to real-world entities or to the
naturally-collected data elements. These entities and data elements
exist in the real-world problem space. Similarly, the model output,
which exists in the model space, needs to be mapped to the real-world
entities in the problem space. The goal of data design is to create this
mapping between the real-world problem space and the model space in a
manner that after mapping the real-world entities onto the ML model
space, then solving the problem in ML model space, and finally mapping
the ML solution from the model space back to the real-world (problem
space), we obtain a correct solution to the real-world problem.

Figure 2 depicts the context around data design from the perspective of
the ML modeling process. It presents an overview of the ML modeling
process and its iterative interaction with modeling. The blue rectangle
highlights the elements of the modeling steps that fall under data
design, and these are the elements that are discussed in this
chapter. Elements outside the blue box, namely, data transformations,
model fitting, evaluation and iterative improvement of the
model are covered in other chapters (“The Development Process and
Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive
AI/ML Models,” “Data Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and Management,
” and “Evaluation”) of this book.

[]

A cyclic flow diagram of data design includes problem definition with
target population, outcomes, exposures, predictors, and timeframe,
understanding causal relationship of factors, biases identification,
design matrix implementation, model workout, and model evaluation or
debugging.

Data design is the process of creating a formal specification of project
goals and variables and establishing a bidirectional mapping between the
real-world entities (and data elements) in the problem space and the ML
features in the ML model space. ML then provides the function
approximation models of the real-world data generating process that can
be used along with the aforementioned mapping to solve problems in the
real world by first solving them in the ML model.

The first step in ML-based problem solving is to define the problem to
be solved according to the following five elements:

1.  1.

    Outcome. What clinical outcomes are we considering? If we consider
    multiple outcomes, which is the primary outcome and which are
    secondary?

     

2.  2.

    Exposure/Intervention. Is there a particular exposure or
    intervention that we wish to estimate the effect of?

     

3.  3.

    Predictor variables (aka independent non-interventional variables).
    Which variables are relevant to this analysis and we want to
    include? Which variables are confounders and we absolutely must
    include? Which variables must we omit?

     

4.  4.

    Target population. Which patients should the answer hold true for?

     

5.  5.

    Time frame. When should the answer hold true? When do we plan to
    intervene, apply the model, or use the knowledge that we gained from
    this analysis? How long does it take for the outcome to manifest
    itself?

     

The above 5 elements describe the real-world solutions we wish to obtain
and the data elements needed to obtain them.

As part of the data design, we also need to consider potential data
design biases. Data design biases are systematic errors in the choice of
data sources, including variables and samples, as well as mismatch of
data to the modeling methods to be used.

Classical statistical study design vs. data design. In classical
statistical study design the data representation for modeling is a
matrix (the “design matrix” in statistical terminology), often a
two-dimensional table of numbers. In ML however, we often deal with
other data representations such as higher-dimensional matrices
(tensors), graphs, sequences, text documents, images, combinations of
the above, etc. The data design methods we describe here are generally
applicable, although for simplicity we give examples based on flat
matrix representations.

Defining the Problem

At the initiation of a ML project, usually, only a rough clinical or
health science question and the context of use of the results are known.
The objective of this step is to refine the rough problem statements
into a more precise, formalized and operationalizable format. By
precise, we mean that problem statement contains all and only the
information we need to solve it; by formalized, we mean that the answer
to the problem can be expressed as an estimand (a computable quantity);
and by operationalizable, we mean that we can compute the answer in
terms of the available data elements. In the following sections, we
describe the setting, the five elements that make problem statements
precise, and the most commonly used estimands. Afterwards, we describe
common data design types to which we can map our problem, and in the
last section of this chapter, we describe the inference process and
explain what a “valid answer” means.

Setting

The first critical junction in defining the problem statement is to
decide the operative setting. We consider three broad settings. First
clinical settings, where the problem concerns clinical decision making,
including risk models, estimates of effects of exposures, targeting
interventions, and timing of interventions. Such clinical models ideally
will directly inform patient care or otherwise become part of health
care delivery.

The second type of setting is operational settings, where the results
from the analysis are not directly used for treating patients, but
rather for managing the system of health care.

The third type of setting is health science research. ML models can be
used for a broad array of research problems, which include biomarker
discovery, optimized treatment protocols based on biomarkers,
discovering biological causal pathways, clinical trials, etc.
Translational research contexts bridge the health sciences with the
health care problem solving domains.

The setting in which the modeling results are used entails many
attributes of the data design and modeling. For example, evaluation of
health care-oriented ML models needs to take patient safety into
account. Clearly, the direct risk of harm to patients is highest in the
clinical setting and lowest in the research setting. The scope of
populations involved in health care versus health science modeling can
vary from very narrow to full-population studies. However, health care
modeling is often restricted to specific health systems with or without
examination of translation across systems.

Setting refers to context in which the modeling results will be used. We
broadly distinguish between three settings: clinical, operational and
research. Different settings impose different requirements towards the
steps of the modeling process.

Best Practice 7.1.1

The ML data design needs to take the operative setting of the ML models
into account.

Elements of the Problem Statement

As we discussed earlier, the modeling project is typically motivated by
a clinical question, an operational opportunity, or a research need.
This initial motivation offers only a rough outline for the problem
statement.

The five elements of a problem statement (Outcome,
Exposure/Intervention, Predictor variables, Target population, Time
frame) help make a rough problem statement more precise. [1].

Example 7.2.1

As a hypothetical example, experts in a health system may believe that
“starting diabetes treatment earlier could improve major cardiac
events”.

The rough problem statement is “Does starting diabetes treatment earlier
reduce major cardiac events?”. This question is not precise: how much
earlier should we start? It is not formalized: what metric (estimand)
for outcomes should we compute? It is also not operationalizable: how do
we define “diabetic” using the available data elements?

To make the question more precise, we need to define 5 elements. Not all
elements are needed for all questions, but most questions need most of
these elements.

Target Population

The target population is the set of patients to which the problem
statement applies.

If we construct a clinical risk model, the target population consists of
patients to whom we are going to apply the resulting model. All patients
in the target population must be at risk of developing the outcome in
the problem statement. If the problem concerns an interventional
treatment, the target population is patients who are eligible for the
treatment. If the problem concerns the study of a biological function,
then the target population is the set of research subjects in which this
biological function exists.

Example 7.2.1

The example problem statement is related to the patient population of
the health system in question, so the target population is the patient
population (1) served by the hypothetical health system (2) who would be
considered for diabetes treatment, or who could conceivably benefit from
earlier diabetes treatment. So the example question is further refined
to: “Can earlier initiation of diabetes treatment in diabetic patients
eligible for it reduce major cardiac events in this health system?”

Exposure/Intervention

Some studies are concerned with the effect of an intervention or of an
exposure (defined below). Not all studies have an intervention of
interest, but if there is one, we need to specify it. The intervention
in our running example is the earlier initiation of diabetes treatment.

The intervention or exposure divides the population into two groups.

- The patients receiving the therapeutic interventions are referred to
  as treatment group, while the remaining (untreated) patients are
  referred to untreated patients (also as controls if untreated and
  similar to the treated ones before treatment).

In case of an exposure to a naturally-occurring factor, patients with
the exposure are referred to as the exposed group and the remaining
patients form the unexposed group (or controls if similar to the exposed
group before exposure).

In non-designed data (e.g., collected from routine care records)
therapeutic interventions may be considered as exposures. It is also
common to collect data about interventions and multiple exposures and
model them simultaneously. Note that classical study design does not
distinguish between exposure and treatment, and refers to both as
‘exposure’.

Outcome

Not all analyses have a designated response variable (e.g., clinical
outcome of interest). For example, finding comorbidities in older
diabetic patients does not have a designated outcome of interest.
However, the product of the analysis still needs to be specified. In
this example, this product is the set of common comorbidities. Commonly,
studies may also have multiple outcomes which are then categorized as
primary and secondary.

The primary outcome(s) is (are) the main focus of interest; other
outcomes are called secondary outcomes.

Example 7.2.1

In our running example, the main and only outcome is major cardiac
events (MACE). Additional (secondary outcomes) could also be of
interest, e.g., health care utilization or quality of life.

Patients with the outcome in question are referred to as cases, while
patients without the outcome are referred to as controls.

Notice that the meaning of ‘control’ depends on the comparison being
made: it can refer to two different groups, either those without the
outcome or those without the intervention/exposure [2].

Time Period

Time period is the time frame encompassing the data to be modeled. Such
time frames may concern, e.g., the time point at which the intervention
is carried out (or a decision support model is used); or the time period
during which the outcomes develop. There could also be a time period for
collecting information before the intervention is applied.

Example 7.2.1

In our running example, for a retrospective analysis aiming to establish
the effects of early diabetes treatment on MACE, we can use a design in
which we collect historical patient data covering a 10 year time window
starting 10 years before analysis and ending at time of analysis. MACE
occurs 5–10 years after diabetes, hence the choice of time window
length. Note that there are alternative designs to accomplish this
modeling that will be discussed later.

Predictor (Non-Outcome) Variables

Predictor variables are all the data (in addition to outcomes) that
could possibly be relevant to our modeling task. Predictor variables
include demographics (age, sex or gender as appropriate), risk factors,
exposures, interventions, social behavioral data, images, genetic
information, etc. At a minimum, we need to include exposure variables
that are known to influence the outcome(s) (if there are any), the
interventions of interest (if there are any), those variables that are
suspected to influence the exposure and outcome(s) of interest (i.e.,
potential confounders), and any other variable that we wish to adjust
for.

There are also variables we should generally not include. (1) In a
regression or SEM model that estimates causal effects, variables that
must be excluded are (a) the causal descendants of the outcome and (b)
variables on the causal chain between the exposure and the outcome. More
details about causal modeling are provided in chapter “Foundations of
Causal ML”. (2) In a predictive model, variables that are associated
with the outcome and occur after it, must be excluded if model
application is desired before the outcome occurrence. More generally,
variables that would be measured after the model application should not
be included.

Common Metrics

There are a number of measures we use to estimate “risk” or “effect
size” and they fall into three broad categories that are frequently
confused. These are proportions, ratios and rates.

Proportion is the number of elements with a particular property divided
by the total number of elements.

For example, the prevalence of the diabetes in a community, is a
proportion, where the “particular property” is having diabetes and
“elements” are patients. Thus, the prevalence of diabetes is the number
of patients with diabetes in this community divided by the total number
of members in the community.

- Ratio: The number of elements with a particular property divided by
  the number of elements without the particular property.

- OR (equivalently)

- p / (1−p),

- where p is the proportion of elements with a particular property.

Rate: the number of measured events over a unit time period.

All these three types are fractions. Proportion and ratio have the same
numerator, but differ in their denominators: for proportions, the
elements in the numerator are included in the denominator, while for
ratios, the elements in the numerator are excluded from the denominator.
The proportion of diabetics in a population is the number of patients
who are diabetic among all members of the population. Patients in the
numerator (diabetic patients) are included in the denominator (all
members). In contrast, the ratio of diabetic patients is the number of
diabetic patients divided by the number of non-diabetic individuals. The
numerator (diabetic patients) are excluded from the denominator
(non-diabetic idividuals). The range of a proportion is between 0 and 1,
while the range of the ratio is between 0 and infinity.

Rate differs from the other two types in that it has a time component:
it measures the number of events over a unit period of time. For
example, the rate of developing diabetes in the US is 1.4 million people
per year.

Commonly used metrics include:

- Prevalence: the proportion of patients with a disease in the
  population at a point in time. This is often expressed as a percentage
  (number of diseased patients per 100 individuals); or in epidemiology,
  prevalence is more commonly expressed as number of diseased patients
  per 10,000 individuals.

- Incidence: the proportion of patients newly diagnosed with a disease
  in the population over a unit period of time. This is a rate often
  measured as number of new cases within 10,000 individuals over a year.

- Probability of an event.

- Odds of an event. Odds is a ratio: probability of an event divided by
  one minus the probability of that event.

- Risk: measures how likely it is for an undesirable event to happen. It
  can be measured as an actual probability, as hazard, log hazard, etc.,
  within a time period.

- Relative risk is a fraction of an observed quantity divided by an
  expected (baseline) quantity. These quantities can be number of
  events, proportions, probabilities, rates (with the same time period
  for the observed and expected quantities).

- Hazard and hazard ratio are formally defined in the “Time-to-Event
  Outcomes,” section of the “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics
  of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health
  Science” chapter.

- Average Treatment Effect (ATE): average difference in therapeutic
  effect between comparable treated and untreated patients.

- Average Treatment Effect in the Treated (ATT): average effect of the
  treatment in a treated sample of patients (average difference of
  effect of treatment between treated patients vs without the
  treatment).

- Individual treatment effect (ITE): the effect of treatment in a
  patient (difference in likelihood of an outcome with and without
  treatment).

Types of Modeling Problems

As we discussed in chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine
Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: the Need for
Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML”, AI/ML have an extraordinary
range of applications. Thankfully the vast majority of problems fall
into only a handful of common categories.

Because the majority of problems fall into a few types, and each type
can be addressed by a small number of data designs, a few data design
templates suffice for solving most problems encountered in health
sciences and health care.

Below we list the most commonly-encountered and broadly applicable
problem classes.

Diagnostic problem class. This is the problem of assigning patients to
diagnostic categories. It is solved by developing diagnostic models,
hand-crafted or machine-learnt. An important aspect of the diagnostic
problem is that it is concerned with diseases (or clinical conditions)
that currently exist in the patient [3].

Screening problem class. A special case of the diagnosis problem where
disease has not manifested clinically and needs to be detected as early
as possible. Different from the diagnostic tests, screening tests are
applied to a much greater number of patients. Mammography is an example
of a screening test, aimed at identifying patients with breast cancer.
When the screening test reports a positive result, a more reliable
diagnostic test is then used to determine whether the subject indeed has
the disease. Compared to diagnostic tests, screening tests are often
less expensive, less harmful (have fewer side effects or lower risk to
health) and thus can be deployed at a larger scale than a diagnostic
test. Screening tests often suffer from producing a large number of
false positives which is a consequence of the low prevalence of the
tested condition in the broad population where the test is applied. ML
modeling can help with implementing high quality scalable screening
tests (e.g., radiology ancillary finding interpretation).

Risk prediction. This problems deals with forecasting patients’ future
risk of developing a disease or a disease related outcome. Risk models
differ from screening or diagnostic models in two important ways. First,
screening and diagnostic models are concerned with diseases that the
patient already developed or is in the process of developing, while risk
models are concerned with events that may occur in the future. Second,
diagnostic tests are often confined to diseases, while the risk models
can be used more broadly, such as to assess the risk of future
re-hospitalization, ICU admission, prolonged illness, etc.

Prognostic problems. Prognosis usually refers to forecasting outcomes of
interest in patients with a disease (or simply the likelihood of
recovery from the disease) [3]. In molecular precision oncology commonly
predictive (instead of prognostic) refers to the likelihood of outcomes
given a treatment. ML models can perform these forecasts (and in some
cases, e.g., high-throughput-based molecular oncology, they provide the
primary means for this task).

Estimating treatment efficacy. The goal of this class of problems is to
estimate the effect of an intervention on an outcome. This outcome can
be an event (e.g. a disease or re-hospitalization) or a quantity (e.g.
systolic blood pressure reduction in hypertensive patients). While it is
sufficient for the relationship between the predictor features and the
outcome of interest to be associative (correlational) for diagnostic,
screening, and risk models; treatment efficacy estimation needs to be
based on causal relationships (especially when changes in treatment
practices are contemplated).

Biomarker or risk factor discovery. Biomarkers are a very diverse group
of entities that include: (1) any correlate of a phenotype or outcome of
interest; (2) complex computable models (aka “signatures”) that can be
used to diagnose, prognosticate or treat phenotypes/patients; (3)
substitutes (proxy outcomes) for longer term outcomes in clinical
trials; and (4) drug targets for new therapeutics. Accordingly, a
variety of ML models can serve such discovery: for (1), predictive
modeling; for (2), predictive, prognostic or causal ML modeling; for (3)
and (4), causal ML modeling [4].

Operational problem solving. These models relate to the management and
administration of health organizations, often involving resource
planning and allocation. Examples include hospital bed allocation,
ordering supplies, managing personnel, billing and reimbursement, etc.

Economic evaluations. These pertain to understanding the economic impact
of clinical and administrative decisions. ML-enabled economic
evaluations can be used to compare two treatments of the same disease
and study their outcomes in light of their costs. They can also be used
to inform resource allocation across multiple diseases by comparing
health benefits of a new treatment of one disease versus the health
benefits of a new treatment of a different disease. At an even higher
level, they guide policy decisions about allocating funds to health care
initiatives and prioritize investments [5].

Subpopulation discovery. This class of problems is closely related to
(1) precision health, (2) poor average effects of treatments, and (3)
population mixtures. With respect to (1), precision treatments target
subgroups that will benefit from the treatment and protect subgroups
that are more susceptible to toxic side effects. Regarding (2), often,
RCTs reveal that the average effect of a new treatment in the general
population of patients may be small, however, it is possible for the
treatment to be optimally effective in a subgroup. In case (3), where an
apparently homogeneous population in reality comprise subpopulations
with different underlying disease mechanisms or physiology, it is often
useful to de-mix these subpopulations and apply
subpopulation-appropriate health interventions.

Inference: What Is a Valid Solution?

Effective ML-based problem-solving must ensure the validity of the
produced solutions. In this section, we elaborate on solution validity.
Every problem at hand concerns a particular patient population, the
target population. The solution of the problem is valid if it holds true
in the target population. It is very rare that we have data for the
entire target population. Instead we often have access to a different
population called the accessible population. Because it is impractical
to collect data about all members in the accessible population, we draw
a discovery sample from the accessible population (Fig. 3). Thus, ML
models are derived from the discovery sample and not the target
population and not even from the entirety of the accessible population.
We must thus ensure that the solutions produced by the models generalize
to the accessible population and then further to the target population
[1].

[]

An illustration of inference includes the selection of discovery sample
from accessible population, which is taken from target population.
Discovery sample through modeling provides study findings transferred as
knowledge to accessible and target population. Generalization with
validation is used.

A valid solution is one that is true in the discovery sample and remains
true in (i.e., generalizes to) the accessible and target populations.

Therefore central to validity is generalizability. The typical
generalizability discussed in machine learning textbooks is internal
validity referring to the requirement that a solution that is valid
(holds true) in the discovery sample must generalize to the accessible
population. Generalizability further to the target population is a type
of external validity. The goal of using design protocols and best
practices is to help achieve both types of validity.

Let us illustrate this concept through an example: consider the
hypothetical question of whether aggressive management of high
cholesterol helps reduce heart disease incidents. If this is a research
question, then we may wish the answer to generalize to a very broad
patient population such as all patients who have high cholesterol in the
entire nation. The target population is all patients with high
cholesterol in the nation (who have not had heart disease yet). Suppose,
we conduct this study in a consortium of academic health centers located
in a handful of states. Our accessible population then consists of
patients with high cholesterol who are typically seen at these specific
academic centers and have health data recorded in the corresponding
EHRs. Further assume that we have analytic access to a small portion of
health records (our discovery sample).

Assuming that the discovery sample is a random sample from the
accessible population and that the resulting model is applied close to
the time frame when the discovery sample was drawn, the results from the
discovery sample will generalize to the accessible population as long as
we do not have modeling issues such as overfitting (chapter
“Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and
Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and
AI”). However, the accessible population (individuals seen at academic
health centers) and the target population (general USA population with
high cholesterol) likely systematically differs and full
generalizability of the results from the accessible population to the
target population is unlikely. To address this problem, the original
accessible population should be constructed in a way that better
represents the general population. If that is not feasible then use of
the models should be restricted to the accessible population only. Other
more sophisticated techniques may also correct the generalizability
issues. The general rule of thumb is that an imperfect design will
require immense modeling efforts to rectify its biases (and may still
not achieve the desired generalizability).

Best Practice 7.2.1

Seek to ensure validity and generalizability with good data design
first. Resort to analytic corrections of biases only to the extent that
optimal design is not attainable.

Now let us consider the same question in a narrower context with some
important biases present: does aggressive management of high cholesterol
help reduce heart disease incidents in the patient population of a
specific health system? The target population is patients in this
singular health system with high cholesterol. As before we may draw a
random discovery sample of patients from the electronic health record
(EHR) system to answer this question. Our accessible population appears
to be the same as the target population. Assume further that not all
patients are included in the EHR and that the patients in the EHR differ
from the patients not in the EHR. For example patients in the EHR
can have lower or higher cholesterol levels than those not in the EHR.
Also assume that patients not in the EHR, predominantly receive their
high cholesterol treatments in a different health system. Under these
and many similar conditions, even when we build models for a single
health system using data strictly from said health system, the target
and accessible populations can differ. Such differences can impact
generalizability and thus validity. A model that is valid in a data rich
environment could perform poorly in a data poor environment when
selection bias is present. Whether a model generalizes can be
determined, of course, and can be made to generalize better through
careful data design.

Pitfall 7.2.1

A random sample from a registry or an EHR is not necessarily a random
sample from the patient population.

Best Practice 7.2.2

Ensure that the accessible population is representative of the target
population.

Best Practice 7.2.3

Ensure that the discovery sample is representative of the accessible
(and target) populations.

Data Design

In the previous section, we started with a rough question and
transformed it into a problem statement. We specified the operative
setting (clinical, operational, research) and made the problem statement
more precise (than the rough question) by describing five major
elements: (1) target population, (2) intervention, (3) outcome, (4) time
period and (5) predictor variables. We also defined an estimand, a
computable metric that solves the problem. In this section, we focus on
the “How?”, how the problem can be solved.

Data designs provide a framework within which different problem types
can be carried out while ensuring validity.

In this book, we focus mostly on observational studies, where data is
already generated and we have no influence over how patients are treated
or how their data is captured in sources like the EHR, but we do have
influence over how data is sampled from such sources and in some cases
how data will be collected specifically for modeling. These foci reflect
the majority of practical situations and are harder than having full
control over data generation and collection.

In the following sections, we describe the data design hierarchy, which
allows us to answer a few simple questions about exposure, outcome and
temporal relationships and arrive at a data design. We describe the most
common data designs in detail, providing concrete examples. After we
describe the data designs, in Table 1, we relate them to the problem
types from section “Types of Modeling Problems” and to the metrics from
section “Common Metrics” thus connecting the data design process with
problem solving requirements.

Table 1

Mapping of problem types to appropriate data designs, analytic methods
and measures. “Any” data design means, that the simplest data design
depends on whether the problem at hand is temporal and not, and whether
an outcome exists and whether it is rare

+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Problem Type             | Simplest design      | Analytic methods     |
|                          | serving this goal    | [and metrics]        |
+:=========================+:=====================+:=====================+
| Association between risk | Cross-sectional      | Classification [odds |
| factor and outcome       |                      | ratio, relative      |
|                          |                      | risk, etc]           |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Summarizing patient info | Cross-sectional or   | Clustering           |
|                          | cohort               |                      |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Summarizing patient info | Cross-sectional      | Classification,      |
| with respect to a        |                      | regression           |
| particular outcome       |                      |                      |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Subpopulation discovery  | Cross-sectional or   | Clustering or        |
|                          | cohort               | specialized method   |
|                          |                      |                      |
|                          |                      | [Meaningful metrics  |
|                          |                      | depend on the        |
|                          |                      | definition of        |
|                          |                      | subpopulation]       |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Subpopulation discovery  | Cross-sectional or   | Classification,      |
| with respect to a        | cohort               | regression,          |
| specific outcome         |                      | time-to-event,       |
|                          |                      | causal modeling,     |
|                          |                      | followed by post-hoc |
|                          |                      | analysis of ML       |
|                          |                      | models               |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Diagnosis/screening/risk | Cohort               | Classification,      |
| model/risk score         |                      | regression,          |
|                          |                      | time-to-event        |
|                          |                      |                      |
|                          |                      | [Incidence, relative |
|                          |                      | risk, hazard, etc]   |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Diagnosis/risk           | Case-control         | Classification,      |
| model/risk score when    |                      | regression, [odds    |
| outcome is rare          |                      | ratio]               |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Biomarker discovery/risk | Cohort               | Classification,      |
| factors                  |                      | time-to-event,       |
|                          |                      | causal modeling      |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Disease trajectory       | Cohort               | Sequence mining,     |
|                          |                      | repeated measures    |
|                          |                      | modeling (e.g. GEE), |
|                          |                      | recurrent neural     |
|                          |                      | networks (RNN)       |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Forecasting              | Cohort               | Regression modeling, |
| (utilization, cost, lab  |                      | VAR, RNN, time       |
| results)                 |                      | series modeling      |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Longitudinal risk models | Cohort               | Repeated measures,   |
|                          |                      | recurrent networks,  |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Treatment effect         | Cohort               | Causal ML, SEM,      |
| estimation               |                      | regression (after    |
|                          |                      | confounder           |
|                          |                      | identified)          |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Causal structure         | Cross-sectional or   | Causal ML            |
| discovery                | cohort               |                      |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Effect of complex        | Cohort               | Structural marginal, |
| treatment protocols      |                      | RNNs, [ITE, ATE,     |
|                          |                      | ATT]                 |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Density estimation       | Any                  |                      |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Outlier detection        | Any                  | Model-based outlier  |
|                          |                      | detection, Parzen    |
|                          |                      | windows, KNN,        |
|                          |                      | 1-class SVM          |
+--------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

Data Design Hierarchy

Experimental Data Designs: these involve generation of data by
manipulating some of the variables. From the perspective of the ML
problem-solving team using the methods of this book, the team may have
control over these interventions (we call this a primary experimental
data) or, alternatively they may be given access to data in
which someone else conducted interventions and the team had no control
over these interventions (we call this secondary experimental data).

Observational Data Designs: these involve data that was
measured/generated by the ML problem-solving team (we call this a
primary observational data), or alternatively the team may be given
access to data that someone else measured and the team had no control
over such observations (we call this secondary observational data).

For example, if the problem-solving ML team is given access to
previously conducted randomized clinical trials, the interventions had
been assigned by the RCT experimenters; patients were randomized into
groups receiving intervention (treated) or being controls (untreated).
Similarly, if the problem-solving ML team is given access to EHR data,
interventions occurred before the ML modeling starts and thus the team
can only observe these interventions. However, in contrast to RCT data,
the nature of interventions in EHR data does not involve randomization
or controlled interventions.

Figure 4, adopted from [6], describes how several prototypical data
designs ensue under the above conditions.

[]

A flow chart of data design begins with design intervention decision. If
yes, primary experimental. If no, secondary experimental is followed by
direction of time. Cross-sectional if no time. Cohort is forward.
Case-control is backward. Cohort is followed by nested case-control
case-cohort.

If an analysis starts with an exposure and follows subjects to determine
the outcome, it is called a cohort design. Conversely, when the analysis
starts with an outcome, identifying subjects with (and without) an
outcome, and proceeds backwards in time to establish their plausible
causes, then it is termed a case-control design. Finally, if the
exposures and outcomes are determined at a single time point (cross
section), then it is called a cross-sectional design.

Cross-sectional design. The exposure and outcome are observed in the
same cross section. With the existence of exposed and unexposed groups,
the association between the exposure and the outcome can be measured,
but since they are measured in the same cross section, the temporal
relationship between them cannot be readily observed (but may be
inferable with causal ML see chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”). The
date of the cross section is the index date.

Best Practice 7.3.1

A cross-sectional data design suffices if one can solve the problem
using the prevalence of the outcome in the exposed and unexposed groups.

Pitfall 7.3.1

A cross-sectional design is inappropriate if there is a time gap between
the exposure and the outcome and is important, or if incidence of the
outcome is of interest.

Cohort design. The logic of the analysis follows the passage of time: it
progresses from the exposure towards the outcome. A cohort of patients
with a particular exposure is identified, and a second comparison cohort
without the exposure can also be observed (if needed by the problem at
hand). These two cohorts are followed forwards in time determining their
outcomes. The date of the exposure and the date when unexposed patients
are included is the index date. The time period during which the cohort
is followed is the follow-up period. Since patients did not have the
outcome at the time of exposure, this design allows for measuring
incidence rates and relative risks [7].

Pitfall 7.3.2

A cohort design falls short when the outcome is rare or if it takes a
long time for the outcomes to develop.

Case-control design. Here we start with identifying a group of subjects
with the outcome (cases) and another group of subjects without the
outcome (controls). Then the analysis progresses backwards in time,
looking for exposures in the records of the subjects. When a comparison
group (unexposed patients) exists, associations can be measured.
However, without knowledge of the prevalence of the outcome, incidence
rates and hence relative risks cannot be computed in absolute terms. The
critical part of this design is the choice of controls (or,
equivalently, the availability of reliable ML algorithms that control
analytically possible confounding) [8].

Relationship Between Problem Type and Data Design

Best Practice 7.3.2

Use the easiest/most economical data design that can solve problem. The
mapping of the problem to a problem type can help find the best design.

Refining the Discovery sample—Use of Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria

The discovery sample is defined using a set of inclusion and exclusion
criteria. As their names imply, inclusion criteria select patients to be
included in the cohort and exclusion criteria exclude patients from the
cohort.

The objective of the inclusion/exclusion criteria is to create a
discovery sample that resembles the target population as closely as
possible.

As we described in section “Inference: What Is a Valid Solution?,”
modeling allows inferences, in which knowledge/models generated in a
discovery sample are used in the target population (after sufficient
validation). The discovery sample comes from the accessible population,
which can be different from the target population and even the discovery
sample can be different (not a random sample) from the accessible
population. Our goal with the inclusion/exclusion criteria is to make
the discovery sample representative of the target population.

A common starting point is the description of the target population as
an inclusion criterion. Next, we refine it by specifying additional
inclusion or exclusion criteria.

Exclusion criteria describe patients in the accessible population who
are either unlikely to contribute to the validity of the findings, or
are excluded so that the accessible population resembles the target
population better. Common reasons for exclusion include:

1.  1.

    Patients are not at risk of the outcome. For example, when studying
    the risk of falling in the elderly, patients who are bed-bound
    should be excluded because they have an artificially low risk of
    falling.

     

2.  2.

    A special case of not being at risk is having a pre-existing outcome
    when we try to measure the incidence rate of a phenomenon. Patients
    who already have the outcome at baseline or are very likely to have
    the outcome (albeit being undiagnosed) at baseline are excluded.

     

3.  3.

    Patients who are very unlikely to receive the intervention. Patients
    who are not at risk of or are at very low risk of the outcome should
    be excluded from modeling that determines the effect of an
    intervention. The intervention in such patients (if ethical) would
    show little (if any) efficacy and these patients would very rarely
    (if ever) receive this intervention.

     

4.  4.

    Patients who have a different disease mechanism than the one under
    study.

     

5.  5.

    Patients having a pre-existing condition that precludes the results
    from holding true. For example, models in which heart rate is a risk
    factor may not hold true in patients with pacemakers (heart rate is
    artificially controlled).

     

6.  6.

    Insufficient data. Patients with insufficient data can be excluded,
    however, doing so can introduce biases.

     

7.  7.

    A special case of insufficient data is insufficient follow-up.
    Patients with insufficient follow-up can be excluded, but doing so
    may introduce biases.

     

We will discuss discovery sample construction further in the context of
the data design types.

Example of a Cohort Design

Cohort studies are arguably the most common data designs in clinical
analytic models.

The defining characteristics of a cohort study are that (1) a cohort of
patients are selected and (2) the cohort is followed forward in time to
determine the outcomes.

In this exposition, we will focus on two kinds of cohort studies. The
first one does not have a specific intervention, we merely measure the
association between baseline exposures with the incidence of an outcome
and construct a risk model. The second has a specific intervention.

Cohort Studies without a Specific Intervention of Interest

Example 7.3.1

Let’s consider development of a clinical risk model for assessing a
patient’s 7-year risk of diabetes. Our hypothetical health system plans
to apply this model every time a patient undergoes blood sugar testing.
Patients that are found to have high risk of diabetes are referred to a
diabetes prevention clinic.

Study type. This is a risk model (Table 1) and cohort study is
appropriate. We are interested in measuring the 7-year risk of
developing diabetes (incidence of diabetes), so hazard, hazard rate,
probability, and possibly other measures are appropriate (Table 1).

Index date. To determine an index date, we take its intended clinical
application into account. When a new blood sugar test result becomes
available, the model will be applied to determine whether the patient
needs to be referred to a diabetes prevention clinic. Patients can have
multiple blood glucose tests, so we can simply take a cross-section of
the eligible population at a random time and use their most recent test
result, provided it is sufficiently recent. The criterion for
“sufficient recent” is determined based on clinical knowledge; the
objective is to ensure that if the blood glucose measurement had been
taken exactly on the index date, we would not expect it to be
meaningfully different from this “sufficiently recent” measurement.

Defining the target population. The target population consists of
patients who are at risk of developing incident diabetes and have
received blood glucose test(s) before the index date. Patients with
pre-existing diabetes are no longer at risk of developing incident
diabetes.

Inclusion/exclusion. The objective is to ensure that the discovery
sample is not significantly different from the target population, which
consists of patient who undergo blood sugar test(s). The discovery
sample comes from the accessible population, which may be different from
the target population. We can use inclusion/exclusion criteria to modify
the discovery sample to better resemble the target population.
Concerning the selection of the accessible population, we can use any
convenient population, as long as it is not significantly different from
the target population. For example, if we wish to apply the model to
patients in 2020 and forward, then we could select patients (say) with
blood sugar test(s) between 2005 and 2015, assuming that the criterion
for ordering a blood glucose test has remained reasonably unchanged
during this period (2005–2020). Conversely, we would not use patients
only from (say) the obesity clinic as the accessible population, because
obesity is a risk factor of diabetes and thus patients in the obesity
clinic can have already progressed further towards diabetes than the
general patient population with blood sugar measurements. We also have
to be mindful to exclude patients who may have had their blood glucose
taken for reasons other than suspecting diabetes (e.g. application for
life insurance)—the resulting model will not be applied to these
patients.

Cohort Studies with an Intervention of Interest

Figure 5 shows an illustration of different types of cohort studies with
an intervention of interest. The horizontal axis represents time and the
dashed vertical line is the index date where we start following
patients. Each dot represents a patient. Black dots are censored
patients (dropped out without an event) and red dots are patients with
an event. The location of the dot shows the time of the event or
censoring.

[]

An illustration of cohort data models. a. Treated bar is stacked over
unexposed bar. b. Treated bar is staggered above the unexposed. Both
have censored and event patients in 2 shades of dots to the right of the
stack on the time axis.

The vertical axis denotes treatment status. Panel A shows a simple
design, with a single cross section, where patients’ treatment status
does not change after the index date. Panel B shows a staggered
treatment design, where the treatment status of some patients changes
over time. These two designs solve different problems.

Example 7.3.2

We suspect that the prolonged (at least 6 months) use of a hypothetical
drug has an adverse effect that increases the risk of mortality in
diabetic patients. We wish to measure the effect size.

Problem type. This is a treatment effect estimation problem (Table 1)
and we are going to use a cohort design with an intervention of interest
(the particular drug). Since no particular time frame is specified for
the outcome, hazard (time-to-event outcome) is appropriate for measuring
the “risk of mortality”. (Had the problem specified 7-year mortality, we
could have also used probability or death in 7 years.)

Exposure. Exposed patients are those who have used this drug for at
least 6 months. We have multiple options for unexposed patients. If the
clinical question places an emphasis on prolonged use as opposed to
short-term use, then an appropriate control (unexposed) group is
patients who took the drug for less than 6 months. If the comparison
really is about being exposed to the drug at all, then an appropriate
comparison group is patients who never took this drug.

Index date. The question does not specify any timing information, so we
can take a cross section of patients at a random date and use this date
as the index date. Some of the patients in this cross section will have
already taken the drug for 6 months, other patients have not, and some
patient will never take it.

Target population. Patients with diabetes who may be considered for
intervention through this drug.

Inclusions/exclusions. Considerations for the construction of the
analytic cohort are similar to those in the previous example. However,
patients unexposed at the index date may later become exposed to the
drug. In that case, this patient can be excluded; or the patient can be
included but censored at the time of exposure to the drug. Caution is
required with the latter approach, because censoring can be informative.

Predictor variables and confounding. The outcome, mortality, depends on
factors other than exposure to the drug. Some of these factors can also
influence exposure to the drug, thus they can be confounders. These
confounders, if known with certainty, must be accounted for, for
example, by including them as covariates or by balancing them between
exposed and unexposed patients using propensity matching. If confounders
are not known but are measured, we can discover them using causal ML
methods.

Predictor variables of mortality are evaluated at the index date. If a
patient has taken the drug for 6 months before the index date, the drug
may have adversely affected some of the predictor variables by the index
date. If these predictor variables are on the causal chain between the
drug and the outcome they must be excluded.

If some variables are affecting the outcome but are not on the causal
chain between treatment and outcome, they should be included.

Determining the precise location/role of such variables requires
extensive domain knowledge or application of causal ML techniques that
can place variables in the correct causal role category.

This is merely an illustrative design. Many other (possibly more
appropriate) designs are also possible.

Example 7.3.3

Let us estimate the effect of a hypothetical diabetes drug on reducing
the risk of mortality. Let us assume that this drug can be prescribed to
all diabetic patients.

Clinical use. We assume that this model will be applied to patients, who
are diabetic and are not yet on this drug (and possibly not on other
drugs that target the same disease). Assume that every time such a
patient interacts with the health system, the model will be applied. If
the predicted risk exceeds a certain level, the patient is given the
drug; otherwise, the patient will not receive the drug. This process
repeats until the patient falls outside the inclusion criteria (e.g.
gets this drug, gets a different drug for the same disease, is lost to
follow-up, or dies).

Problem type. This is also a treatment effect estimation problem (Table
1) and we are going to use a cohort design with an intervention of
interest (the particular drug). Similar to Example 7.3.2., since no
particular time frame is specified for the outcome, hazard
(time-to-event outcome) is appropriate for measuring the “risk of
mortality”.

Exposure. Exposed patients are those taking the drug and unexposed
patients are those who do not take any drugs for this disease.

Index date. For exposed patients, the index date is the date of their
first prescription. There are multiple options for the choice of
controls. First, we can take a sample of eligible patients at a date who
did not receive the drug yet at that date. This date can be chosen
randomly or as the median date of the exposed patients’ index dates.
When a control patient receives any drug for the same disease (either
the drug in question or a different drug for the same disease), the
patient is censored.

Inclusion/exclusion. Considerations for the construction of the analytic
cohort are similar to those in the previous example. If the drug is
contraindicated for some patients for reasons unrelated to the outcome,
these patients can be included (as untreated patients); if the drug is
contraindicated for the presence of a complication that increases
mortality (the outcome), these patients should be excluded as they
increase the risk of mortality in the untreated group.

Predictor variables. We must include all confounders and we can include
variables that cause the treatment or the outcome. We should not include
variables that are descendants of the outcome, nor variables that are on
the causal chain between the treatment and the outcome.

Merits and Demerits of Cohort Studies

Best Practice 7.3.3

Cohort studies are straightforward and necessary if the time gap between
the index date and the outcome cannot be ignored.

Best Practice 7.3.4

Cohort studies allow us to estimate the prevalence and/or incidence of
outcomes, separately for exposed and unexposed patients (if an
intervention is considered).

Being able to estimate the prevalence or incidence of outcomes,
separately for exposed and/or unexposed patients, allows us to compute a
multitude of measures, including relative risks, hazard ratios, as well
as odds ratios.

Pitfall 7.3.2

Cohort studies are less practical if the outcome is rare or if the
outcome takes a long time to develop.

The key challenge to a cohort design is rare outcomes and outcomes that
develop over very long periods of time. EHR systems track a great number
of patients, but patients can be lost to follow-up over time. When the
time gap between the index date and the outcome is long, we may not find
sufficiently many cases due to the follow-up constraint.

In the case when outcomes are rare, a very large cohort may be necessary
to contain a sufficiently high number of cases (patients with confirmed
positive outcome). When some of the important variables need to be
collected, ascertained or processed in a way that increases cost, doing
this for a very large cohort is not cost effective. Additionally, if the
outcome is very rare, a single cross section may not yield sufficient
number of possible cases.

Case-Control Design

Case/control studies start from the outcome. Cases (patients with
positive outcome) and controls (patients without an outcome) are
identified and possibly sampled. Patient records for this sample are
then examined moving backwards in time, recording the exposures (or
treatments) they experienced.

Pitfall 7.3.3

When we sample cases or controls in a case/control design, we have to do
so without any regard to the exposure. Whether a patient is selected
into the cohort or not must be independent of the
exposure(s)/treatment(s).

Best Practice 7.3.5

Whenever possible, the use of clinical trial data is recommended for
case/control studies.

In observational data with complex causal structure and potentially
unobserved confounders, we may inadvertently select patients based on
criteria that are linked to the exposure/treatment. In clinical trial
data, the exposure/treatment is not caused by any of the variables.
Observe, however, that putative causes of the outcome (other than the
randomized treatment) can be confounded in a RCT design (Fig. 6).

[]

An illustration of a case-control data model has time indicated
horizontally. 5 exposures squares are distributed to the left of the
stack of cases bar over controls bar.

Merits and Demerits

Best Practice 7.3.6

Case/control design is best suited when the outcome is rare, but the
exposures/treatements are relatively frequent.

Case-control designs have smaller sample requirements and depending on
the costs of collecting or measuring variables they can substantially
reduce total data cost.

The key demerit lies in creating a discovery sample with artificial
distribution of cases and controls. When the data is sampled de novo for
analysis (as opposed to pre-existing e.g. in an EHR) this leads to
difficulties in optimizing model use according to loss functions that
are prior-dependent (because the natural prior is not known).

Pitfall 7.3.4

Case/control studies do not measure the prevalence of the outcome, which
makes computing measures other than odds ratios non-trivial.

Case/control studies do not measure the prevalence of the outcome, thus
we can only estimate odds ratios. Luckily, for rare outcomes, the odds
ratios and relative risks are similar.

Nested Case-Control Design and Case-Cohort Design

These two designs attempt to merge the benefits of the cohort design
with the case-control design. We would conduct a regular cohort design,
but embed a case/control design. In the cohort, we select all cases
(patients with the outcome) and match them to controls (patients without
the outcome) based on their baseline characteristics. One benefit of
this approach is that the exposure/treatment needs to be ascertained
only for the cases and the selected controls, not all patients, yet
because it is a cohort design, we can estimate prevalence of the outcome
[1, 9].

A nested case-control and a case-cohort designs are both case/control
designs nested into a cohort design. They differ in the way controls are
selected. Nested case/control studies match cases with controls
individually, while case-cohort studies simply take a random sample of
the non-cases in the cohort as the control group.

The key limitation of these designs is the same as the case/control
design: finding appropriate controls is error-prone and difficult to
automate.

Biases

In statistics, bias refers to a systematic tendency which causes
differences between results and facts [10, 11].

In the context of data design, bias are systematic deficiencies in the
design that lead to errors in the produced models and corresponding
problem domain solutions.

A bias is systematic if it is not arising purely through randomness.
Many different types of bias exist. For example, in case of measurement
bias, the systematic error exists between the measured and the actual
values of a variable; similarly, in case of an estimation bias, the
systematic error is between the estimate and the true value. In the
context of drawing a sample from a population, sampling bias [11] occurs
when some characteristic in the sample is over- or underrepresented
relative to the population.

Broader uses of the term bias are also common. For example, an
evaluation bias arises when the estimated performance of a model
systematically differs from the actual performance often due to a flawed
evaluation metric or method. Social biases, such as racial bias, arise
when a systematic difference that cannot be attributed to a morally and
scientifically justifiable reason between social groups (e.g. races or
ethnicities) exist in terms of some desirable or undesirable metric
(e.g. employment, compensation, incarceration rate). Analogously, health
equity bias arises when health related measures, such as unjustifiable
mortality rate, access to health care or health care utilization
systematically differ across groups of patients. Analytic bias happens
when the inference of the relationship between outcome and
exposure/treatment is incorrect: the estimate of the relationship from
the sample systematically differs from the true relationships in the
population [12].

A particularly bad case of an analytic bias is when the direction of the
relationship reverses, as it can happen in case of the Simpson’s
paradox.

- Even broader use of the term also exists where bias refers to a
  systematic preference of one option versus another. For example,

- Inductive bias of a machine learning algorithm is the preference that
  the algorithm has for certain models over others. This is the only
  common use of the term bias that has a positive connotation.

- Cognitive biases are systematic propensities of human decision making
  that lead to errors in decision making. Such cognitive biases may be
  the result of evolutionary adaptations that require rapid action based
  on heuristic or limited analytical reasoning.

In this section, we focus on biases that we encounter in data design.
These are mainly estimation biases, including sampling and analytic
biases as well as Simpson’s paradox. Other kinds of biases are discussed
in the appropriate sections. Inductive bias is discussed in the
“Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” chapter, measurement bias
in the “Evaluation” chapter,, and human biases in judgement and decision
making in the “From ‘Human versus Machine’ to ‘Human with
Machine'” chapter.

Commonly Encountered Biases in Data Design

Confounding bias. When the purpose of the analysis is to quantify the
relationship between an exposure and an outcome, confounding, latent or
observed, can distort this relationship. The confounding factor can take
many forms and some of the common confounding forms have their own name.
When the confounding factor is the missingness of data, we have
information bias; when the factor is a latent factor causing certain
patients in the target population to be excluded from the sample, we
have selection bias; or when a factor is an indication for the exposure
(treatment in this case) of interest and independently causes the
outcome, we have confounding by indication [13].

Selection bias occurs when a (typically latent) factor causes certain
patients to be excluded from the discovery sample who are part of the
accessible population or from the accessible population who are part of
the target population. Analysis is valid (unbiased) if the accessible
population is a random sample from the target population and the
discovery sample is a random sample from the accessible population.
Violation of this assumption can affect the external validity (discovery
sample or accessible population is not a random sample from the target
population) or the internal validity (discovery sample is not a random
sample from the accepted population) [11].

Selection bias can affect the analysis by creating an artifactual
difference between cases and controls or between exposed and unexposed
patients. In the former case, estimates of the prevalence of the outcome
will be biased, which will transcend to any metric, such as relative
risk, that relies on prevalence; in the latter case, the relationship
between the exposure and outcome will be biased.

Information bias. Information bias occurs when the information is
available differentially between cases and controls or between exposed
and unexposed patients. The former biases prevalence estimates and the
latter biases estimates of the association between exposure and
treatment. Recall bias is a special case of information bias, where
cases and control recall (remember) exposures differently [11].

Confounding by indication. This is another special case of confounding
bias, where a confounder is an indication for the treatment and can
independently cause an outcome. For example, infection may cause fever
and thus use of paracetamol as well as it may be a cause for asthma
later in life, thus it can distort the association between paracetamol
use and asthma [13, 14].

Ascertainment bias. Certain exposures cause the outcome to be
ascertained at a higher probability. For example, having eye problems
may trigger a diabetes test (diabetic retinopathy) leading to the
discovery of diabetes which may remain undiscovered in patients without
eye problems. In some cases, when the proportion of patients with and
without the exposure is “unlucky”, Simpson’s paradox combines with
ascertainment bias and reverses the direction of the association between
the exposure and outcome. This latter form of ascertainment bias is
Berkson’s bias [15]. We discuss Simpson’s paradox later in Section
“Simpson’s Paradox”.

Informed presence bias. Related to ascertainment bias, patients who have
frequent encounters may have more problems documented that would remain
undiscovered otherwise.

Non-contemporaneous control bias. If the comparison group is selected
from a different time frame from the cases or the exposed group, they no
longer represent a random sample from the accessible population (or the
target population) leading to biases [16].

Reverse causation. Cause and effect may appear reversed in association.
For example, when sedentary lifestyle is associated with increased death
rate, sedentary lifestyle may not be the cause of death; quite on the
contrary, a deadly disease may have caused the sedentary lifestyle and
ultimately the death [17].

Simpson’s Paradox

Consider two factors, A and B, both binary for simplicity. Further,
consider that we are studying the probability of the outcome in the four
groups defined by the two factors. Figure 7 provides an illustration of
the results. There are four circles in the figure representing the four
groups. The radius of the circles is proportional to the number of
subjects in the group. The horizontal layout of the circles relates to
factor B: the two circles on the left lack factor B (i.e. B = 0) and
those on the right have factor B (i.e. B = 1). The vertical position of
the circles relates to factor A: the two circles on the top have factor
A = 1, while the bottom two circles have A = 0. The vertical axis
represents the probability of outcome. Clearly, factor A is associated
with higher probability of outcome, as the two circles with A = 1 are
higher than the two with A = 0. The two X’s in between the top and
bottom circles represent the average probability in the sample when
B = 0 (on the left) and when B = 1 (on the right).

[]

A diagram. 2 larger and 2 smaller circles are featured. Factor B and A
correspond to horizontal and vertical orientations of the circles. The
left circles are at 0 B factor, and the right are at 0 A factor. The P r
outcomes for the lower and upper circles are 0.4 and 0.45, respectively.

Let us consider patients with A = 1. They are located in the top two
circles. We can see that the probability of outcome is lower when B = 1.
The 80 patients with A = 1 and B = 0 (top left circle) have an average
probability of outcome of 0.7, which is higher than the average
probability of 0.65 in the group of 120 patients with A = 1 and B = 1
(top right circle). Similarly, let us consider the remaining patients,
those with A = 0 (the bottom two circles). The probability of outcome is
again lower for patients with B = 1. The 120 patients with A = 0 and
B = 0 (bottom left circle) have an average probability (for the outcome)
of 0.2, which is higher than the average probability of 0.15 in the
group of 80 patients with A = 0 and B = 1 (bottom right circle).
Paradoxically, when we look at all patients with B = 0, they have an
average probability of 0.4 (left X), which is lower(!) than the average
probability of 0.45 (right X) for patients with B = 1.

The interested reader is referred to [18] for more details and to [19]
for a causal interpretation of the Simpson’s Paradox.

Best Practice 7.4.1

If you see an unexpected effect direction, always consider the
possibility of Simpson’s paradox and Bergson bias.

Key Messages and Concepts Discussed in Chapter “Data Design”

Data design is an iterative process that transforms available data
elements into an analytic matrix. The analytic matrix is a data set, on
top of which ML algorithms can be directly executed. A successful data
design allows for the ML algorithms to produce a valid solution to an ML
problem.

A solution is valid if it holds true in the discovery sample that it was
computed from and generalizes to the target population. The target
population is the population, in which we want to use the modeling
results (model, knowledge, etc).

Setting refers to the context in which the modeling result will be used.
We broadly distinguish between three settings: clinical, operational and
research. The setting will determine the requirement towards the data
design, and more broadly, the entire analytic process.

The components of the data design include (1) defining an analytic
question, (2) designing the analytic matrix (data design), (3) executing
the modeling, (4) debugging and evaluating the model. The process is
iterative.

The analytic question starts with a rough question that prompted the
analytic project and is refined to be precise, formalized and
operationalizable.

To make an analytic question precise, we commonly define five elements:
(1) target population, (2) intervention, (3) outcome, (4) time period
and (5) predictor variables.

The analytic question is formalized if its answer can be expressed as a
computable estimand. The section “Common Metrics” list several such
estimands (metrics).

Most analytic questions map to a small number of study types which are
listed in the “Types of Modeling Problems” section. This allows us to
develop templated solutions to these questions. These templates are the
data designs.

Data designs form a hierarchy and by answering some questions about
exposure, outcome and their temporal relationship, we arrive at a data
design.

In this book, we focus on observational studies and we considered three
main data designs: (1) cross-sectional, (2) cohort, and (3)
case/control. In addition, nested designs, such as case/control nested
into a cohort study or case/cohort are also discussed.

Concrete data design examples are shown and the merits and demerits of
the various data designs are elaborated on.

Biases are systematic differences between two quantities. Often, one of
these quantities are estimates (or measurements) and the other is
observed. Biases that are common in data designs are presented. We
discuss Simpson’s paradox.

Best Practice Recommendations and Pitfalls, Chapter “Data Design”

Best Practice 7.1.1. The ML data design needs to take the operative
setting of the ML models into account.

Best Practice 7.2.1 Seek to ensure validity and generalizability with
good data design first. Resort to analytic corrections of biases only to
the extent that optimal design is not attainable.

Best Practice 7.2.2 Ensure that the accessible population is
representative of the target population.

Best Practice 7.2.3 Ensure that the discovery sample is representative
of the accessible (and target) populations.

Best Practice 7.3.1. A cross-sectional study suffices if you can answer
the analytic question with the prevalence of the outcome in the exposed
and unexposed groups.

Best Practice 7.3.2. Use the simplest data design that can answer your
analytic question. The mapping of an analytic question to a study type
can help find the simplest design.

Best Practice 7.3.3. Cohort studies are very straightforward and
necessary if the time gap between the index date and the outcome cannot
be ignored.

Best Practice 7.3.4. Cohort studies allow us to estimate the prevalence
and/or incidence of outcomes, separately for exposed and unexposed
patients (if an intervention is considered).

Best Practice 7.3.5. Whenever possible, the use of clinical trial data
is recommended for case/control studies.

Best Practice 7.3.6. Case/control design is best suited when the outcome
is rare, but the exposures are relatively frequent.

Best Practice 7.4.1. If you see an unexpected effect direction, always
consider the possibility of Simpson’s paradox.

Pitfall 7.2.1. A random sample from a registry or an EHR is not
necessarily a random sample from the patient population.

Pitfall 7.3.1. A cross-sectional study is inappropriate if a time gap
between the exposure and the outcome is expected and important or if
incidence of the outcome is of interest.

Pitfall 7.3.2. Cohort studies may not be appropriate if the outcome is
rare or if the outcome takes a long time to develop.

Pitfall 7.3.3. When we sample cases or controls in a case/control study,
we have to do so without any regard to the exposure. Whether a patient
is selected into the cohort or not must be independent of the
exposure(s).

Pitfall 7.3.4. Case/control studies do not measure the prevalence of the
outcome, which makes computing measures other than odds ratios
non-trivial.

Classroom Assignments and Discussion Topics, Chapter “Data Design”

1.  1.

    Consider the problem of predicting the risk of a disease in a
    clinical setting and in a research setting. Can you think of some
    differences in the data design for these two settings in terms
    of (1) the purpose of the model, (2) data sources, (3) target
    population, (4) choice of modeling algorithm, and (5) evaluation?

     

2.  2.

    Consider the problem of predicting the probability of discharge from
    the hospital in 4 days for a patient, in two settings: clinical
    setting and operational setting. Can you think of clinical and
    operational questions that could require these probabilities? How
    would the resulting models be different?

     

3.  3.

    Suppose you have a discharge model that is being used in a clinical
    setting. For each patient, it predicts the probability of discharge
    in 10 days. You are asked to estimate the number of beds that will
    be available in 10 days. Would you use the clinical model or would
    you build a model specifically to estimate the number of available
    beds?

     

4.  4.

    You are tasked with predicting the 7-year risk of diabetes.
    1.  (a)

        Is the outcome prevalence or incidence of diabetes?

         

    2.  (b)

        Is there an exposure of interest? Comparison groups?

         

    3.  (c)

        Is a cohort study an appropriate data design? Could you make a
        cross-sectional design work?

         

    4.  (d)

        What is the eligibility criterion and what is the target
        population? (You need to make some assumptions.)

         

    5.  (e)

        Suppose the model will be used in obese patients. How did the
        eligibility criterion (and the target population) change?

         

    6.  (f)

        Is obesity an “exposure of interest” and would the study require
        a comparison between obese and non-obese patients?

         

    7.  (g)

        If you use a cohort study, how would you construct your cohort?
        What would be the index date? Accessible population? Exclusion
        criteria? Please elaborate.

         

    8.  (h)

        Suppose the model is used only once, precisely at the moment a
        patient first becomes obese. How would you change your design?
        (Hint: a cross-section at a random date will probably not yield
        a sufficient number of patients.)

         

    9.  (i)

        Suppose now that your outcome is a very rare form of diabetes.
        Is a cohort study still appropriate?

         

     

5.  5.

    A hypothetical diabetes drug came to market 10 years ago. It is
    intended for diabetic patients to reduce the risk of major cardiac
    events. You are tasked to evaluate this drug in terms of its
    real-world effect (as seen in EHR data) to reduce major cardiac
    events and mortality.
    1.  (a)

        What type of problem is this?

         

    2.  (b)

        What is the outcome?

         

    3.  (c)

        Is there an exposure/intervention of interest?

         

    4.  (d)

        What are the comparison groups? (You have to make assumptions.
        Discuss how these assumptions affect your answer.)

         

    5.  (e)

        What are potential confounders? How would you adjust for
        confounding?

        The question is intentionally underspecified. Feel free to make
        several assumptions and discuss how different assumptions affect
        your design.

         

     

6.  6.

    You are building a model that advises clinicians on the expected
    effect of a hypothetical diabetes drug on major cardiac events
    (MACE). This model computes the risk of MACE and if the predicted
    probability exceeds a certain (clinically determined) threshold, the
    patient is given the drug. The model is applied to diabetic patients
    at every encounter until the patient either receives a diabetes drug
    or has achieves a normal blood sugar level.
    1.  (a)

        Is there an exposure/intervention of interest?

         

    2.  (b)

        What are the comparison groups (if any)?

         

    3.  (c)

        What is the eligibility criterion and the target population?

         

    4.  (d)

        Is a cohort study appropriate?

         

    5.  (e)

        How would you determine the index date?

         

     

7.  7.

    What is the simplest data design to
    1.  (a)

        Determine whi0ch is more common: high blood pressure or high
        cholesterol

         

    2.  (b)

        Determine whether the prevalence of major cardiac event is more
        common among patients with or without diabetes?

         

    3.  (c)

        Determine whether the incidence of major cardiac event is more
        common among patients with or without diabetes?

         

    4.  (d)

        Assess the effect of obesity on diabetes?

         

    5.  (e)

        Compare the effect of two diabetes drugs on major cardiac
        events?

        In your(!) opinion, when is a data design “simple”?

         

     

8.  8.

    Can you use Cox model with cross-sectional design?

     

9.  9.

    How do you handle confounders in a deep learning model?

     

10. 10.

    Consider a machine learned diabetes risk calculator. This model
    would predict patients’ 7-year risk of diabetes based on some
    commonly available data elements in non-diabetic patients. It would
    be applied to patients with high blood pressure, high blood
    cholesterol or obesity.
    1.  (a)

        Can you think of a choice of accessible population that would
        cause selection bias?

         

    2.  (b)

        Can you give an example of information bias in this context?

         

    3.  (c)

        You find that heart disease is negatively associated with
        diabetes in this model. Can you explain this finding using
        Ascertainment bias? Berkson’s bias?

         

     

11. 11.

    Consider the diabetes risk calculator from the previous question.
    Assume that this calculator now tries to predict the risk of a very
    rare form of diabetes.
    1.  (a)

        Design a case/control study for developing this model. Who are
        the cases? Who are the controls? When do you evaluate the
        baseline predictor variables?

         

    2.  (b)

        Can you give an example of non-contemporaneous control bias in
        this context?

         

     

12. 12.

    “I prefer chocolate over vanilla ice cream.” Can you rephrase this
    statement using the term “bias”. Can you explain how this is a bias?

     

13. 13.

    Can you explain why systematic racism is a bias using the definition
    of bias?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References^([18])

1.  1.

    Hullet SB, Cummings SR, Browner WS, Grady DG, Newmann TB. Designing
    Clinical Research. 3rd ed. Wolters Kluwer Health; 2001.

2.  2.

    Mann CJ. Observational research methods. Research design II: cohort,
    cross sectional, and case-control studies. Emerg Med J.
    2003;20:54–60.Crossref

3.  3.

    Cook NR. Statistical evaluation of prognostic versus diagnostic
    models: beyond the ROC curve. Clin Chem. 2008;54(1):17–23.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1373/​clinchem.​2007.​096529.Crossref

4.  4.

    Lukač N. Adam T, Aliferis C, editors. Personalized and precision
    medicine informatics: a workflow-based view. Croat Med J.
    2020;61(6):577–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3325/​cmj.​2020.​61.​577. Springer
    Nature Switzerland AG; 2020; print ISBN 978–3–030-18,625-8; online
    ISBN 978-3-030-18626-5. PMCID: PMC7821372.Crossref

5.  5.

    Drummond MF, Sculpher MJ, Torrance GW, O’Brien BJ, Stoddart GL.
    Methods for the economic evaluation of health care programmes. 3rd
    ed. Oxford University Press; 2005.Crossref

6.  6.

    Grimes DA, Schulz KF. An overview of clinical research: the lay of
    the land. Lancet. 2002;359(9300):57–61.
    https://www.thelancet.com/series/epidemiology-2002Crossref

7.  7.

    Grimes DA, Shulz KF. Cohort studies: marching toward outcomes.
    Lancet. 2002;359(9303):341–5.Crossref

8.  8.

    Grimes DA, Shulz KF. Case-control studies: research in reverse.
    Lancet. 2002;359(9304):431–4.Crossref

9.  9.

    Kulathinal S, Karvanen J, Saarela O, Kuulasmaa K. Case-cohort design
    in practice - experiences from the MORGAM Project. Epidemiol
    Perspect Innov. 2007;4(4):15.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​1742-5573-4-15.Crossref

10. 10.

    Bias. Wikipedia. https://​en.​wikipedia.​org/​wiki/​Bias_​(statistics)14.

11. 11.

    Jager KJ, Tripepi G, Chesnaye NC, Dekker FW, Zoccali C, Stel VS.
    Where to look for the most frequent biases? Nephrology (Carlton).
    2020 Jun;25(6):435–41. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​nep.​13706.Crossref

12. 12.

    Kramer MS. Analytic bias. In: Clinical epidemiology and
    biostatistics. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-642-61372-2_​5.

13. 13.

    Kyriacou DN, Lewis RJ. Confounding by indication in clinical
    research. JAMA. 2016;316(17):1818–9.Crossref

14. 14.

    Aronson JK, Bankhead C, Mahtani KR, Nunan D. Confounding by
    indication. In: Catalogue of Biases; 2018.
    https://​catalogofbias.​org/​biases/​confounding-by-indication/​.

15. 15.

    Berkson J. Limitations of the application of fourfold table analysis
    to hospital data. Biometrics. 1946;2(3):47–53.Crossref

16. 16.

    Catalogue of Bias Collaboration, Spencer EA, O’Sullivan J. Informed
    presence bias. In: Catalogue of bias; 2017.
    https://​catalogofbias.​org/​biases/​informed-presence-bias/​.

17. 17.

    Sattar N, Preiss D. Reverse causality in cardiovascular
    epidemiological research. More common than imagined? Circulation.
    2017;135:2369–72.Crossref

18. 18.

    Agresti A. Categorical data analysis. 2nd ed. Wiley; 2002. p.
    51.Crossref

19. 19.

    Pearl J. Understanding Simpson’s Paradox. Technical Report R-414,.
    UCLA; 2013.Crossref

20. 20.

    Grimes DA, Shulz KF. Descriptive studies: what they can do and
    cannot do. Lancet. 2002;359(9301):145–9.Crossref

21. 21.

    The catalog of bias collaboration. https://​catalogofbias.​org/​about/​.

Footnotes

1

 

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_8

Data Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and Management

Steven G. Johnson¹  , Gyorgy Simon¹ and Constantin Aliferis¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Steven G. Johnson

Email: joh06288@umn.edu

Abstract

Data preparation and feature engineering transform source data elements
into a form that can be used by analytic and machine learning methods.
Raw source data elements are transformed into data design features that
are specified in the data design through an iterative process of mapping
data elements to concepts, value sets, and phenotype expressions. Data
that meet the data design criteria are extracted into a data mart where
the quality of the data can be assessed. Once data are of sufficient
quality and meet expectations, ML features are developed for use in
machine learning models.

Keywords

Data warehouse/data mart/datasetFeature engineeringData qualityMissing
dataAI/ML ecosystems

Overview

ML modeling requires sophisticated data transformations of the data
extractions or samples collected to serve the needs of an application
according to the specifications of the data design (Chapter “Data
Design”, Fig. 1.) The current chapter is concerned with this lower-level
mapping (aka data transformation), of raw data elements into features
suitable for ML modeling.

The raw data is transformed into the modeling data set in two steps. In
the first step, the raw data is transformed into features, data design
features, that the data design utilizes; and in the second step, the
data design features are further transformed into ML features that the
learning algorithm can operate on.

The key difference between the two steps is that the first step is
independent of the learning algorithm and simply implements the study
design, while the second step transforms the features specifically for
the learning algorithm.

Figure 1 presents an outline of this process. Progressing from left to
right, we start with the raw data elements in one or more source data
repositories. The block labelled “Prepare Data” represents the first
step, where we transform the raw data elements into data design features
as specified by the data design. The target population, outcomes and
covariates of interest are expressed in terms of the data design
features. Data for these features are stored in a data mart. The next
large block represents the second step and is labelled “Feature
Engineering”, in which data design features are refined to ensure they
represent what the modeling team intended and ML features are created.
Converting raw data into ML features is an iterative process. Both steps
(Data Preparation and Feature Engineering) iterate internally until
sufficient data quality is achieved. When data quality issues cannot be
resolved, there may be a need to move backwards, stepping back from
Feature Engineering to Data Preparation or from Data Preparation to find
new raw data elements. The block at the bottom of Fig. 1 is the “Data
Ecosystem”, which is a collection of tools that support the entirety of
the data transformation process. Data Ecosystem contains information
about data mapping (from raw data to real-world entities), the tools
necessary for the transformation, and other ancillary functions such as
documentation and version control.

[]

A flow diagram of feature engineering includes source data, preparation
including design features, data mart, and quality, ecosystem including
common data model, software and tools, and feature engineering with
analytic matrix, data quality, model development, and assess features.

The chapter starts by defining data and related concepts (section
“Working with Data”). Section “Constructing the Design Features”
describes the first step (Data Preparation) and section “Modelling
Dataset and Feature Engineering” describes the second step (Feature
Engineering). Due to its importance, data quality assurance receives a
section on its own (section “Data Quality”) and section “Missing Data”
discusses the missing data problem. Finally, in section “Data Processing
Stacks” we review popular data processing ecosystems.

Working with Data

During the process of transforming raw data into an ML modeling dataset,
we face a number of challenges. These challenges include:

1.  1.

    The data in the EHR (and possibly other system) were designed with
    documentation of care in mind and their design may not be optimal
    for our purpose.

     

2.  2.

    Data may be coming from different sources and each source may use a
    different terminology to denote the same real-world entity (e.g.
    “Systolic blood pressure”, “Blood pressure, systolic”).

     

3.  3.

    Related to different terminologies, measurement units could also
    differ (e.g. temperature can be measured in F versus C).

     

4.  4.

    Data quality issues abound: formatting issues, out of bound
    measurements, invalid characters, etc.

     

Common to many of these challenges is differences in mapping data in the
data sources to real-world entities. In what follows, we describe
terminologies related to the real-world (Problem Space in Chapter “Data
Design”) entities.

A (biomedical) concept is a real-world clinical entity, such as a
diagnosis, a medication, or a lab result.

“Blood pressure”, “Systolic Blood Pressure”, “Blood pressure
medication”, “Diagnosis of high blood pressure” are all concepts and so
are “Patient”, “Diagnosis”, “Medication”, etc. However, the blood
pressure reading of “140 mmHg”, is not a concept; it is an observation
for the concept “Blood Pressure”.

A vocabulary is the collection of all terms that a domain addresses.

This definition has two parts. First, there is a domain. A vocabulary
for heart disease medications will contain all terms related to heart
disease medications, but will (mostly) not(!) contain terms for
unrelated domains, such as cancer diagnostic procedures, or will contain
them at very high levels without any details. Second, a vocabulary
contains all terms related to a domain, including synonyms (e.g.
“Systolic blood pressure”, “Blood pressure, systolic”).

A terminology is a standardized vocabulary that represents a system of
concepts.

For example, the International Classification of Diseases, revision 10
(ICD-10) is a terminology that represents the system of all diseases.
Within this terminology there is an entry, “I21 Acute Myocardial
Infarction”, for heart attack.

Property: entries in a terminology are unique. Terminologies do not
contain synonyms, so in ICD-10, for instance, there is no entry such as
“Heart attack”. The lack of synonyms makes terms corresponding to a
concept unique, and thus terminologies are used to assign unique IDs to
concepts.

An ontology is a representation of a domain of concepts, comprising (1)
concepts and their formal names (i.e. terminology), (2) attributes of
the concepts, and (3) relationships among the concepts.

The types of relationships ontologies encode depend on the domain and
the ontology. For example, the National Drug File Reference Terminology
(NDF-RT) is an ontology for pharmaceuticals and it defines relationships
such as “has_ingredient”, “has_MOA” (mechanism of action), “may_treat”,
“may_prevent”, etc. Most ontologies, however, define the ISA (taxonomy
or containment) relationship: e.g. A beta blocker ISA (“is an”)
anti-hypertensive medication, which ISA (“is a”) cardiovascular
medication.

Attributes of concepts in the NDF-RT are, for example, whether a drug is
meant for human use, available dosages, available routes (e.g. oral,
topical, injectable), etc.

In mapping the raw data to real-world entities, the smallest unit is a
data element.

A data element represents a singular concept.

For example, a birthdate, lab test result or a patient’s name are data
elements. Data elements are also called fields, columns or attributes.

Data elements can be brought together into a dataset to answer a
specific analytic question.

A dataset is a collection of data elements that groups related concepts
together.

For example, yesterday’s claims or a copy of an EHR are datasets.
Datasets can have other containment structures such as tables, rows,
databases, etc.

A modeling problem can utilize several datasets, each dataset
representing some aspect of the modeling.

It is common practice for an organization to bring all the data it needs
into a common location, called a data warehouse (or data repository)
(Fig. 2).

[]

A Research Data Warehouse framework includes data inflow from labs and
external sources, data quality checks, terminology standardization,
integration with health records, result generation, metadata, secure
data transfer, a user portal, data sharing, and security services.

When an analytic project is carried out, data elements required by the
analytic project are extracted and stored into a data mart.

A data mart is an extract of a subset of data from a data warehouse that
is built for a specific project or for a group of related projects and
contains only the data elements and patients/subjects of interest.

Datasets and data marts differ in two ways. First, a data warehouse (and
to a certain degree a data mart, as well) are created for a broad
purpose; while a dataset is created for a specific purpose. For example,
a data mart for all hospitalizations may exist. From this data mart, a
dataset for studying care pattern variations after heart attack can be
extracted. Naturally, only a fraction of hospitalizations and a fraction
of data elements (procedures, treatments, lab results, diagnoses, etc.)
are related to heart attack. Thus, the resulting data set is both
narrower in focus and smaller in size than the original data mart.
Second, a data mart is typically standardized in terms of the
terminologies it uses for various concepts. In contrast, a dataset might
span multiple data warehouses and may therefore rely on different
terminologies, or it may contain unstandardized data that do not conform
to any particular terminology.

The linkage between the raw data and the real-world entities is provided
by the data model.

The data model is an abstract model that defines data elements and
standardizes how these data elements relate to each other and to
real-world entities (clinical concepts, in our case).

Thus, a data model plays three roles. The first role is to catalog all
data elements. If a domain for the data model is defined, the data model
will contain all data elements in that domain. If no domain is
specified, as could be case for the main data repository, the implicit
domain is all clinical affairs, the set of all data elements in the data
model is the entirety of the clinical concepts that can be modeled.
Naturally, the data model can be expanded if necessary; in fact,
publicly available data models, such as the OMOP model (described later
in section “Standardized Data Models and Ontologies for Health Care and
the Health Sciences”) undergoes regular reviews.

The second role is to relate data elements to each other. Later in this
chapter (in section “Standardized Data Models and Ontologies for Health
Care and the Health Sciences”), we describe the OMOP data model in more
detail, but in the meantime consider the caricature example of
“patients” who have “encounters” and during these encounters, they may
receive diagnoses of “diseases”. Words in quotes are both data elements
and clinical concepts. The data model will indicate relationships
between “patients” and “encounters” and between “encounters” and
“diseases”.

The third role of a data model is to establish a mapping between the
data elements and the real-world clinical entities. Terminologies serve
this role. For each data element, for which terminologies exist, a
terminology is selected. That data element is now standardized to a
particular terminology. Continuing with the above caricature, we can
assume that no terminology is needed for the data elements “patient” and
“encounter”, but several terminologies exist for diseases. We can elect
to use ICD-10 to describe diseases. Although “encounter” does not have a
terminology on its own, it may have an attribute, say “encounter type”,
which can still have a well-defined vocabulary (containing terms such as
“emergent”, “urgent”, or “elective”). The data model can still specify
that the “encounter type” attribute of the data element “encounter” must
use this vocabulary.

Related to a data model is a data dictionary.

A data dictionary is an inventory of all data elements and their
“meta-data”, which comprises (a) the type of a data element (e.g. date,
string, integer, real-value numeric), (b) expectations of the data (e.g.
feasible values, range), (c) the terminology it is mapped to (if any),
and (d) usually a brief narrative of what the data is supposed to
represent.

A data dictionary is essentially a documentation of parts of the data
model. Additionally, it is also complementary to it. When a data element
cannot be mapped to a terminology, the data dictionary will contain
metadata about that data element. For example, to the best of our
knowledge, no terminology exists for “birthdate” (because it would be
merely list of all dates and a term conveying that it is unknown). We
still need to document the format of the date (e.g. yyyy-mm-dd), whether
a date may be missing, a NULL value for missing dates if missingness is
allowed (or the fact that missingness is not allowed), and possibly
ranges of acceptable birthdates.

Best Practice 8.2.1

It is a best practice to use a data dictionary to define each data
element in the dataset that we are working with.

Every organization or even every project can define its own data model.
However, having several, potentially incompatible data models hinders
sharing data, expertise, and models across organizations or even across
projects within the same organization. It also leads to waste, as the
same terms need to be redefined for every project or organization.

A common data model describes a standard data model that a data
warehouse and derivative data marts conform with. This is used in
projects and research networks and to foster interoperability of
healthcare data across organizations.

Finally, we can define data. The fundamental raw material for developing
AI and machine learning models is data. There are several definitions
for data [1] with a practical definition being that “data” is the lowest
level, initial ingredient on the path to information, knowledge and
wisdom [2].

Data are what we are given at the start of our analytic modeling and
represent observations about the real-world.

In healthcare, data can come from electronic health records (EHR),
claims, research data registries, wearables, and patient reported data.
Not all information is available in electronic format; some information
that might be useful must be first transformed into something a computer
can work with. For example, paper forms, clinical expertise, or
patient’s genome must be processed into useful features.

For our purposes, we will use a practical definition of data as anything
in electronic form that a computer can process.

Data model vs data design. Both data model and data design create a
mapping from raw data to features used in modeling. Data design uses
higher-level semantics. While a data model is primarily concerned with
mapping real-world entities into data elements, a data design is
concerned with the role the data elements plays in the analysis
(outcome, exposure/intervention, predictor variable), the time-frame
within which we consider the data element, the subjects/patients we need
data from, etc.

Standardized Data Models and Ontologies for Health Care and the Health Sciences

As we discussed earlier, data models represent the linkage between the
data in the data warehouse and the clinical context and are essential
for the data to have meaning. Common data models differ from (regular)
data models in that their definitions and specifications are shared
across projects and possibly organizations. Several common data models
exist within healthcare, including OMOP [3], i2b2 [4], HL7 FHIR [5],
PCORNet [6], and others. Each of the EHR vendors has their own data
model and research collaboratives have also developed their own data
models. This proliferation of data models means that many projects have
to spend a substantial amount of time converting from different source
data formats into whichever model was used by the study team. This is
inefficient and may also cause semantic data translation errors when
moving from one format to another. While it isn’t right for every
situation, the Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) Common
Data Model (CDM) is gaining momentum and a number of research
collaborations have decided to standardize on it including the National
Institutes of Health All Of Us initiative [7], National COVID Cohort
Collaboration (N3C) [8] and the eMerge network [9]. As more and more
healthcare organizations develop and maintain an OMOP version of their
healthcare data, they can more easily contribute to these research
initiatives and researchers can better trust that the data from
different organizations mean the same.

Table 1 shows key standardized ontologies for harmonizing data across
domains, research sites, groups etc. Harmonization works by mapping data
elements to standardized ontologies, thus ensuring (a) bringing same
variables and values to common computer readable codes, (b) accurate
search for data elements, and (c) interoperability across groups and
sites.

Table 1

Standardized ontologies for harmonizing data

+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Data type class            | Standard ontologies for data mapping    |
+:===========================+:========================================+
| Molecular and cellular data                                          |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Assay results meta data    | Ontology for biomedical investigations  |
|                            | (OBI)                                   |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Transcriptomics            | GO, VariO                               |
|                            |                                         |
| Genetics variants          |                                         |
|                            |                                         |
| Epigenetics                |                                         |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Proteomics                 | PRO                                     |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Metabolomics               | Chemical entities of biological         |
|                            | interest ontology (ChEBI), gene         |
|                            | ontology (GO)                           |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Cellular types             | CL                                      |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Clinical Data                                                        |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Pharmacological treatments | RxNorm                                  |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Comorbidities              | ICD9, ICD10, SNOMED CT                  |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Procedures                 | CPT                                     |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Laboratory tests           | LOINC, HL7                              |
+----------------------------+-----------------------------------------+

There are hundreds of ontologies and terminologies that are used to
represent healthcare data, and more are being added every year. Table 1.
contains some of the most commonly used ontologies and terminologies
both in health sciences data, specifically in molecular and cellular,
and in clinical data.

Even within a type of data (i.e. clinical vs. molecular), different
domains use different terminologies.

For molecular and cellular data, these include the Ontology for
Biomedical Investigations [10] for terminology related to assay results,
Gene Ontology (GO) [11, 12], genetics variants VariO [13], metabolomics
[14], and the Cell Oontology (CL) [15]. Commonly used clinical data
terminologies for medications include RxNorm [16] and NDF-RT [17]; for
laboratory tests LOINC [18]; for diagnoses ICD-10-CT [19], DRG
(specifically for reimbursement) [20]; for procedures CPT [21] and
ICD-10-PCS [19].

For any research study, a significant amount of work is required in
standardizing the data and ensuring terminologies are consistently and
correctly applied within the dataset.

Several tools exist that help with this translation. The Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS) offers its Metathesaurus as a way to cross-walk
between equivalent concepts [22]. In terms of tools, the Observational
Health Data Science and Informatics (OHDSI) program [3] offers a single
vocabulary service, named Athena, that provides a translation between
common healthcare vocabularies.

As healthcare knowledge in medicine continues to advance, new terms need
to be created to represent concepts in the data. The common data model
may also need to evolve to accommodate new information and new types of
data such as genomic, image, and unstructured note data. The OMOP data
model itself has gone through a number of versions and the most recent
version (5.4) does supports these new data types. Similarly,
vocabularies also continue to evolve. As new concepts are created, they
must be added to terminologies and be connected together across related
terminologies. Both the Athena vocabularies and the UMLS Metathesaurus
are continuously maintained to ensure new terms and linkages are
up-to-date.

Constructing the Design Features

As we discussed earlier, the transformation from raw data to a modeling
dataset consists of two main steps. First, the raw data elements in the
data warehouse relevant to the analytic question are transformed into
data design features; and in the second step these design features are
further transformed into ML features that the learning algorithm can
operate on. In this section, we focus on the first step. Specifically,
we discuss the following tasks (1) extract the data elements from the
warehouse that are necessary for the study, (2) transform them in a
manner that is agnostic of the learning algorithm into the set of design
features, and (3) using the inclusion/exclusion criteria from the study
design, create a cohort of patients who are subjects in the study.

We defined concept in Section “Working with Data” as a real-world
clinical entity, such as a diagnosis, a medication, or a lab result.

A feature represents a concept. A data design feature represents a
concept in the data design; and an ML feature (variable) in the ML
modeling dataset.

The difference between concept and feature is that features are those
concepts that are referenced in the study design. There are numerous
other features in the data model that are not referenced in the study
design. These concepts do not need to be used in the analysis and will
not be turned into features.

In this book, we refer to the concepts that appear in the data design as
(data) design features.

Sometimes, for a concept in the study design, there exists a data
element in the data mart that has a one-to-one correspondence. However,
often, multiple data elements need to be combined to accurately
represent a concept.

Example 8.3.1

Suppose we are interested in the side effects of a particular drug and
we are constructing a cohort consisting of patients currently taking
this particular drug. This drug is a concept, it is referenced by the
data design (as an inclusion criterion), and thus, needs to become a
data design feature. Due to the terminology we use, this drug has a
one-to-one correspondence with the data in the medications table. In
this case, the design feature is the corresponding drug in the
medications table.

Example 8.3.2

Consider the concept of a “diabetic patient”. This concept could be
defined as a patient with a diagnosis code that indicates diabetes.
Under this definition, the design feature would be the presence of any
diabetes-related diagnosis code. Diabetes is known to be underdiagnosed,
thus using this definition could lead to false negatives. If the
requirements of the modeling problem are sensitive to false negatives
(and less sensitive to false positives), we may need to cast a wider net
and define “diabetic patient” as patients with any indication of
diabetes. In this case, the design feature could be created using a
simple algorithm which checks whether the patient has a diabetes-related
diagnosis code, a (possibly preventive) prescription of anti-diabetic
drugs, or a periodic measurement of blood glucose (indicating suspicion
of diabetes). In both cases, the design feature requires transformations
of the data elements in the dataset. In the first case, the design
feature maps to a set of diagnosis codes (called a value set); in the
second case, a simple algorithm (called a phenotyping algorithm)
transforms the original data elements into the design feature. Also
note, that the amount of transformation the raw data needs to undergo
depends on the requirements of the study.

The raw data may come from a variety of sources, but it was often
collected for some purpose other than research. In some cases, such as
randomized control trials, data may be collected specifically for a
study and therefore already be perfectly tailored to what that modeling
problem needs. However, in most cases, the raw data will need to be
transformed into a form that is required to implement the data design.
These transformed forms are given names such as features, variables,
phenotypes, predictors, etc. and are often used interchangeably. In the
subsequent sections we are going to discuss phenotypes, and value sets
as two prominent ways of transforming the raw data elements into design
features.

As transformations occur, information about inputs, the transformations
themselves, and their outputs should be documented as meta-data. Not
only is this required to reproduce results, but it is also necessary to
ensure that researchers that use the resulting output understand how and
why the data was produced and that it can therefore be trusted.

Data provenance (or data lineage) is the meta-data that describes data
transformations. A complete set of data lineage information helps
researchers know that the data that they are using in their study or for
their model are correct.

In the remainder of this chapter, we will describe specific ways to
construct the design features and also discuss cohort construction.

Phenotypes

Simple algorithms, like the one in the diabetes example (Example 8.3.2),
are referred to as phenotyping algorithms. In genetics, a phenotype is
an individual’s observable traits [23]. We will use the term phenotype
to refer to the traits of the individuals represented in our data.

A phenotype is an algorithm or expression that defines a feature and is
specified at a sufficient level of detail to be computable.

When we’re working with data transformations, we need to define the
phenotypes computed from the source data in such a way that they can be
consistently applied by anyone trying to reproduce the study. We will
create these computable and reproducible phenotype definitions using
concepts, value sets, cohorts, covariates and combinations of these that
can be combined into complex expressions to define exactly the concept
that we wish to represent. Some phenotypes are simple. For example, a
patient that has had a heart attack will have a single diagnosis code
that indicates they had that event as part of their record (for example,
an ICD10 code of I21). Other phenotypes may be more complex. For
example, a patient will be considered as a Type II diabetic patient if
they have at least two diagnosis codes in their record within the prior
2 years (e.g. descendants of ICD10 code E11), at least one diabetes
medication prescribed (e.g., metformin) and at least one HgA1c measure
above 6.5 in the past 2 years.

Value Sets

Value sets, sometimes called concept sets, are lists of concept codes
that further define a phenotype of interest by enumerating all of the
codes that comprise that phenotype.

Only in simple cases will a single concept code identify the concept
that a researcher is interested in. For example, in the case of atrial
fibrillation, a researcher may just be interested in chronic atrial
fibrillation and therefore will use SNOMED concept code 4141360. But
more often, a list of the different concept ID’s that describe the
intended phenotype is required. The UMLS value set authority (VSAC) [24]
was created to allow organizations to develop and maintain lists of
concept codes that define very specific phenotypes of interest. But
finding all of the codes for the intended definition is still difficult.
For example, within the VSAC, there are 62 different definitions of an
atrial fibrillation concept set (Fig. 3).

[]

A table with 14 samples of atrial fibrillation concept sets has 5
columns of parameters.

It is still a difficult task for a researcher to find a version of
atrial fibrillation that defines their intended definition of atrial
fibrillation. Even though the VSAC was created to provide a mechanism to
share concept sets, it is still hard to know what phenotype a particular
set of concepts really refers to and reusing these concepts sets can be
problematic. In many cases researchers still end up defining their own
set of codes.

There are common pre-defined value sets for us to use. Although ICD
codes form a taxonomy, it is imperfect. There are codes that describe
multiple diseases (e.g. diabetic retinopathy, hypertensive kidney), yet
they appear only once in the ICD hierarchy; and conversely, codes
indicative of a certain disease can appear in different parts of the
taxonomy (e.g. pre-existing diabetes in pregnancy does not appear under
the diabetes codes). This motivated the creation of the Clinical
Classification Software Refined (CCSR) [25], which creates value sets of
ICD-10-CT codes for different diseases, regardless of where the code
resides in the ICD-10 hierarchy. Another example of value sets is the
Elixhauser comorbidities. Suppose we wish to estimate the effect of an
exposure (e.g. lead poisoning) on mortality. To elicit the effect of
lead poisoning, we need to adjust for the patient’s general state of
health, because other severe comorbidities the patient may have could
also influence mortality risk. Elixhauser comorbidities are such severe
comorbidities, and for each comorbidity, a value sets of ICD-10 codes is
predefined [26].

Modeling Dataset and Feature Engineering

In the current section, we focus on the second step of transforming raw
data into ML features, namely the transformation of the data design
features into ML features. Recall that ML features are specific to the
learning algorithm and allow them to operate on these features
optimally. In this section we describe (1) the modeling dataset, (2)
transformation of the data design features into ML features, (3) feature
selection, and (4) feature importance.

ML Modeling Dataset

Now that we have defined the features, variables, phenotypes and the
discovery sample, we can put this information into a format that is more
easily consumed by our analysis and modeling software.

An ML Modeling Dataset is a data structure that contains information
about the cohort and is in a convenient input format for the ML
algorithm we selected for use.

The classical modeling dataset, also known as design matrix or analytic
matrix, is typically a two-dimensional structure with one row for each
subject (or observation) and a column for each variable/feature. Modern
ML methods, in addition to analytic matrices, can also utilize higher
dimensional tables (tensors), as well as non-tabular data sets (graphs,
sequences, images, text, etc.).

A ML modeling dataset can contain classical analytic tables, data sets
in more modern data formats, or a combination of these.

In this section we will examine best practices for producing these data
extracts that will be consumed by our ML software. We will first examine
the different types of fact tables defined as the “long” vs the “wide”
data formats.

Classical Analytic Table Formats

Ultimately, data science projects need a way to represent all the
information about each person that is part of each cohort in the study.
Most data science projects use a simple spreadsheet-like fact table.

The format of the table is how the rows and columns of the table are
laid out.

Typically, the table is arranged such that each row represents a person
and the columns represent features (or facts) about that person.

In wide format, there is one row per patient/subject/sampling unit and
facts about the subject are laid out in columns; in the long format,
there is one fact/observation per row and each patient/subject/sampling
unit can have multiple rows.

Example 8.4.1

Consider a cohort of patients. We collect facts about these patients and
each lab result is a fact. In the wide format, we have one row per
patient and the different lab tests are the columns. Not all patients
have results for all tests; thus, some fields in a row will be empty. In
the long format, the different lab results the patient has are the rows.
The columns could be patient id, date, lab type, lab result.

Table normalization and pivoting. Suppose that in the domain of the data
model, several different lab tests can be administered, including
cholesterol tests (LDL, HDL, TG), glucose test (FPG), kidney function
tests (creatinine), inflammation, etc. We could store these results in a
“wide” table, with columns patient id, result date, LDL, HDL, TG, FPG,
etc. Given that the LOINC terminology for laboratory results identifies
56,000 different lab tests, this would result in a table with 56,000
columns, which is a problem by itself. Compounding this problem is the
fact that for each patient at each encounter (which is a row in this
wide table), only a few tests are administered, thus the vast majority
of the columns in each row would have missing value (NULL). Storing all
these NULL values, wastes space. To prevent this waste, the table is
normalized into a “long” format, where the columns are patient id,
result date, lab type, lab result and a row is generated only for those
tests that were actually administered. This way no NULL values need to
be recorded.

Most analytic software however expect unnormalized (“wide”) tables,
where lab results that could have been administered (but maybe not for
this patient) are columns. The operation to covert a normalized (long)
table into unnormalized (wide) table is called pivoting. The pivot
operator takes a column (“lab type” in this example), creates new
columns for (potentially user-selected) unique values of this column,
and populates these new columns with values taken from another original
column (“lab result”). When there is no data for a particular lab test
on a particular date, the corresponding field is set to NULL.

Laboratory results are not the only normalized columns. The same
normalization takes place for other data elements, such as diagnoses,
medications, etc.

Longitudinal data. Longitudinal observations arise in several settings,
including routinely collected data in the healthcare setting and
clinical trials. These two settings can have different characteristic
affecting the format in which the data is stored.

In a clinical trial setting, repeated measures may be taken following a
particular schedule. All trial subjects are administered the same
battery of tests at the same time point (where time may be measured
related to entry into the trial, rather than calendar time). Suppose,
two lab tests, LDL and creatinine, are measured for each subject on days
1, 5, and 30, then the data may be stored a “wide” format, having
columns patient id, ldl_day1, ldl_day5, ldl_day30, creatinine_day1,
creatinine_day5, creatinine_day30. In the longitudinal data analysis
literature, this format is called person-level format.

Alternatively, in a routine healthcare setting, the schedule at which
lab results are collected varies from person-to-person. Attempting to
store such data in person-level format would yield an excessive number
of columns: there would be a column for every date when a lab test was
administered (for any patient) and every lab test. Instead, a “longer”
format, called the person-event format (also known as counting process
or lifetable format in the survival literature; see Chapter “Methods
Summary”) is used. In the person-event format, there is a row for each
patient at each time point when that patient has a lab test
administered. Suppose, we measure cholesterol (LDL, HDL, TG) and kidney
function (creatinine), a table in the person-event format would have
columns patient id, result date, LDL, HDL, TG, creatinine.

Note that the person-event format is not a normalized format. Although
it has a row for every time point when a test was administered (to that
person), not all lab tests may be administered at that time. Tests that
were not administered would have NULL values.

Relationship between analytic software and analytic table format. Almost
all analytic software expect unnormalized tables (i.e. wide format,
person-event or person-level format). From the perspective of
normalization, the analytic software determines the format of the
analytic table. In contrast, in the case of longitudinal data, analytic
method (and software) is selected based on the data format. Data in
person-level format versus person-event format yield different models
with different interpretation.

Best Practice 8.4.1

Whether the data need to be pivoted or not depends on the software that
will be used for modeling. Almost always, the software will expect
pivoted (wide) data.

Best Practice 8.4.2

The choice between person-level and person-event format is driven by the
analytic need and the analytic software (model) is chosen accordingly.

Feature Engineering

As we discussed earlier, data design features are transformed into ML
features to better suit the ML algorithm. What we have not discussed
earlier are the benefits of these transformations. These benefits
include:

1.  1.

    Models can become more interpretable (e.g. transform non-linear
    features, de-skew distributions),

     

2.  2.

    Predictive performance can improve as the transformation can reduce
    bias, variance and noise (e.g. scaling continuous variables, remove
    outliers, autoencoders),

     

3.  3.

    The transformation can combine existing features into features that
    are easier to use (e.g. single variable for complex diabetes
    phenotypes),

     

4.  4.

    Summarize other features in a more meaningful way (e.g. summarize
    comorbidities into a risk index or severity index)

     

5.  5.

    Make the modeling possible (e.g. using natural language processing
    to extract features from narrative text, dimensionality reduction).

     

6.  6.

    The transformation can also be specifically aimed at reducing the
    dimensionality of the problem (i.e. the number of variables)

     

Featuring engineering is the process of transforming existing variables,
or developing additional variables, or features, from the source data
that can enable the use of a particular learning algorithms, improve its
performance, or interpretability.

Feature engineering also involves understanding how all of the features
are related so that irrelevant and redundant features can be removed and
the most important features are identified for subsequent analysis and
model development.

In the following, we review several techniques for transforming the
design features into ML features.

Scaling. Several techniques, including neural networks, perform best
when variables are brought to the same scale. Scaling helps prevent
variables that are vastly different numerically, such as creatinine
levels (between 0 and 2) and weight in pounds (between 0 and 500) from
overwhelming an analysis, although some analytical techniques can deal
with large scale differences. Variables can be brought to the same (or
similar) scale by (1) simply normalizing them to be between (say) 0 and
1 (and possibly trimming some outliers), or (2) standardizing the
features (subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation).

Addressing Non-linearity. Some algorithms assume a linear relationship
between the predictor variable and its effect on the outcome. Features
that do not satisfy this assumption can be transformed. Common
transformations include expanding the features into a polynomial (adding
the squared, cubed, and higher order versions of the same feature),
taking the square root or log of the feature, or more broadly,
transforming it through a non-linear function. Alternatively, continuous
features can be binned. This involves splitting the variable range into
a number of categories or bins. For example, “age” can be split into
bins of “0–16”, “17–65” and “>65” in an analysis.

Indicator variables. Many algorithms (e.g. regression, SVM, neural
networks, etc.) operate exclusively on numeric variables. Some
implementations of these algorithms may accept categorical variables,
but will internally encode them into numeric variables. The key to
converting categorical variables into numeric is that binary variables
are often implemented as integer 0 or 1 values, thus they appear
numeric. Although they may not have distributional characteristics that
typical numeric variables have, from a technical perspective they appear
numeric in the sense that they support numerical operators, such as
addition and multiplication that the fitting algorithms rely on.

One-hot encoding. This is the simplest way to convert categorical
variables into indicator variables. Each level (unique value) of a
categorical variable becomes its own new variable. For example, the
source data may have a variable named “eye_color” that contains the
items “blue”, “brown”, “green”, or “black”. Each of these items becomes
an ML feature, which could be named, for instance, “eyes_blue”,
“eyes_brown”, “eyes_green”, and “eyes_black” and each would have a value
of 0 or 1.

Binning. Continuous variables can also be converted into a set of
indicator variables through binning. We discussed binning as a way of
handling non-linear effects, but it can also help interpretability.
There are several strategies to binning, including equi-depth and
equi-width binning. In case of equi-depth binning, the number of
observations in all bins will be as close to equal as possible. In case
of equi-width binning, the range of values covered by each bin will be
roughly equal. For example, categorizing age as 20–40, 40–60, 60–80 is
equi-width, because all three bins cover a range of 20 years of age.

Contrast coding. When (ordinal or nominal) categorical variables are
transformed into a set of indicator variables chiefly for the purpose of
improving interpretation, contrast coding is used. The name comes from
the property that levels of the categorical variable are encoded into
indicator variables in such a way that the effect of each level is
contrasted against another level or a reference level. When used in a
regression model, the use of contrast coding schemes also has
implications on the meaning of the intercept of the model.

Treatment coding is the simplest contrast coding scheme. It considers
one level as the reference level and encodes all other levels using
one-hot-encoding. In a regression model, the effect of each level on the
outcome is measured relative to the reference level and the effect of
the reference level on the outcome becomes part of the intercept. Other
encodings, that offer different guarantees for the intercept and
different interpretations for the effect sizes, include the Sum,
Deviation, Helmert, Orthogonal Polynomial, Forward Difference, and
Backward Difference (see [27–30] for details) codings. Creating
contrasts manually can capture complex semantic relationships among
levels of a categorical variable. Some coding schemes are most
meaningful for ordinal variables.

Example 8.4.2

Consider a blood pressure variable with levels “normal”,
“pre-hypertensive”, “hypertensive, grade 1”, “hypertensive, grade 2”.
This is an ordinal variable, where
“normal” < “pre-hypertensive” < “hypertensive, grade 1” < “hypertensive,
grade 2” in terms of blood pressure: patients whose blood pressure is
“normal” have lower blood pressure than patients whose blood pressure is
“pre-hypertensive”. If we encode this variable into four indicator
variables, such as ‘Is blood pressure normal?’ or ‘Is blood pressure
pre-hypertensive?’, the ordering among these four indicator variables
will not be explicit to the learning algorithm. If, instead, we encoded
these variables as ‘Is blood pressure at least “hypertensive, grade
2”?’, then it is explicit to the learning algorithm that “grade 2”
should carry higher risk than “grade 1”, because every patient with
“grade 2” also has “grade 1”, and, in fact, they have already exceeded
“grade 1”. If the learning algorithm is a linear regression algorithm,
the interpretation of the coefficient of “grade 2” becomes the excess
risk associated with having grade 2 hypertension relative to grade 1
hypertension.

Pitfall 8.4.1

If ordinal variables (or more generally, variables with semantic
relationships among their levels) are encoded using one-hot-encoding,
the semantic relationships will be hidden from the modeling algorithm.

Best Practice 8.4.3

If categorical variables with sematic relationships among their levels
need to be converted into a set of indicator variables, design an
encoding scheme (if possible) that makes this semantic relationship
explicit to the learning algorithm.

Missingness indicators. We will discuss handling missing values later in
Section “Missing Data”. When the missingness of data for a design
feature carries information, missing feature indicators can be defined
for each such features. The missingness indicator takes the value 1 if a
variable is missing and 0 if it is present. The indicator allows the
learning algorithm to assign an effect size to the missing feature.

Combining features to reduce dimensionality. It is often desirable to
combine existing features into new features to make a particular
analysis or model easier to build or understand. This is called
dimensionality reduction. Dimensionality reduction is discussed in
Chapter “Methods Summary”.

Scores. A supervised way of combining features is to create scores. A
score is often a weighted sum of several features, where the weight can
be assigned fully manually [30], semi-manually by converting regression
weights into—supposedly more easily applicable—integer weights [31], and
fully computationally, where regression weights are used as is [32].

Automated feature engineering. There are also methods to automatically
engineer features by using software to create hundreds or thousands of
features based on data elements. This saves the researcher from having
to devise features that they think will be helpful for the model and
instead generates a large set of potentially useful features. Feature
selection techniques can then be used to find a subset of features for a
more efficient but high performing model. Automated feature engineering
algorithms apply mathematical functions to information about the
relationship between data elements in a database or correlations between
features to generate new features [33–35]. Automatic feature generation
can save time and may even propose novel features, but a big issue is
that the methods will generate a very large number of features, most of
which will not be useful. Efficient feature selection algorithms must
then whittle the set of features down to an optimal set. Domain experts
hand crafting a set of features can usually do better than the automated
algorithms [34].

Deep Feature Synthesis [34] is an automated feature generation method
that operates on relational databases using the entity-relationship
models and generates features that span multiple tables. The “depth” of
the features is the number of entities that were used to create the
features and is a user parameter.

Autoencoders aim to create new features, collectively called a data
representation, such that the original data features can optimally be
reconstructed from these new features. Autoencoders use deep learning to
learn this representation and the objective is to minimize the so-called
reconstruction error, which is the difference between the input data
reconstructed from the new representation and the actual input data
[36], given the architecture, including the size of the new
representation (number of new features). If the resulting representation
is of lower dimensionality than the original data, then this is also a
dimensionality reduction technique (see chapter “Methods Summary”). We
also discussed in Chapter 3 transfer learning, where a pre-trained model
is used (after removing its output layer) as a new data representation.
This new data representation can be viewed as a set of automatically
engineered new features.

There are many commercial tools that can automatically generate features
as well as a few open source tools for Python (e.g. autofeat [37] and
Featuretools [38]) and for R (e.g. tsfeaturex [39]).

Knowledge-based automated features. Another common way to generate
features is to use external knowledge, for example, a physical equation,
to generate these features or to train a model to learn these features
and apply these models to training data set thereafter to generate the
new features for the training data. Some of the clinical scores, where
the scores were computed on an external data set, unrelated to the
training data, are special cases of this approach. For a more complete
review of example of knowledge-based features, the reader is referred to
[40].

Data Quality

Data quality is the degree to which a dataset meets a user’s
requirements [41] and is fit for the purpose it is intended [42].
Whether the data was collected for the purpose of the modeling task
(primary use of the data) or for a different purpose and the modeling
task just uses the data as a convenience sample (secondary use of the
data), data quality issues can exist and can impact the modeling and its
results.

Consequences of data quality issues range from benign to catastrophic.

For example, from a modelling perspective, when a lab result is missing
for a patient because of an accidental loss of data, this is typically
benign: the issue is known and many modeling methods can correct for it.
If a dataset has unknown biases, these biases can invalidate a
model—unbeknownst to the modeling team—leading to potentially incorrect
clinical predictions or findings.

When researchers try to make use of this data, such as research studies
and quality initiatives, the first thing they need to do is to
understand the quality of the information, what the data represents and
mitigate any issues or gaps in what they require from the data.

While all modeling, even outside healthcare, can be impacted by data
quality issues, data quality issues are exacerbated in healthcare due to
(1) lack of standards for describing or dealing with data quality issues
within healthcare data, (2) the lack of a common EHR data model, (3) a
preponderance of vocabularies and terminologies to represent data types
and the complexity of healthcare data, (4) the continuing evolution of
additional medical concepts procedures and conditions as new medical
knowledge is discovered.

Pitfall 8.5.1

There a fallacy that “Because of data quality issues in EHR data, they
cannot be used for discovery”.

Best Practice 8.5.1

EHR data can be used for discovery, but be aware of the quality issues
and select modeling methods that can correct for the relevant and
potentially consequential issues.

Data Quality Standards

One major issue is that there are no standard ways of describing data
quality. Until recently, there have not been standard ways of even
consistently referring to different issues and aspects of data quality.
A number of frameworks have tried to standardize the terms that are used
to describe data quality issues, and a distillation of that work
resulted in harmonized terminology for data quality [43]. The primary
dimensions of data quality are Plausibility (are data believable?),
Conformance (do data values conform to standards?) and Completeness (are
there missing data?).

We can categorize the many different types of data quality issues that
arise into the following groups. If we can identify data quality issues,
then we can potentially apply mitigation strategies to deal with the
issues, which are described in Table 2, which lists data quality
dimensions with examples of the types of data quality issues that can
arise.

Table 2

Examples of data quality issues

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Data quality         | Description          | Example issues       |
| dimension            |                      |                      |
+:=====================+:=====================+:=====================+
| Value conformance    | Values conform to    | Dates have invalid   |
|                      | formatting           | formats such as “Jan |
|                      | constraints          | 1 1998″              |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Relational           | Values follow        | There exist visit    |
| conformance          | relational           | records that don’t   |
|                      | constraints          | have an associated   |
|                      |                      | patient record       |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Computational        | Computed values      | BMI is computed      |
| conformance          | follow               | using any height     |
|                      | specifications       | measurement in the   |
|                      |                      | record instead the   |
|                      |                      | one paired with the  |
|                      |                      | weight               |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Completeness         | Absence of values    | Diagnosis codes for  |
|                      | agrees with          | COVID don’t exist    |
|                      | expectations         | before 1/1/2020      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Uniqueness           | Values identify a    | Patients from a      |
| plausibility         | single object        | single institution   |
|                      |                      | that have multiple   |
|                      |                      | MRNs                 |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Atemporal            | Data values and      | Measurement error    |
| plausibility         | distributions agree  | when nurse takes BP  |
|                      | with independent     | readings, data entry |
|                      | measurement or       | errors               |
|                      | clinical knowledge   |                      |
|                      |                      | BMI > 100            |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Temporal             | Values conform to    | Admission date after |
| plausibility         | temporal             | discharge date       |
|                      | expectations         |                      |
|                      |                      | Antibiotic           |
|                      |                      | prescribed before    |
|                      |                      | admission date       |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

There is a growing body of work to develop frameworks of data quality
rules that can be used to assess the quality of a specific dataset or
cohort.

Assessing Data Quality

There is software that implements some of the data quality assessments.
For example, the Data Quality Dashboard (DQD) [44], which is one of the
data quality tools within the OHDSI toolset, assesses data quality along
the dimensions of Completeness, Plausibility and Conformance. The DQD
uses the harmonized data quality terminology and implements data quality
rules to provide a system that can evaluate an OMOP formatted dataset
and provide a set of metrics that be used to compare across datasets or
for a single dataset across time (Fig. 4).

[]

A table of a metric set includes verification, validation, and total
values with sub-divisions of pass, final, total, and % pass, for
plausibility, conformance, completeness, and total in rows.

The DQD encapsulates expectations as data quality rules that can be
executed against the data to produce reports to show the overall data
quality of the dataset. Importantly, it provides a quantitative score
for the dataset that can be tracked over time (to see if changes are
improving data quality) and across datasets (to ensure that datasets
across organizations are of similar quality). Figure 5 lists examples of
the type of rules and metrics that are computed by the data quality
dashboard.

[]

A sample of the rules and metrics calculated by the data quality
dashboard includes data for status, context, category, subcategory,
level, description, and % records with 5 rows of data.

While these quantitative data quality metrics are useful, they only
assess overall data quality. One important exercise is for the
researcher to explicitly define the expectations that they have of the
data that is relevant to their particular research question. Even if a
dataset is of high quality in general, it may not be for certain
research questions.

Best Practice 8.5.2

Provide a minimal set of data quality metrics for Completeness,
Plausibility and Conformance.

Missing Data

A data element is missing, if no data value is stored for a variable
(features).

There are three general reasons why data may be missing. First, and
arguably most common in healthcare, is structural missingness, where the
data was not supposed to be collected in the first place. For example,
we would not expect cholesterol data to be collected at an encounter for
vaccination. The second general reason is inadvertent missingness. There
was a reason to collect the data, but for example, the test failed to
yield result. A third reason is data quality issues. Relevant data
quality issues include not Plausible data elements (for example,
BMI > 100), or values with formatting errors that impact data quality
(Conformance).

Informative missingness. One important attribute to missingness is
whether it is informative. Missingness is informative, if missingness of
a data element is predictive of the outcome in question. One important
consequence of informative missingness is that it can confound the
relationship between (observed) predictors of the outcome.

Types of missingness. Data can be missing completely at random (MCAR),
missing at random (MAR) or missing not at random (MNAR). If the
probability that a particular piece of data is missing is independent of
any other variables as well as the true (unobserved) value of the
missing variable, then it is missing completely at random (MCAR). In
this case, the reasons that the data are missing are not related to the
missing data itself and every observation has an equal chance of being
missing. This allows us some freedom to deal with that missing data.
Unfortunately, most data is not missing completely at random.

If the probability that a particular piece of data is missing depends
only on other observed variables and does not depend on the true
(unobserved) missing value (given the other observed variables), then
the data is missing at random (MAR).

In this case there is a relationship between one or more observed pieces
of data that is associated with the missing data. We can use the
observed data to help us adjust for the missing data. Unfortunately,
there is not usually an easy way to confirm that the missing data is
only a function of the observed data.

Finally, if the probability that a particular piece of data is missing
depends on the unobserved data itself, then the data is missing not at
random (MNAR). Missing not at random is the most complicated situation
and there is no way to confirm if missing data is MNAR without knowing
the values of the missing data (which, of course, are missing). One of
the only ways to mitigate MNAR data is to try to identify and resolve
reasons for the cause of the missing data (Table 3).

Table 3

Types of missing data with examples

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Missing data type    | Description          | Example issues       |
+:=====================+:=====================+:=====================+
| Missing completely   | The reason that the  | A lab test did not   |
| at random (MCAR)     | data are missing are | produce a result or  |
|                      | not related to the   |                      |
|                      | missing data itself  | an automated blood   |
|                      | and every            | pressure cuff does   |
|                      | observation has an   | not record results   |
|                      | equal chance of      | periodically         |
|                      | being missing        |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Missing at random    | There is a           | A patient has no     |
| (MAR)                | relationship between | HgA1c results        |
|                      | one or more observed | (because they are    |
|                      | pieces of data that  | not diabetic)        |
|                      | is associated with   |                      |
|                      | the missing data     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Missing not at       | The probability that | A patient does not   |
| random (MNAR)        | data is missing      | report a quality of  |
|                      | depends on the data  | life score (because  |
|                      | itself               | they are depressed)  |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

Handling missingness. Missing and implausible data can be handled in a
number of different ways [45]. Traditional methods of dealing with
missing data have assumed the data are MAR or MCAR. But if data are
MNAR, those methods will produce biased estimators [46].

Complete data analysis, listwise deletion. Complete data analysis (aka
listwise deletion) removes all of the data for any patient that has
missing values. This is easy to implement, but can result in biased data
if it is not truly MCAR or when the complete data is not a random sample
from the analytic sample (or population). This approach also wastes data
and reduces the population for modeling.

Single imputation methods calculate a replacement value for the missing
data. Single imputation produces a set of complete data, but it has a
few disadvantages. Most of the methods introduce bias, and only
stochastic regression produces an unbiased dataset. Single imputation
methods include using the mean (or median) of the complete data as a
replacement for the missing values, hot-deck imputation (replacing
missing values using values from “similar” patients), and last
observation forward imputation (for longitudinal data, taking the last
measured value and using for remaining missing values). Stochastic
regression is the recommended single imputation method since it produces
unbiased data for MAR and MCAR data. Stochastic regression involves
developing a regression model to predict values for incomplete variables
(using complete variables) and then adding a normally distributed
residual term to the values in order to add the proper variance into the
missing variables [45].

Multiple imputation methods create multiple copies of the dataset and
compute estimates for the missing values. This technique replaces
missing values in multiple copies of the original dataset and then
analyzes each copy to produce model parameter estimates and standard
errors. All of the model estimates are then pooled to produce a final
set of model parameters and error estimates. There are a number of ways
that the missing values can be estimated and the model parameters
pooled. There are R (Mice) and Python (Scikit-learn, IterativeImputer)
packages that implement these techniques.

Pattern-based modeling. When missingness follows only a few patterns,
namely when only a few combinations of variables with simultaneously
missing data exist, an alternative to imputation is to build models for
each pattern separately. This method results in a collection of models
(rather than a single model), one for each missingness pattern, but may
produce unbiased estimates even for MNAR data.

Data Processing Stacks

In order to process and transform data, we need to use a set of tools.
There are many data environments and software for working with data,
including several excellent commercial environments, but there are also
freely available open source tools.

As organizations continue to create an exponentially expanding amount of
new data, there has been more focus on inventorying, describing and
governing that data. Processes that transform data should use FAIR
principles for scientific data and software (Findable Accessible
Interoperable and Reusable data and software) [47, 48] and TRUST data
principles (Transparency, Responsibility, User focus, Sustainability,
and Technology) [49].

A data processing stack is a group of related tools that are designed to
work together well and which form an ecosystem for efficiently working
with data.

The qualities that are required in an effective data processing stack
are:

1.  1.

    Support for a common data model (CDM), which is a data model that is
    common across projects and researchers, promoting the sharing of
    artifacts and expertise in a community of researchers

     

2.  2.

    Efficient and flexible access to databases and data storage
    structures (SQL, csv, flat file, etc.)

     

3.  3.

    Tools to document data transformation steps and track data lineage

     

4.  4.

    Support for using a complete programming language (e.g. R, Python,
    Julia, etc.) not just a data access language (e.g. SQL)

     

5.  5.

    Rich packages and libraries to help with data transformations, data
    quality assessment, visualizations, feature engineering and model
    performance assessment

     

6.  6.

    Support for the FAIR and TRUST principles

     

Documenting Data Transformations

Best Practice 8.7.1

It is a best practice to document all data transformations so that the
entire process can be reproduced from scratch if necessary.

The documentation tool should ideally allow for mixing narrative text to
describe each step of the data pipeline with the actual code that
implements the transformations so that everything is in once place. In
addition to data artifacts, the pipeline will also produce data quality
assessments, summary tables and visualizations of the data and
meta-data. The documentation environment should make it easy to keep all
of these artifacts connected together and easily viewable. Feature
engineering is an iterative process and the data pipeline will change
quite often. The documentation and data pipelines should have a version
control ability to track changes and allow for rollback of the undesired
changes. The documentation is also something that should be easily
shared within the project and across projects, ideally in a way that the
documentation can collaboratively be edited and shared.

If the project does not require a specific documentation tool, an
excellent place to start are Jupyter notebooks. They serve as
documentation and as a development environment to write and execute
code. Jupyter is an open-source web application that allows for creating
and sharing documents that contain live code, equations, visualizations
and narrative text [50]. Alternatives with similar capabilities include
Zeppelin, R Studio, etc.

Common Data Processing Stacks

Structured Query Language (SQL) is a language for low-level data
manipulation and transformation. Many SQL engines are designed to
achieve very high performance on retrieving data elements from large
data warehouses or data marts, but lack features for sophisticated
feature engineering, such as missing value imputation, etc.

Spark is an open-source data science ecosystem, with implementations of
SQL standards, offering powerful data transformation and feature
engineering capabilities. Emphasis is placed on computational
scalability, optimization, and load-balancing across potentially very
large number of compute nodes. Spark also has ML modeling capabilities
and some Spark environments, such as Zeppelin, support visualization.
Programming languages supported by Spark include Scala (its native
language), Java, Python, R, etc.

R is an open-source, primarily statistical programming language. As
such, it natively supports tasks related to feature engineering,
statistical modeling, and visualization. It is highly extensible, and
packages implement all major population ML algorithms. With its origins
in statistical processing, its data extraction and transformation
capabilities were designed for smaller, in-memory data sets, however,
packages have been developed to interface with database engines. It is
not the first choice tool for data extraction.

Python is an open-source, interpreted, high-level, dynamically typed,
general-purpose programming language created by Guido van Rossum in
1991. It has developed into one of the first-choice environments for
data science activities, with extension packages covering an extremely
broad range of areas including numerical computation, manipulation of
tabular and graphical data, ML modeling, visualization, etc.

Matlab is a commercial language, originally for high-performance matrix
manipulations and visualization. Major machine learning methods have
been implemented for Matlab.

Table 4 summarizes how well each data stack addresses different tasks.

Table 4

Some common data processing stacks. Notation: ‘-‘: not designed to
perform this task; ‘O’: possible to perform the task but not
recommended; ‘+’ good at performing the task; ‘++’ designed specifically
for efficiently performing this tasks

  Task                                                  SQL   Spark   R    Python   Matlab
  ----------------------------------------------------- ----- ------- ---- -------- --------
  Data extraction from a warehouse or data mart         ++    ++      O    +        O
  Data transformation (creating data design features)   +     ++      +    +        +
  Feature engineering                                   −     ++      ++   ++       ++
  Modeling                                              −     +       ++   ++       ++
  Visualization                                         −     O       ++   ++       ++

Best Practices 8.7.2

The minimum set of tools to learn is a common data model, at least one
of the data science programming languages, and data access using SQL.

Data Pipelines

A data pipeline is a set of software programs that convert the raw data
in the data sources into a modeling dataset that ML algorithms can
directly operate on.

A data pipeline differs from a data processing stack, in that a data
pipeline is a project-specific while a data processing stack is still
general-purpose. Data processing stacks were implemented to be, after
project-specific customizations, broadly applicable to a wide range of
projects. The data pipeline, on the other hand, is fully implemented by
the modeling team and its main purpose is specifically to produce the
modeling data set. Often, data pipelines are implemented using data
processing stacks.

Data science projects usually have quite a few data transformation
steps. In fact, data manipulation, transformation, quality assessment
and standardization consume most of the effort in a typical data science
project. It is critical that data transformation steps be well defined,
well documented, and reproducible. As we have discussed earlier, it is
critical to document all of the steps of the data transformations in a
project. Most projects will have many steps that need to be executed in
a certain order in order to reproduce all of the features used in a
project.

Best Practice 8.7.3

Every project should create and maintain a data pipeline, which is a
repeatable process that performs all of the steps required to transform
data from the source data to the final analytic fact table that is used
as input for the analytic and modeling part of the project.

The team should be able to recreate the modeling dataset from scratch
using only the source data and the data pipeline. It is also critical
that metadata about when these transformations occurred on which source
datasets and the characteristics of the data at that time are
documented.

We discussed data lineage or data provenance (e.g. when did the
transformation happen and what were the source input data) in section
“Constructing the Design Features”. The data lineages help researchers
know how the data that they are analyzing was created. It helps other
researchers and collaborators reproduce the steps with their own data
set, and it helps all of the stakeholders trust that the data was
transformed in a manner that was expected and supports the analytic
process. In commercial data science systems data lineage capabilities
may be built into their products. For researchers using open source
software, they usually have to cobble together their own solutions.
Recently, there are a number of open source projects emerging that help
to document data lineages (e.g. Amundsen, Datahub and Marquez).

Best Practice 8.7.4

Ensure that meta-data associated with phenotypes and variables contains
enough information to allow for the re-creation of the
phenotypes/variables from source data.

It is also important that as the definitions of the phenotype and
variables change, the version of those definitions that was used to
compute the variable is also recorded. Using a version control system
for the definitions is also a best practice. You can check-in the code
from your Jupyter Notebooks, Python or R programs in order to maintain a
reproducible data pipeline.

A data pipeline is also a convenient place to insert data quality
assessments. Information about the source data and its impact on the
transformed data is important metadata that can help researchers to
debug any analytic issues. These projects record data quality metadata
of the source data longitudinally. They currently do not have very good
mechanisms for assessing the data quality of transformed data elements,
so researchers may have to develop their own assessments.

It is also useful to automate data pipelines and allow them to be
executed when the source data changes. It may often be expensive in time
and money to run entire pipelines on very large datasets in full, so it
is useful to understand how source data updates impact downstream
variable transformations. This allows software to only execute the parts
of the pipeline that are necessary to regenerate the downstream elements
and if certain source data does not change it may not affect other
downstream elements, which is more efficient.

The result of the data pipeline should be the creation of your modeling
data set. Some data ecosystems have tools to support this process. For
example, OHDSI has the Atlas tool that takes as input a cohort
definition (using the web UI or via a JSON definition file) and creates
an analytic cohort from the criteria. Atlas supports defining variables
as single concepts or via value sets. At this time, Atlas does not
support defining more complex phenotype expressions, which need to be
handled outside of the tools using a programming language or SQL.

Key Concepts in Chapter “Data Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and
Management”

Biomedical concept, vocabulary, terminology, ontology.

Data element, dataset, data warehouse, data mart.

Data model, data dictionary, common data model.

Data provenance (lineage).

Phenotyping algorithm, value set.

Feature, variable.

ML Modeling Dataset.

Classical analytic table format: wide and long tables.

Variable types: numeric, binary, categorical (nominal and ordinal).

Feature engineering.

Data quality, data quality standards.

Missing Data, informative missingness, Types of missingness (MCAR, MAR,
MNAR).

Data processing stack, ecosystems, data pipelines.

Pitfalls and Best Practices in Chapter “Data Preparation, Transforms,
Quality, and Management”

Pitfall 8.4.1. If ordinal variables (or more generally, variables with
semantic relationships among their levels) are encoded using
one-hot-encoding, the semantic relationships will be hidden from the
modeling algorithm.

Pitfall 8.5.1. There a fallacy that “Because of data quality issues in
EHR data, they cannot be used for discovery”.

Best Practice 8.2.1. It is a best practice to use a data dictionary to
define each data element in the dataset that we are working with.

Best Practice 8.4.1. Whether the data need to be pivoted or not depends
on the software that will be used for modeling. Almost always, the
software will expect pivoted (wide) data.

Best Practice 8.4.2. The choice between person-level and person-event
format is driven by the analytic need and the analytic software (model)
is chosen accordingly.

Best Practice 8.4.3. If categorical variables with sematic relationships
among their levels need to be converted into a set of indicator
variables, design an encoding scheme (if possible) that makes this
semantic relationship explicit to the learning algorithm.

Best Practice 8.5.1. EHR data can be used for discovery, but be aware of
the quality issues and select modeling methods that can correct for the
relevant and potentially consequential issues.

Best Practice 8.5.2. Provide a minimal set of data quality metrics for
Completeness, Plausibility and Conformance.

Best Practice 8.7.1. It is a best practice to document all data
transformations so that the entire process can be reproduced from
scratch if necessary.

Best Practices 8.7.2. The minimum set of tools to learn is a common data
model, at least one of the data science programming languages, and data
access using SQL.

Best Practice 8.7.3. Every project should create and maintain a data
pipeline, which is a repeatable process that performs all of the steps
required to transform data from the source data to the final analytic
fact table that is used as input for the analytic and modeling part of
the project.

Best Practice 8.7.4. Ensure that meta-data associated with phenotypes
and variables support at some basic aspects such as the date of the
transformation and the version of the source data that was used to
compute that variable.

Questions for Class Discussion and Assignments Chapter “Data
Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and Management”

1.  1.

    The International Classification of Diseases, Revision 10 (ICD-10)
    is often used for documenting the diagnosis of diseases in the
    electronic health records. How many codes can you find that
    indicates type-2 diabetes mellitus among the ICD-10 codes?

    https://​www.​icd10data.​com/​ICD10CM/​Codes/​E00-E89/​E08-E13

    (The above link takes you to the diabetes subtree of the ICD-10
    hierarchy.)

    The Clinical Classification Software (CCS) reorganizes ICD-10 codes
    into diseases (with overlaps) so that they better represent
    diseases. Look at the ICD-10 codes under the type-2 diabetes CCS
    category (END005). Did you find any ICD-10 codes that are not in the
    E11 branch?

    (CCS is available from
    https://​www.​hcup-us.​ahrq.​gov/​toolssoftware/​ccsr/​dxccsr.​jsp)

     

2.  2.

    Look at the RxNorm or NDF-RT terminologies. Where would you find
    insulin?

     

3.  3.

    Creatinine in the bloodstream is one of the indicators of kidney
    disease. Which creatinine codes from LOINC can you use? How do they
    differ? [Hint: Beware of creatinine in urine.]

     

4.  4.

    We aim to build a diabetes risk prediction model for adult (age >18)
    patients with elevated fasting plasma glucose (FPG) levels (at least
    100 mg/dL). Exclude patients with pre-existing diabetes (as
    indicated by the presence of a diabetes diagnosis code,
    FPG >125 mg/dL, or prescription of an anit-diabetic drug). As
    predictors, we use specific vital signs and lab results: systolic
    and diastolic blood pressure, pulse, body mass index (BMI),
    cholesterol levels (LDL, HDL, TG), and FPG.
    1.  (a)

        What are you design features? (Hint: Do not forget features in
        the inclusion and exclusion criteria and outcome.)

         

    2.  (b)

        Assuming your institution uses ICD-10 for documenting diagnoses,
        how would you define ‘pre-existing diabetes’? Hints: Use the
        term “value set”.

         

    3.  (c)

        You can cross-check your value set with CCS or CCSR for
        ICD-10-CT. https://​www.​hcup-us.​ahrq.​gov

        Hint: Use CCS or CCSR for ICD-10-CT (clinical terminology CT;
        not procedure codes PC)

         

    4.  (d)

        Based on the description in the question, how would you define
        the phenotyping algorithm for ‘pre-existing diabetes’? For this
        question, you may assume that a value set for “diabetes
        medication” already exists. You can also use the vital signs and
        lab test names, you do not need to look up their LOINC codes.

         

    5.  (e)

        Phenotype for the outcome. How is it different from your answer
        for question (d)?

         

     

5.  5.

    Suppose you implement your risk model using GLM.
    1.  (a)

        What would be your ML features? [Hint: Is pre-existing diabetes
        going to be turned into ML features?]

         

    2.  (b)

        Do you need to transform your lab results in any way?

         

    3.  (c)

        Due to inclusion and exclusion criteria, FPG will be truncated
        to a range between 100 and 125 mg/dL. Will this cause any
        problems?

         

    4.  (d)

        Assume that age below 45 has no effect, between 45 and 65 have
        moderate effect and above 65, age has a very pronounced effect.
        How would you turn age into ML features?

         

    5.  (e)

        Suppose we wish to add anti-hypertensive (blood pressure)
        medications as predictors. Further assume for simplicity that we
        only have three anti-hypertensive subclasses (ACE, ARB and BB).
        How would you encode these drugs into ML features? [Hints: Some
        patients do not take anti-hypertensive drugs.]

         

    6.  (f)

        If I told you that ACE and ARB have roughly the same effect, but
        BB is more potent, would you change your encoding?

         

    7.  (g)

        How would you change your encoding if I told you that BB can be
        added to an ACE/ARB regimen for even greater (i.e. interaction)
        effect? [Hint: there are two solutions; one of them does not
        require new ML features.]

         

     

6.  6.

    Suppose you implement your risk model from Question 4 using neural
    networks? How would your answers to Question 5 change?

     

7.  7.

    While implementing your model from Question 5 (using GLM), you find
    that some of the blood pressure measurements are missing. How do you
    handle the situation under the following conditions? Would you
    delete patients with missing blood pressure? Would you impute? Would
    you create a missingness indicator variable? Is the missingness
    informative?
    1.  (a)

        All blood pressure measurements were collected, but a technician
        accidentally forgot to transfer some of them. Whether a blood
        pressure measurement was transferred or not is random.

         

    2.  (b)

        Some blood pressure measurements are not collected because the
        patient is young, and BMI as well as all lab results indicate
        that the patient is healthy.

         

    3.  (c)

        The missing blood pressure measurements are not collected
        because the patient is obviously healthy. For the same reason,
        other labs are missing, too.

         

     

8.  8.

    Suppose observations for blood pressure are missing completely at
    random (a technician forgot to transfer them to you). Since they are
    missing completely at random, you decide to impute the population
    mean value.
    1.  (a)

        Will this impact the predictions from your model?

         

    2.  (b)

        Does this change the variance of the blood pressure in the
        sample? (Hint: use the formula for sample variance.)

         

    3.  (c)

        Would this affect the estimated error of the prediction from
        your model? Would this effect the significance of the
        coefficient for blood pressure?

         

    4.  (d)

        How can you compensate for this possible change in variance?
        (Hint: stochastic regression.)

         

     

9.  9.

    Consider an ordinal categorical variable with four levels, A
    < B < C < D. How do I encode this variable into ML features to
    achieve the desired interpretation?
    1.  (a)

        I wish to know the effect of B, C, D relative to A.

         

    2.  (b)

        I wish to know the effect of B relative to A, the effect of C
        relative to B and the effect of D relative to C.

         

    3.  (c)

        Some values are missing. I wish to know the effect of all levels
        and the effect of missingness relative to A. How do I define the
        ML features and the missingness indicator?

         

    4.  (d)

        Some values are missing. I wish to know the effect of B relative
        to A, the effect of C relative to B, the effect of D relative to
        C, and the effect of missingness relative to D.

         

     

10. 10.

    Consider an ordinal variable with three levels: A < B < C. Let α₀,
    α_(B), α_(C) denote the intercept and the coefficients quantifying
    the effects of B relative to A and C relative to A in a regression
    model. In an alternative encoding, let β₀, β_(AB), β_(BC) denote the
    intercept, the effect of B relative to A and the effect of C
    relative to B. Can you express α_(c) in terms of β’s? (Hint: You can
    consider a simple model with a single predictor, the variable in
    question. You can now express the prediction from both models in
    terms of their respective coefficients when the observation (for
    your only predictor) is A, B and C. Can the predictions differ
    between the two models?)

     

11. 11.

    Consider a caricature problem of predicting mortality based on
    predictors related to blood pressure (systolic and diastolic blood
    pressure, presence of blood pressure medications) and cholesterol
    (LDL, HDL, TG, presence of cholesterol medications). Two models are
    considered. The first one, model A, uses all 7 predictors to predict
    mortality. The second, alternative model, is a stacked model, where
    the first layer consists of a blood-pressure score, which is
    implemented as the predictions from a logistic regression model that
    predicts mortality using the 3 blood pressure related variables; and
    a cholesterol score that is implemented as a logistic regression
    model predicting mortality using the 4 cholesterol-related
    variables. The second layer is also a logistic regression model that
    predicts mortality based on the blood pressure score and cholesterol
    score. Are these models (model A and the stacked model) different?
    Is one of the models more constrained? Can you think of situations
    when one model performs better than the other?

     

12. 12.

    The Charlson comorbidity score [51] is a weighted sum of the
    presence of comorbidities that predicts 1-year mortality. It is
    frequently used to adjust for a patient’s state of health. What is
    the benefit from using such a score versus using the individual
    comorbidities? Is there a disadvantage?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Witten, Frank, Hall, Pal, Data (2005) Practical machine learning
    tools and techniques. Data Min Knowl Disc.

2.  2.

    Matney S, Brewster PJ, Sward KA, Cloyes KG, Staggers N.
    Philosophical approaches to the nursing informatics
    data-information-knowledge-wisdom framework. ANS Adv Nurs Sci.
    2011;34:6–18.Crossref

3.  3.

    Stang PE, Ryan PB, Racoosin JA, Overhage JM, Hartzema AG, Reich C,
    Welebob E, Scarnecchia T, Woodcock J. Advancing the science for
    active surveillance: rationale and design for the observational
    medical outcomes partnership. Ann Intern Med.
    2010;153(9):600–6.Crossref

4.  4.

    Murphy SN, Weber G, Mendis M, Gainer V, Chueh HC, Churchill S,
    Kohane I. Serving the enterprise and beyond with informatics for
    integrating biology and the bedside (i2b2). J Am Med Inform Assoc.
    2010;17:124–30.Crossref

5.  5.

    HL7. Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR).
    https://​hl7.​org/​fhir/​. Accessed 1 Jul 2022.

6.  6.

    Fleurence RL, Curtis LH, Califf RM, Platt R, Selby JV, Brown JS.
    Launching PCORnet, a national patient-centered clinical research
    network. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2014;21:578–82.Crossref

7.  7.

    All of Us Research Program. The “all of us” research program. N Engl
    J Med. 2019;381:668–76.Crossref

8.  8.

    Haendel MA, Chute CG, Bennett TD, et al. The national COVID cohort
    collaborative (N3C): rationale, design, infrastructure, and
    deployment. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2021;28:427–43.Crossref

9.  9.

    Hripcsak G, Shang N, Peissig PL, et al. Facilitating phenotype
    transfer using a common data model. J Biomed Inform.
    2019;96:103253.Crossref

10. 10.

    Bandrowski A, Brinkman R, Brochhausen M, Brush MH, Bug B, Chibucos
    MC, Clancy K, Courtot M, Derom D, Dumontier M, Fan L, Fostel J,
    Fragoso G, Gibson F, Gonzalez-Beltran A, Haendel MA, He Y, Heiskanen
    M, Hernandez-Boussard T, Jensen M, Lin Y, Lister AL, Lord P, Malone
    J, Manduchi E, McGee M, Morrison N, Overton JA, Parkinson H, Peters
    B, Rocca-Serra P, Ruttenberg A, Sansone SA, Scheuermann RH, Schober
    D, Smith B, Soldatova LN, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Taylor CF, Torniai C,
    Turner JA, Vita R, Whetzel PL, Zheng J. The ontology for biomedical
    investigations. PLoS One. 2016;11(4):e0154556.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journal.​pone.​0154556;eCollection2016.Crossref

11. 11.

    Ashburner M, et al. Gene ontology: tool for the unification of
    biology. Nat Genet. 2000;25(1):25–9.Crossref

12. 12.

    Gene Ontology Consortium. The Gene Ontology resource: Enriching a
    gold mine. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021;49(D1):D325–34.Crossref

13. 13.

    Vihinen M. Variation ontology for annotation of variation effects
    and mechanisms. Genome Res. 2014;24(2):356–64.Crossref

14. 14.

    Hastings J, Owen G, Dekker A, Ennis M, Kale N, Muthukrishnan V,
    Turner S, Swainston N, Mendes P, Steinbeck C. ChEBI in 2016:
    improved services and an expanding collection of metabolites,
    vol. 44. Nucleic Acids Res; 2016. p. D1214–9.

15. 15.

    Diehl AD, Meehan TF, Bradford YM, Brush MH, Dahdul WM, Dougall DS,
    He Y, Osumi-Sutherland D, Ruttenberg A, Sarntivijai S, Van Slyke CE.
    The cell ontology 2016: enhanced content, modularization, and
    ontology interoperability. J Biomedical Semantics.
    2016;7:1–10.Crossref

16. 16.

    RxNorm. https://​www.​nlm.​nih.​gov/​research/​umls/​rxnorm/​overview.​html.

17. 17.

    National Drug File Reference Terminology (NDF-RT™) Documentation
    U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health
    Administration. 2015.
    https://​evs.​nci.​nih.​gov/​ftp1/​NDF-RT/​NDF-RT%20​Documentation.​pdf.

18. 18.

    Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC).
    https://​loinc.​org/​about/​.

19. 19.

    World Health Organization. International Statistical Classification
    of Diseases (ICD) and related health problems.
    https://​www.​who.​int/​standards/​classifications/​classification-of-diseases.

20. 20.

    Centers for Medicade & Medicare Services. Medicare Severity
    Diagnosis Related Groups (MS-DRG).
    https://​www.​cms.​gov/​medicare/​medicare-fee-for-service-payment/​acuteinpatientpp​s/​ms-drg-classifications-and-software.

21. 21.

    American Medical Association. Current Procedural Terminology
    (CPT^(®)).
    https://​www.​ama-assn.​org/​amaone/​cpt-current-procedural-terminology.

22. 22.

    Bodenreider O. The unified medical language system (UMLS):
    integrating biomedical terminology. Nucleic Acids Res.
    2004;32:D267–70.Crossref

23. 23.

    Phenotype. In: Genome.​gov.
    https://​www.​genome.​gov/​genetics-glossary/​Phenotype?​id=​152. Accessed
    8 Aug 2022.

24. 24.

    Bodenreider O, Nguyen D, Chiang P, Chuang P, Madden M, Winnenburg R,
    McClure R, Emrick S, D’Souza I. The NLM value set authority center.
    Stud Health Technol Inform. 2013;192:1224.

25. 25.

    Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP). Clinical
    classification software refined.
    https://​www.​hcup-us.​ahrq.​gov/​toolssoftware/​ccsr/​ccs_​refined.​jsp.

26. 26.

    Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP). Elixhauser
    comorbidities.
    https://​www.​hcup-us.​ahrq.​gov/​toolssoftware/​comorbidityicd10​/​comorbidity_​icd10.​jsp.

27. 27.

    UCLA Statistical Consulting Group. R Library Contrast Coding Systems
    for Categorical Variables.
    https://​stats.​oarc.​ucla.​edu/​r/​library/​r-library-contrast-coding-systems-for-categorical-variables/​.

28. 28.

    Lisa DeBruine, Anna Krystalli, Andrew Heiss. Contrasts.
    https://​cran.​r-project.​org/​web/​packages/​faux/​vignettes/​contrasts.​html.

29. 29.

    Patsy: contrast coding system for categorical variables.
    https://​www.​statsmodels.​org/​dev/​contrasts.​html.

30. 30.

    Ngufor C, Caraballo PJ, O'Byrne TJ, Chen D, Shah ND, Pruinelli L,
    Steinbach M, Simon G. Development and validation of a risk
    stratification model using disease severity hierarchy for mortality
    or major cardiovascular event. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(7):e208270.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​jamanetworkopen.​2020.​8270. PMID: 32678448;
    PMCID: PMC7368174.Crossref

31. 31.

    Wilson PWF, Meigs JB, Sullivan L, Fox CS, Nathan DM, D’Agostino RB.
    Prediction of incident diabetes mellitus in middle-aged adults: the
    Framingham offspring study. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167(10):1068–74.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​archinte.​167.​10.​1068.Crossref

32. 32.

    Huang IC, Frangakis C, Dominici F, Diette GB, Wu AW. Application of
    a propensity score approach for risk adjustment in profiling
    multiple physician groups on asthma care. Health Serv Res.
    2005;40(1):253–78. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1475-6773.​2005.​00352.​x.
    PMID: 15663712; PMCID: PMC1361136.Crossref

33. 33.

    Kaul A, Maheshwary S, Pudi V. Autolearn—Automated feature generation
    and selection. IEEE International Conf Data Mining; 2017.Crossref

34. 34.

    Kanter JM, Veeramachaneni K. Deep feature synthesis: towards
    automating data science endeavors. In: 2015 IEEE international
    conference on Data science and advanced analytics (DSAA).
    ieeexplore.​ieee.​org; 2015. p. 1–10.

35. 35.

    Katz G, Shin ECR, Song D (2016) ExploreKit: automatic feature
    generation and selection. In: 2016 IEEE 16th international
    conference on Data mining (ICDM). ieeexplore.​ieee.​org. pp 979–984.

36. 36.

    Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A. Chapter 14 Autoencoders. In:
    Deep Learning. MIT Press; 2016. http://​www.​deeplearningbook​.​org.

37. 37.

    Horn F, Pack R, Rieger M. The autofeat python library for automated
    feature engineering and selection. In: Machine Learning and
    knowledge discovery in databases. Cham: Springer International
    Publishing; 2020. p. 111–20.Crossref

38. 38.

    Alteryx Featuretools. https://​github.​com/​alteryx/​featuretools.
    Accessed 1 Jul 2022.

39. 39.

    Roque NA, Ram N. Tsfeaturex: an R package for automating time series
    feature extraction. J Open Source Softw. 2019;4:1279.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​21105/​joss.​01279.Crossref

40. 40.

    Willard J, Jia X, Xu S, Steinbach M, Kumar V. Integrating scientific
    knowledge with machine Learning for engineering and environmental
    systems. ACM Comput Surv. 2022;55(4):37.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​3514228.Crossref

41. 41.

    Ehsani-Moghaddam B, Martin K, Queenan JA. Data quality in
    healthcare: a report of practical experience with the Canadian
    primary care sentinel surveillance network data. Health Inf Manag.
    2021;50:88–92.

42. 42.

    Johnson SG, Byrne MD, Christie B, Delaney CW, LaFlamme A, Park JI,
    Pruinelli L, Sherman SG, Speedie S, Westra BL. Modeling flowsheet
    Data for clinical research. AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc.
    2015;2015:77–81.

43. 43.

    Kahn MG, Callahan TJ, Barnard J, et al. A harmonized Data quality
    assessment terminology and framework for the secondary use of
    electronic health record Data. EGEMS (Wash DC). 2016;4:1244.

44. 44.

    OHDSI (2019). The book of OHDSI: observational health Data sciences
    and informatics.

45. 45.

    Enders CK. Applied missing Data analysis. 2nd ed. New York: Guilford
    Publications; 2022.

46. 46.

    Rubin DB. Inference and missing data. Biometrika.
    1976;63:581–92.Crossref

47. 47.

    Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJJ, et al. The FAIR guiding
    principles for scientific data management and stewardship. Sci Data.
    2016;3:160018.Crossref

48. 48.

    Lamprecht A-L, Garcia L, Kuzak M, et al. Towards FAIR principles for
    research software. Data sci. 2020;3:37–59.Crossref

49. 49.

    Lin D, Crabtree J, Dillo I, et al. The TRUST principles for digital
    repositories. Sci Data. 2020;7:144.Crossref

50. 50.

    Kluyver T, Ragan-Kelley B, Pérez F, et al. Jupyter notebooks-a
    publishing format for reproducible computational workflows.
    International Conference on Electronic Publishing; 2016.

51. 51.

    Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, MacKenzie CR. A new method of
    classifying prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal studies:
    development and validation. J Chronic Dis. 1987;40(5):373–83.

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_9

Evaluation

Gyorgy Simon¹   and Constantin Aliferis¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

Abstract

The purpose of model evaluation is to assess the model’s suitability for
the intended purpose. In the evaluation of clinical models, we consider
three levels of evaluation. At the core, we are concerned with
predictive performance, namely whether the model we constructed has
sufficiently high predictive ability. On the next level, we are
concerned with generalizability. We wish to ensure the model is robust
to changes over time and we may wish to know whether the model can
generalize to different demographics at different geographic locations
or to a different service with different disease severity. Finally, on
the third level, we evaluate the model from the perspective of achieving
the clinical objective and doing so at a cost that is acceptable to the
health system.

The purpose of evaluating a clinical model is to ensure that a model has
sufficient performance, is valid in the target population (and any other
population of interest), and is capable of achieving the clinical
objectives at a cost that is acceptable to the health system.

We consider three levels of model evaluation. Let us illustrate these
levels through the hypothetical example of developing a screening test.
Suppose a diagnostic test for a disease exists, it is reliable, but
invasive and can cause serious adverse events. We wish to develop a
machine learning based screening model that determines whether a patient
needs to undergo this invasive diagnostic test. We evaluate this
screening model.

On the first layer, we have to ensure that the model can predict the
outcome and has sufficiently high predictive performance to capture
patients at high risk of the outcome who really need to undergo the
invasive diagnostic test.

On the second layer, we are concerned with the validity of the model. As
we discussed in chapter “Data Design”, the model is developed on a
discovery sample with the intent of applying it in the target
population. We discussed two kinds of validations. First, internal
validation is concerned with generalization from the discovery sample to
the accessible population; and external validation is concerned with
generalizability to the target population and other populations of
interest. More formally, external validation refers to validating a
model in a setting that is different from the setting of the accessible
population. The setting can differ, for example, in the time frame,
geographic location, data collection method, or clinical setting
(clinical application).

Finally, on the third layer, we wish to ensure that the model achieves
the health objective of reducing adverse events from the invasive test
without missing too many patients with the disease. We wish to do this
at a reasonable cost; ideally, the added cost of the ML-based screening
test is offset by the savings on the invasive diagnostic test and its
adverse events.

Section “Evaluating Model Performance” focuses on the core evaluation,
where we discuss the predictive performance of a model. In sections
“Clinical Usefullness” and “Health Economic Evaluation”, we evaluate the
clinical utility and health economic impact of the model. Finally, in
section “Estimators of Model Performance”, we discuss internal and
external validation, as well as “estimators”, methods for estimating
model performance in the context of generalizability.

Evaluating Model Performance

In this section, we focus on common measures (or metrics) of model
performance. In the course of writing this book, we found over 30
different measures of model performance just for time-to-event outcomes
alone, many of which were proposed recently. Therefore, complete
coverage of the measures in existence is impractical. Instead, we aim to
provide an extensive overview of measures, and we specifically strive to
include measures that measure different aspects of model performance,
that have different properties, or measures that are derived from
different principles (e.g. how close is the estimate to the actual
value; how does the estimate co-vary with the actual value, or how well
does the model fit the data). Not all of these measures are commonly
used. For example, among the 30 performance measures for time-to-event
outcomes, one measure, Harrell’s C statistic, covers 63% of the
published literature [1]. To guide the reader, we will indicate which
measures are commonly used, which combinations of measures provide
complementary information and under what conditions is a combination
preferable over another.

Best Practice 9.1.1

Use evaluation metrics appropriate for the outcome type.

Best Practice 9.1.2

Multiple metrics are needed to cover different aspects of model
performance. Use sets of measures that provide complementary
information.

We present the measures organized by model outcome types. In this
section, we discuss measures for categorical (including binary and
multinomial); in the subsequent two sections, we discuss continuous
(Gaussian and non-Gaussian) and time-to-event outcomes. Finally, we
discuss calibration in section “Calibration”, which applies to all of
the above outcome types.

Model Performance Metrics for Classification

We grouped measures of classification performance into two groups. The
first group is directly based on the contingency matrix (and thus
misclassifications). These methods typically require the prediction,
which is often a score or a probability, to be converted into an actual
predicted class label. The second group, which we call
discrimination-based measures, do not require the conversion of a score
into predicted class labels.

Performance Metrics Based on the Contingency Matrix

At the core of the first group of evaluation metrics lies the
contingency table (sometimes called the misclassification table or
confusion matrix) depicted in Table 1 [2–4]. In binary (two-class)
classification problems, a subject can be predicted to be positive or
negative. If the subject is predicted positive, they fall into the first
column; if predicted negative, into the second column. In reality, the
subject can be positive or negative. If the subject is a positive, they
fall into the first row of the table (actual positive, AP), and if they
are actual negative, they fall into the second row (actual negative,
AN). Subjects who are predicted to be positive (first column) and are
actually positive (first row) are true positives (TP); subjects who are
predicted positive (first column) but are actually negative (second row)
are false positives (FP). Analogously, subjects who are predicted
negative (second column) and are actually positive (first row) are false
negatives (FN); and subjects who are predicted to be negative (second
column) and are actually negatives (second row) are true negatives (TN).

Table 1

Sample contingency table

+----------+---------------------------+-----------------+
| Actual   | Predicted                 | Total           |
+----------+--------------+------------+-----------------+
|          | Positive     | Negative   |                 |
+:=========+:=============+:===========+:================+
| Positive | TP           | FN         | AP = TP + FN    |
+----------+--------------+------------+-----------------+
| Negative | FP           | TN         | AN=FP + TN      |
+----------+--------------+------------+-----------------+
| Total    | PP = TP + FP | PN=FN + TN | Grand total = N |
+----------+--------------+------------+-----------------+

Based on the contingency table, the following measures can be
defined (Table 2).

Table 2

Commonly used measures of classifier performance based on contingency
tables

+:------------------+:-------------------+:----------------------------+
| Accuracy, % correctly classified, weighted 0/1 loss                  |
+-------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------+
|                   | (TP + TN)/N        | Proportion of subject       |
|                   |                    | correctly classified        |
+-------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------+
| Precision, predicted positive value (PPV)                            |
+-------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------+
|                   | TP/PP=TP/(FP + TP) | Proportion of true          |
|                   |                    | positives (actual           |
|                   |                    | positives) among predicted  |
|                   |                    | positives                   |
+-------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------+
| Recall, sensitivity, true positive rate (TPR)                        |
+-------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------+
|                   | TP/AP=TP/(TP + FN) | Proportion of true          |
|                   |                    | positives (predicted        |
|                   |                    | positives) among actual     |
|                   |                    | positives                   |
+-------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------+
| Specificity, true negative rate (TNR)                                |
+-------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------+
|                   | TN/AN=TN/(TN + FP) | Proportion of true          |
|                   |                    | negatives (predicted        |
|                   |                    | negatives) among actual     |
|                   |                    | negatives                   |
+-------------------+--------------------+-----------------------------+

A number of additional measures can also be defined (Table 3) and these
are used in some fields of study.

Table 3

Additional measures of classifier performance, their definitions and
mathematical relationships

  -------------------------------- ----------------------------
  True positive rate (TPR)         TP/AP = TP/(TP + FN)
  False Negative Rate (FNR)        FN/AP=FN/(TP + FN) = 1-TPR
  True Negative Rate (TNR)         TN/AN = TN/(TN + FP)
  False Positive Rate (FPR)        FP/AN=FP/(TN + FP) = 1-TNR
  Predicted Positive Value (PPV)   TP/PP = TP/(TP + FP)
  False Discovery Rate (FDR)       FP/PP=FP/(TP + FP) = 1-PPV
  Predicted Negative Value (PNV)   TN/PN = TN/(FN + TN)
  False Omission Rate (FOR)        FN/PN=FN/(FN + TN) = 1-PNV
  -------------------------------- ----------------------------

Mathematically related measures. Table 3 contains measures in pairs,
where the top measure is mathematically related to the measure below.
They describe the same aspect of a classifier. For example, true
positive rate TPR is the proportion of true positives among the actual
positives. Since the actual positives are TP + FN, the false negative
rate (FNR), which describes the false negatives among the actual
positives, is simply 1-TPR. FNR offers no information about the
classifier beyond what TPR already offered.

Complementary measures. Each pair of complementary measures describes
different aspects of the classifier. For example, one measure can
describe how well the classifier performs on actual positive subjects,
while the second measure can describe how well the classifier performs
on actual negative subjects. Common pairs include precision and recall.
Precision describes how selective the classifier is for positive
subjects, but does not tell us what percentage of the actual positives
we selected. A classifier that only classifies a single subject as
positive, and that subject is actually positive, has a precision of 1
(100%) but is very likely useless, since it fails to identify the vast
majority of the positive cases. In a complementary manner, recall
provides exactly this missing piece of information. Similarly,
sensitivity and specificity are a commonly used pair. Sensitivity tells
us what percentage of the actual positives the classifier classified as
positive, while specificity tells us the percentage of actual negatives
classified as negative. A trivial classifier, which classifies every
subject as positive, has sensitivity of 1 (100%), but is useless. In a
complementary manner, specificity would show that this classifier
captured none of the actual negatives, thus it has specificity of 0. A
third complementary pair that is commonly used is bias and
discrimination, which we will describe later.

Pitfall 9.1.1

Don’t use mathematically related measures together. They do not provide
additional information.

Best Practice 9.1.3

Common complementary pairs of classifier performance evaluation metrics
include: (1) precision/recall; (2) specificity/sensitivity; (3)
bias/discrimination.

Measures that Describe the Performance with Respect to Both Positives and Negatives

Given these complementary pairs of measures, it is reasonable to ask
whether there are measures that can do both: describe positives and
negatives. There are two commonly used measures that achieve this goal.
First is accuracy (percent correctly classified).

[$$ Acc=\frac{TP+ TN}{N} $$]

While accuracy involves both the true positives and negatives, as a
percentage of the entire population, it is very sensitive to the
distribution of actual positives and negatives in the population.
Suppose only 1% of the population is positive, then a trivial
classifier, which classifies nobody as positive, achieves a seemingly
very high 99% accuracy, yet this classifier is completely uninformative.

Pitfall 9.1.2

Accuracy is very sensitive to the prevalence of actual positives and
negatives.

Another measure that combines performance with respect to positive and
negative subjects is F-measure

[$$ F1=\frac{2^{\ast
}{\mathrm{prec}}^{\ast}\mathrm{recall}}{\mathrm{prec}+\mathrm{recall}}=\frac{2^{\ast
} TP}{2 TP+ FP+ FN} $$]

where ‘prec’ denotes precision (predictive positive value). One drawback
of the F-measure (specifically the F1 measure) is that it assigns equal
importance to precision and recall.

Weighted Confusion Matrices

In some applications, the cost of misclassification can be different
between false positives and false negatives. For example, in case of a
screening test, the harm caused by false positives (the screening test
incorrectly reports the patient as having the disease) is often lower
than the harm caused by false negatives (the screening test missed a
case completely). In the former case, the patient may undergo a more
invasive diagnostic test that determines that the patient does not
actually have the disease, while in the latter case, the patient may
remain undiagnosed for possibly a long period of time, suffering the
consequences of the undiagnosed disease.

The confusion matrix can be element-wise multiplied with the weight
matrix (Table 4) and weighted versions of the measures from Tables 2 and
3 can be computed. For example, a weighted version of accuracy would
become

Table 4

Correct and misclassification weights for measures based on confusion
matrices

+----------+---------------------+
| Actual   | Predicted           |
+----------+----------+----------+
|          | Positive | Negative |
+:=========+:=========+:=========+
| Positive | w_(TP)   | w_(FN)   |
+----------+----------+----------+
| Negative | w_(FP)   | w_(TN)   |
+----------+----------+----------+

[$$ \mathrm{weighted}\ \mathrm{acc}=\frac{w_{TP} TP+{w}_{TN} TN}{w_{TP}
TP+{w}_{FP} FP+{w}_{FN} FN+{w}_{TN} TN} $$]

When different types of misclassifications have different consequences,
the TP, TN, FP and FNs can be assigned weights in the computation of the
evaluation measures based on contingency tables.

Measures of Discrimination

Many classifier models produce a score or a probability of a subject
belonging to one class versus another. Confusion matrices require that
we dichotomize the score into a predicted class: subjects with a score
above a threshold are considered positive, those with a score below the
threshold are classified as negative. The values in the confusion
matrix, namely the number of TP, TN, FP, NF are influenced by this
threshold, and thus the metrics we compute from the confusion matrix are
influenced by this threshold. Consequently, when we compare two
classifiers, our preference for one over the other may also be
influenced by this threshold.

For classifiers that output a score or probability of an instance
belonging to the positive class, measures of classifier performance in
Tables 2 and 3 require the specification of a threshold for classifying
an instance positive (above the threshold) or negative (at or below the
threshold). This threshold influences the performance measurements.

In this section, we look at measures of discrimination, the classifier’s
ability to distinguish between the two classes, without requiring such a
threshold.

Concordance

Concordance operates directly on the score without having to threshold
it into a decision. Concordance (C-statistic or discrimination by other
names) is the probability that in a randomly selected pair of patients,
one actual positive and one actual negative, the actual positive patient
has a higher score than the actual negative patient. For binary
classification, the C-statistic can be computed as the area under the
ROC (to be described next) and thus it is also known as Area Under the
ROC (AUC).

Concordance is related to the measures based on the confusion matrix.
Consider every distinct score S a classifier produces. We use each score
as the threshold for determining a predicted label: patients with scores
above this threshold are predicted positive (PP) and at the score or
below are predicted negative (PN). We can now compute the true positive
rate (TPR) and the false positive rate (FPR). The S different thresholds
result in S different TPR-FPR pairs, which we can plot. The resulting
curve is called the Receiver Operating Curve (ROC).

Example 9.1.1

Consider a hypothetical classifier that produced the following
predictions on a hypothetical data set (0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.19, 0.21,
0.3) with the corresponding true outcomes being (0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1).
These six distinct predicted probabilities yield seven different
thresholds as summarized in Table 5.

Table 5

Shows a hypothetical data set with six observations and six distinct
predicted probabilities of outcome (shown in the text) yielding seven
different possible cutoffs. For each cutoff, the number of true positive
(TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN), and false negative (FN)
classifications are shown. The corresponding sensitivity and specificity
values are also shown

  Threshold   TP   FP   FN   TN   Sens.   Spec.   1-Spec.   Remark
  ----------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ------- ------- --------- --------------------------------
  0.00        3    3    0    0    1.00    0.000   1.00      Everyone is predicted positive
  0.01        3    2    0    1    1.00    0.333   0.667      
  0.02        2    2    1    1    0.667   0.333   0.667      
  0.05        2    1    1    2    0.667   0.667   0.333      
  0.19        1    1    2    2    0.333   0.667   0.333      
  0.21        1    0    2    3    0.333   1.00    0.000      
  0.30        0    0    3    3    0.000   1.00    0.000     Nobody is predicted positive

- With a cutoff of 0, observations with predicted probability >0 are
  classified as positive. In this case all observations have predicted
  probability >0, thus all observations are predicted positives. Among
  these 3 are actual positive and 3 are actual negative observations.
  Therefore, we have 3 true positives (TP = 3) and 3 false positives
  (FP = 3). The sensitivity is 3/3 = 1 and the specificity is 0/3 = 0.

- When we increase the cutoff to 0.01, the one observation with
  predicted probability of 0.01 becomes predicted negative and all other
  observations (with predicted probability >0.01) remain predicted
  positives. Given that this observation is an actual negative, the
  number of true negatives increases (to 1) and the number of false
  positives decreases (to 2). This yields a sensitivity of 3/3 = 1 and a
  specificity of 1/3 = 0.333.

- As the cutoff increases to 0.02, one actual positive patient gets
  reclassified from predicted positive to predicted negative, thus
  sensitivity becomes 2/3 = 0.667 and specificity remains 1/3 = 0.333.
  Proceeding in the same manner, the last cutoff is 0.3. At this cutoff,
  nobody is classified as predicted positive (since no predicted
  probability > 0.3), thus sensitivity is 0 and specificity is 1.

The ROC for this example is shown in Fig. 1. The seven rows of the table
correspond to the seven points in the plot, with the first row being the
lightest blue and the last row being the darkest blue.

[]

A scatter plot presents the relationship between sensitivity and
1-specificity. The values are plotted for points 1 to 7, which forms a
stepped pattern with an increasing trend.

The ROCs are plots of the classifier’s performance at various thresholds
(for classifying an instance positive). Sensitivity is plotted against
1-specificity.

The ideal classifier has a FPR of zero, meaning that none of the actual
negative subjects were classifiers as (false) positives. It has a TPR of
1, meaning that every actual postive patient is classified as positive.
The ideal classifier would reside in the top left corner of the ROC. A
completely uninformative classifier resides on a diagonal line from (0,
0) to (1, 1) with an AUC of 0.5.

Interpretation of the ROC. Figure 2 depicts two classifiers, Model 1 and
2, built on the same data set, having the same AUC of 0.7, but different
characteristics. The horizontal axis is (1-specificity), also known as
the false positive rate, which is the proportion of false positives
among the actual negatives. The vertical axis is sensitivity (also known
as recall), which is the proportion of true positives among the actual
positives. When the false positive rate is low (1-Specificity < 0.5),
Model 1, depicted in blue, achieves higher sensitivity, than Model 2
(depicted in orange). Conversely, when the false positive rate is high,
Model 2 has higher sensitivity. If the application of the modeling
requires low false positive rate, then Model 1 is preferable; but if for
a different application, false positives are less of a concern than
false negatives, then we may prefer Model 2. For example, Model 1 is
preferable as a risk model, which targets an intervention to a small
portion of the population at high risk, while Model 2 would be
preferable as a screening model, where the main objective is to identify
as many true positives as possible.

[]

A line graph of sensitivity versus 1-specificity for R O C. The lines
are plotted for models 1 and 2. Both lines have an increasing
concave-down trend with minor fluctuations.

In addition, the following probabilistic relationships are valid
interpretations of the AUC ROC:

- The probability that a random positive case is ranked before a random
  negative case. (= probability that a random pair with one positive and
  one negative case are ranked correctly).

- The proportion of positives ranked before a random negative case.

- The proportion of negatives ranked after a random positive case.

- The expected true positive rate if the ranking is split just before a
  random negative case.

- The expected false positive rate if the ranking is split just after a
  uniformly drawn random positive.

Lorenz Curve

Lorenz curves [5] were originally introduced in econometrics in 1905 to
depict the distribution of wealth. The horizontal axis shows the
cumulative distribution of the population in increasing order of wealth
and the vertical axis corresponds to the cumulative distribution of
wealth. The Lorenz curve has been adapted to health sciences.

The Lorenz curve depicts classifier performance. The horizontal axis
represents the cumulative distribution of observations that are
predicted positives ordered in increasing order of risk and the vertical
axis is the cumulative distribution of positive outcomes.

Other parameterizations of the axes are possible: patients could be
ordered in decreasing order of risk and the vertical axis could
represent the cumulative distribution of the missed negatives (false
negatives).

Interpreting the Lorenz curve (Fig. 3). The interpretation of the Lorenz
curves is more straightforward than that of an ROC. The horizontal axis
corresponds to the cumulative proportion of the population classified as
positive when ordered in increasing order of risk. In plain English, the
value p on the horizontal axis corresponds to the 100p percent of
patients with the lowest predicted risk. The vertical axis is
sensitivity (recall). The orange line, corresponding to Model 2, shows
that the 30% of the population with the lowest predicted risk (0.25 on
the horizontal axis) contains no actual positives (sensitivity = 0),
while the blue line (corresponding to Model 1) indicates that Model 1
included 10% of the positives. If we used 0.25 as the classification
threshold, namely, subjects with predicted probability of outcome in
excess of 0.25 are predicted positives, classification by Model 1 would
have resulted in 10% false negatives and no false negatives by Model 2.
Again, Model 2 (orange) is better at identifying low risk patients,
while Model 1 (blue) is better at identifying high risk patients.

[]

A line graph plots the cumulative probability of outcome versus the
cumulative predicted positive. The lines are plotted for models 1 and 2.
Both lines have a gradual upward trend.

Comparing the ROC and the Lorenz Curves

Figure 4 depicts the ROC for the two models and also the “inverted”
Lorenz curve, where the Lorenz curve is “flipped” along both axes. We
can see that the “inverted” Lorenz curve and the ROC are very similar.
Also, the differences between the two models are also very similar
regardless of which curves we use.

[]

A line graph plots sensitivity 1-cumulative recall versus 1-specificity
1-cumulative probability. The lines are plotted for R O C models 1 and 2
and Lorenz models 1 and 2. All the lines overlap and have an increasing
concave-down trend.

Lorenz curves offer two key benefits. (1) Their interpretation is more
straightforward than that of ROCs. (2) The Lorenz curves are
advantageous when we are interested in predictive performance on
low-risk patients. Predictive performance for the high-risk patients
looks very similar to the ROC, and we can thus approximately interpret
the ROC as a Lorenz curve with respect to the high-risk patients.

The Lorenz curves and the ROC contain similar information and are
generally similar.

Best Practice 9.1.4

The ROC is much more commonly used than the Lorenz curve and is more
familiar to many readers.

Best Practice 9.1.5

Consider showing the Lorenz curve (possibly in combination with the ROC)
when low-risk patients are of particular interest.

For both ROC and Lorenz curves, the uninformative model, i.e. model with
AUC of 0.5, is a diagonal line from (0, 0) to (1,1). The ideal point on
an ROC curve is where the false positive rate is 0 and the sensitivity
is 1. This is the top left corner. The ideal point on the Lorenz curve
is where the model classifies all negatives as negative without any
false negatives. This point is (1-prevalence) on the horizontal axis and
0 on the vertical axis.

Pitfall 9.1.3

Lorenz curves depend on the prevalence of the disease; ROCs do not.

Another consequence of the dependence on the outcome prevalence is that
Lorenz curves are only comparable within the same population (or
populations with the same outcome prevalence). Generally, models are
compared within the same population, so this is more of a theoretical
limitation.

Precision-Recall (PR) Curve and AUC-PR

The precision-recall (PR) [6] curve plots the performance of a
classifier in a way that is similar to the ROC. The horizontal axis is
recall and the vertical axis is precision. Each point corresponds to a
classification threshold. Recall that for classifiers that produce a
score, observations with a score above the threshold are classified as
positive and (at or) below the threshold as negative.

Analogously to AUC for the ROC, the PR curve also has a summary
statistic, which is the area under the PR curve (AUC-PR, also known as
AUPRC).

Multi-Class Classification

Confusion matrices for the multi-class classification setting with k
classes (typically, k>2) will have k columns corresponding to the k
predicted labels and k rows corresponding to the k actual labels [7].

A measure like accuracy can be computed in a straightforward manner,
representing the proportion of subjects correctly classified.

A key disadvantage of accuracy, as we discussed earlier, is that it is
affected by the prior probabilities of the classes. Cohen’s kappa is a
measurement of agreement between two sets of classifications (the
predicted and the true in this application). Unlike accuracy, Cohen’s
kappa takes the agreement that arises by chance between the two
classifications into agreement [7]. However, under some unbalanced
conditions, it has been shown to be incoherent, assigning better score
to the worse classifier [8].

While additional metrics that are specific to multi-class classification
exist (e.g. Matthews Correlation Coefficient; MCC [8]), in the
followings, we focus on general strategies to convert the evaluation of
multi-class classification into a sequence of binary classifications.
This strategy has the advantage that it can be used with virtually all
of the above measures.

In a multi-class classification problem with k classes, the computation
of most performance measures requires that the multi-class problem is
broken down into a series of binary classifications following one of two
main strategies, One-Vs-One or One-vs-All.

These strategies perform a sequence of evaluations. In the One-Vs-One
strategy, each evaluation corresponds to a pair of class labels,
measuring the model’s ability to classify one of these two classes
versus the other. One evaluation is carried out for all pairs of
classes. In the One-Vs-All strategy, each evaluation measures the
model’s ability to classify one class versus all other classes [9].

The binary classification metrics are computed for each comparison and
are averaged. For example, computing the precision of a k-class
classification model using the One-vs-All strategy will initially result
in k precision values which are later averaged. Averaging can be done by
computing the arithmetic mean of the k performance metrics or by
computing the weighted average of these metrics, where the weight is
proportional to the number of instances belonging to the class.

To incorporate the cost of misclassification, the multi-class confusion
matrix can be element-wise multiplied by a k-by-k weight matrix, where
each cell contains the weight associated with the misclassification
cost.

Model Performance Measures for Continuous Outcomes

- Measures of predictive model performance for continuous outcomes fall
  into two groups: those that examine the residuals (difference between
  the prediction and the actual value) and aggregate them into an
  overall value; and (2) metrics that measure how well the prediction
  covaries with the actual value.

The first group is (somewhat) analogous to the misclassification-based
measures, while the second group is analogous to concordance in
classification [10]. We explore these two groups in the following two
sections.

Residual Based Metrics

Let [$$ \hat{y}_i $$] denote the prediction from a model and let y_(i)
denote the actual value. The squared residual (squared error; SE) is
defined as

[$$ {r}_i^2={\left(\hat{y_i}-{y}_i\right)}^2. $$]

Because of the square, large residuals contribute disproportionately
(quadratically) large errors. The absolute error (absolute deviation) is
defined as the absolute value of the residual [$$ \mid {r}_i\mid =\mid
\hat{y_i}-{y}_i\mid $$] and all residuals have a proportionate
contribution. In some cases, it is useful to make the error proportional
to the amplitude of the prediction, so that the same deviation
contributes less error if the predicted value is higher. The Pearson
residual is defined as

[$$ {r}_{pearson}=\frac{{\left(\hat{y_i}-{y}_i\right)}^2}{\hat{y_i}} $$]

Based on these residuals, we can define the following commonly used
metrics (Table 6).

Table 6

Common residual-based measures for predictive model performance for
continuous outcomes

  --------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------
  Mean Squared Error (MSE)          [$$ \frac{1}{N}\sum \limits_i{r}_i^2 $$]
  Mean Absolute Error (MAE)         [$$ \frac{1}{N}\sum \limits_i \mid {r}_i\mid $$]
  Median Absolute Deviation (MAD)   median_(i) ∣r_(i)∣
  Mean Pearson Residual             [$$ \frac{1}{N}\sum \limits_i \mid {r}_{pearson,i}\mid $$]
  --------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------

Variations of these measures are also in use. For example, sum squared
error (SSE) is N × MSE, and root mean squared error (RMSE) is [$$
\sqrt{MSE} $$].

Concordance-Analogue Metrics

The next set of metrics measure how well the predictions co-vary with
the actual values.

The most fundamental such metric is R² and it measures linear
correlation between the predicted and actual values

[$$
{R}^2=1-\frac{MSE}{\frac{1}{N}{\sum}_i{\left(\hat{y_i}-\overline{y}\right)}^2}
$$]

An R² of 0 indicates random prediction while an R² of 1 indicates that
the prediction is perfectly (positively) correlated with the actual
value.

Ideally, R² is computed on a validation set. When no validation set is
available, R² can be adjusted for model complexity, penalizing large
numbers of predictors relative to the number of observations. The
adjusted R² is defined as

[$$ {R}_{adj}^2=1-\frac{\left(1-{R}^2\right)\left(N-1\right)}{N-K-1} $$]

where N denotes the number of observations and K the number of
predictors.

The main drawback of R² is that it measures a linear relationship. When
linearity is undesirable, Spearman correlation can be used instead.

Example 9.1.2

[Influence of outliers in Gaussian data.]

In the absence of outliers and extreme values (that are highly unlikely
under the model), the relationship between the predicted values and the
actual values can be assumed linear when the data generating process is
approximately Gaussian. However, outliers introduce outsized residuals
and possibly quadratically disproportionate errors (if we are using
squared errors), breaking the linear relationship between predicted and
actual values. In this example, we study how the outliers influence
various metrics.

Using an arbitrary known linear function f(x) we generated predictor x
and outcome y pairs with standard normal noise added: y~f(x) + ε,
ε~Normal(0, σ). We used the true generating function as the “model”. We
then mixed in 0, 1, 5 and 10% outliers. For the outliers, their
“predicted” value is the prediction from the “model” f(x) and their
actual value is the 99.9th quantile of the possible predicted values
under the “model” given the predictors, that is the 99.9th percentile of
Normal(f(x), σ). We evaluated the predictions using the above metrics
and summarized the results in the Table 7 below.

Table 7

Example 9.1.2—Influence of outliers in Gaussian data

+----------+-----------------------------------+
|          | Outlier percent                   |
+----------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Metric   | 0%     | 1%     | 5%     | 10%    |
+:=========+========+========+========+========+
| MSE      | 0.933  | 1.019  | 1.344  | 1.716  |
+----------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| MAE      | 0.773  | 0.796  | 0.884  | 0.984  |
+----------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| MAD      | 0.676  | 0.679  | 0.708  | 0.744  |
+----------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Pearson  | 0.018  | 0.181  | 0.236  | 8.563  |
+----------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| R²       | 0.575  | 0.598  | 0.647  | 0.685  |
+----------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Spearman | 0.662  | 0.649  | 0.618  | 0.589  |
+----------+--------+--------+--------+--------+

The interpretation of the table is as follows. If we use the true
“model” on a test set without outliers, it achieves an MSE (second row)
of 0.933 (second column), but if we add 1% outliers to the test data
sets, the apparent MSE of the model increases to 1.019 (column 3). This
9% difference is solely due to outliers and does not actually reflect a
difference in the goodness of the model: the model is the same true data
generating model but evaluated on a data set that contains outliers.

As expected, with increasing outliers, the apparent model performance
decreases the most when we use MSE as the evaluation metric. Adding 1%
outliers increases the MSE by 9%, adding 5% outliers by 44% and adding
10% outliers increases the MSE by 84%. In comparison, when we used MAE
as the evaluation metric, the corresponding changes were 3%, 14.3% and
27.2%; and when we used MAD, the difference further decreased to 0%,
4.6% and 9.9%. MAE and MAD are indeed more robust in face of outliers.

The use of the Pearson residual is not ideal for Gaussian data. It
utilizes squared error (it is sensitive to outliers) and is normalized
by the prediction. If an outlier has an expected value close to 0, the
Pearson residual can become very large, because a large squared residual
is divided by a value close to 0.

The R² statistic indicates better model performance in the presence of
outliers than in their absence. This is merely a coincidence. The
outliers are chosen to be incongruent with the data generation process,
so we should not see an improvement in the model performance.

The Spearman correlation became worse in the presence of outliers,
showing a decrease of 2, 6.7 and 11.1%.

Best Practice 9.1.6

All of these measures are appropriate for Gaussian data.

Best Practice 9.1.7

MSE is more sensitive to outliers than MAD.

Pitfall 9.1.4

Pearson residual is sensitive to small predictive values.

Example 9.1.3

[Non-gaussian Data]

Another assumption that many of the residuals and the R² statistic makes
is homoscedasticity: the variance of an observation is constant across
the observations. This assumption does not hold for many exponential
family distributions, including the Poisson distribution which we often
use to model counts.

Given predictors x, and a generating function f, in this example, we
generated Poisson outcomes y as y~Poisson(λ = f(x)). To this data, we
fitted an ordinary least-square (OLS) regression model and a Poisson
model. We also generated an independent test set and evaluated the two
models on this test set using the above metrics.

Figure 5 shows a smoothed plot of the residuals of the test set against
the log of the true value for three commonly used residuals: square,
absolute and Pearson. We can see that both the squared and the absolute
residuals increase as the true value y increases. This suggests that in
the evaluation, observations with large true values have an outsized
impact. Note, that this not large errors having an outside impact; this
is large true values having an outsized impact. In contrast, the Pearson
residual remains mostly flat, because the residual is normalized with
respect to the predicted value. This suggests that no particular range
of the true outcome has an outsized impact. As a side note, notice that
the log (true value) starts at 0.5 and thus the predicted values are
~1.5. If the predicted values were close to 0, dividing by the predicted
value could create unduly large Pearson residuals (as we saw in the
previous example).

[]

A line graph plots residual versus log of true value. The lines are
plotted for square, absolute, and Pearson. The line plotted square has
an increasing trend, whereas the lines for absolute and Pearson remain
flat with slight increasing and decreasing trends, respectively.

In Gaussian regression, observations are assumed homoscedastic: all
observations are assumed to have the same variance. In contrast, when we
model counts, the variance of the observations is related to their
predicted values: the variance of the Poisson distribution is the same
as its mean. Therefore, higher predicted values have higher variance.
The Pearson residual is the squared residual divided by the variance,
thus it is the square of the residual measured in standard deviations.

Pitfall 9.1.5

When the outcome is not homoscedastic, some ranges of the outcome value
(larger values) can dominate the evaluation.

Best Practice 9.1.8

When evaluating predictive model with continuous outcomes that are
heteroscedastic, consider using a residual that normalizes the expected
variance (such as the Pearson residual for counts) or at least for the
predicted value.

Pitfall 9.1.6

R² is designed to measure the linear correlation between the predicted
and actual values. When this is not linear, R² is inappropriate.

Best Practice 9.1.9

When the relationship between the predicted and actual values is not
linear, consider using a rank-based measure such as Spearman or Kendall
correlation.

Time-to-Event Outcomes

The evaluation of time-to-event models differs from the evaluation of
models for categorical or continuous outcomes in two ways. First, the
outcome is time-dependent: the state of the outcome changes over time. A
subject without an event at the beginning of the follow-up period may
develop an event over time. Second, the outcome is not observable for
censored patients.

The prediction from the time-to-even model can also differ. Some
predictions are time dependent (e.g. survival probability or cumulative
hazard), while other predictions are not (e.g. (log) risk score from a
Cox proportional hazards model). Time-dependent and independent
predictions require different evaluation methods.

Several factors complicate the evaluation of time-to-event models: (1)
the true outcome is time dependent, (2) the prediction itself can be
time-dependent, and (3) subject may be lost to follow-up.

Time-independent predictions can be transformed into time-dependent
predictions and vice versa.

For example, a time independent measure, specifically the risk score,
can be converted into a time-dependent measure by multiplying it with a
(time-dependent) baseline hazard. When a software package (e.g. a deep
learning package) only provides risk scores, a Cox model can be fit with
the risk score as the sole independent variable to obtain the baseline
hazard function. With the baseline hazard function in hand, survival
probabilities can be computed. Conversely, a time dependent measure can
be converted into “time-independent” by taking its value at a single
clinically relevant time point. Alternatively, the time-dependent
measure can be integrated over time [1].

Survival Concordance. This is an extension of the concordance measure
(C-statistic) to time-to-event outcomes.

The C-statistic is the probability that in a randomly selected pair of
patients, where one had an event earlier than the other had the event or
got censored, the one with the event has a shorter predicted time to
event.

Several versions of the C-statistic for time-to-event models exist,
chiefly differing in the way they address censoring.

The most commonly used C-statistic is Harrell’s C. The scikit
documentation [11] and the vignette for the random survival forest R
package [12] provide an exact algorithm for the respective
implementations. Harrell’s C has been shown to depend on the censoring
distribution of the training data and to be biased when the proportion
of censored subjects is high (~50% or above). Uno’s C statistic [13]
addresses this issue by using inverse probability of censoring
weighting.

Measures based on prediction error: IAE, ISE, Brier Score, and IBS. When
the prediction from the time-to-event model is a (time-dependent)
survival probability, the prediction error at the time can be computed
as

[$$ PE{(t)}_i={\hat{S(t)}}_i-S{(t)}_i, $$]

where [$$ \hat{S{(t)}_i} $$] is the predicted survival probability of
subject i at time t and S(t)_(i) is the actual survival curve for
subject i; or as

[$$ PE{(t)}_i=\hat{S{(t)}_i}-\delta {(t)}_i, $$]

where δ(t)_(i) is the disease status of subject i at time t. Using the
prediction error as a residual in conjunction with a loss function (such
as absolute error or squared error) and integrating it over time yields
the Integrated Absolute Error (IAE), ∫|PE(t)_(i)| dt, which uses the
absolute prediction error, and similarly, the Integrated Squared Error
(ISE), [$$ \int PE{(t)}_i^2\mathrm{d}t $$], which uses the squared
prediction error.

To address censoring, the individual time points can be weighted by the
inverse propensity of censoring. The Brier Score, at a time point t, is
essentially an inverse propensity of censoring weighted squared
prediction error

[$$ BS(t)=\frac{1}{N}\sum \limits_i\left(S{(t)}_i^2\delta
{(t)}_iG{(t)}^{-1}+{\left(1-S{(t)}_i\right)}^2\hat{I}_{T_i&gt;t}G{(t)}^{-1}\right)\hat,
$$]

where T_(i) is the time of event for subject i, G(t) is the propensity
of censoring as estimated through a Kaplan-Meier estimator [12]. The BS
can be integrated over time to obtain the Integrated Brier Score (IBS),
which is no longer time-dependent.

Time-dependent ROC and iAUROC. ROCs are useful tools for evaluating
classifiers. The time-dependent ROC analysis views time-to-event
modeling as a sequence of binary classification tasks evaluated either
at a single clinically meaningful time point or at multiple time points.
For this analysis, at a time point t, the prediction from the
time-to-event model needs to be converted into a classification outcome.
Heagerty and Zheng [14] have proposed three main strategies:
cumulative/dynamic (C/D), incident/dynamic (I/D), and incident/static
(I/S) that chiefly differ in the definition of a case, a control and the
risk set. In case of C/D, at a time t, a case is a subject with an event
time < = t (but after time 0), a control is a subject with follow-up up
to t and no event, and the risk set consists of all cases and controls.
This is “cumulative” because patients with events accumulate and is
“dynamic” because the risk set depends on t. The I/D strategy defines a
case as a patient who suffered an event exactly at time t; and defines
controls as subjects remaining event-free at time t. This strategy
excludes patients who developed an event before t. Finally, the I/S
strategy defines cases identically to I/D but the risk set is static; it
consists of all patients present at a separate time point t*, the time
point when the cohort is defined.

Based on the definitions of cases/controls, the specificity and
sensitivity can be computed, the ROC curve can be drawn, and the AUC can
be computed.

Similarly to C-statistic, the sensitivity in the AUC computation can be
weighed by the inverse propensity of censoring to make the estimates
more robust in face of censoring. The AUC values at different time
points can be integrated over a pre-selected set of time points to
obtain the integrated AUROC or (iAUROC).

Best Practice 9.1.10

The most common evaluation metric of a time-to-event model is Harell’s C
statistic (survival concordance) [13].

Pitfall 9.1.7

When a model produces time-dependent predictions, these need to be
summarized into a single value before the C statistic can be computed.

Best Practice 9.1.11

Time-dependent predictions can be summarized into a single value as (1)
survival probability at the end of the study, (2) survival probability
at the median survival time, (3) or survival probability at some
clinically relevant time.

Best Practice 9.1.12

If an ROC is desired, time-to-event prediction can be converted into
classification outcomes at a specific (clinically relevant) time point
using the C/D strategy to plot the ROC.

Calibration

Discrimination tells us how well the model can rank patients on their
risk of outcome. Calibration tells us complementary information [2, 3,
15, 16].

Calibration tells us how reliable the estimates are in different ranges
of the predicted risk of outcome.

There are four types of calibrations: mean, weak, moderate and strong,
satisfying increasingly stringent criteria.

Mean calibration, also known as calibration-in-the-large, simply
ascertains that the mean of the predicted risk of outcome coincides with
the mean observed outcome in the sample. Many algorithms, including
regression models, guarantee mean calibration in the development sample,
thus discrimination is more important. On the other hand, in an external
sample, the model may not be mean-calibrated.

Weak calibration assures that the model does not provide overly small or
large predictions (relative to the actual incidence or prevalence) or
that the model is not too close to the mean event rate (or prevalence).
The principal tool for weak calibration is the calibration model, which
is a regression model, regressing the observed outcome on the predicted
risk. For continuous outcomes, the calibration model takes the form

[$$ \hat y\sim {\beta}_0+{\beta}_yy $$]

where [$$ \hat y $$] is the prediction from the model, β₀ is the
calibration intercept and β_(y) is the calibration slope. In a
well-calibrated model, the slope is 1 and the intercept is 0.

When the outcome is binary, Cox’s method is used, where the calibration
model takes the form of

[$$
\mathrm{logit}(y){\beta}_0+{\beta}_y\mathrm{logit}(y)+\mathrm{offset}\left(\mathrm{logit}(y)\right)\hat
\hat $$]

Weak calibration suffers from several shortcomings.

Pitfall 9.1.8

Weak calibration can only detect miscalibrations that are affine,
involving a shift or a scale.

Pitfall 9.1.9

A model, that is well calibrated by the weak calibration criterion, does
not guarantee to be well calibrated in all regions of the predicted
outcome.

Hosmer-Lemeshow test. Both of these limitations stem from the fact that
the calibration model is a (generalized) linear model. The
Hosmer-Lemeshow test has been proposed to overcome these limitations. It
performs a chi-square test comparing the sum predicted probability of
outcome with the sum of the events in the 10 deciles of the predicted
probability range. The test has 8 degrees of freedom internally and 9
externally. The chi-square test does not rely on the linearity
assumption, however, it is not powerful and requires a certain minimum
sample size.

Moderate calibration checks whether the model is unbiased over the
entire range of the predicted probabilities. Typically, a flexible
calibration curve, such as local polynomial regression (loess), is used
to model the observed outcome as a function of the predicted risk.
Figure 6 shows the calibration curve of a model on a hypothetical data
set.

[]

A line graph plots observed probability versus predicted probability.
The line plotted for observed probability with respect to predicted
probability has an increasing trend.

In the figure, the horizontal axis corresponds to the predicted
probabilities of the outcome and the vertical axis to the observed
probabilities. The diagonal dashed line represents a perfectly
calibrated model, one where the predicted and observed probabilities
always coincide. The model slightly underestimates the risk when the
predicted probability is between 10 and 20% and slightly overestimates
the risk when the predicted probability is between 20 and 40%.

It may be desirable to summarize the calibration curve into a single
number. Let [$$ \hat{y} $$] denote the probability of outcome predicted
by the model, y_(c) denote the smoothed observed probability of outcome
(when the predicted probability is y) and f() the density of [$$ \hat{y}
$$]. The Integrated Calibration Index (ICI) is defined as

[$$ \int \mid y-\hat {y}_c\mid f\hat(y)\mathrm{d}\hat{y}, $$]

the absolute difference between the predicted and (smoothed) observed
probability is integrated over the range of predicted probabilities
weighed by the density of the predicted probability.

Another summary statistic of the calibration curve is Harrell’s E.
Harrell’s E(q) is the qth quantile of the [$$ \mid y-\hat {y}_c\mid $$]
distribution. For example, E50 is the median difference between the
predicted and (smoothed) observed probabilities of outcome.

Pitfall 9.1.10

Flexible calibration curves depend on the smoothing applied to the
curve.

Strong calibration ensures that the model predictions are unbiased for
every possible input combination. This is often impossible to achieve in
practice.

Example 9.1.4 [Weak calibration]

We created a synthetic data set with 10 predictors, 1000 observations
and outcome prevalence of 20%. We first checked
calibration-in-the-large. The mean predicted probability in the entire
training sample was 0.199, while the mean outcome was 0.2 (p-value
0.99).

Next we checked weak calibration. The model

[$$ \mathrm{logit}(y)\sim
{\beta}_0+{\beta}_y\mathrm{logit}(y)+\mathrm{offset}\left(\mathrm{logit}(y)\right)\hat
\hat $$]

yielded β_(o) = 0.063 (p-value 0.61) and β_(y) = 0.063 (p-value 0.440).
With both the calibration intercept and slope being non-significant, the
model is considered well-calibrated in the weak calibration sense.

Example 9.1.5 [Poorly calibrated models]

To illustrate the effect of the calibration intercept and slope, we took
the above well-calibrated model and intentionally mis-calibrated it by
adding +1 and − 1 to the intercept and using 1.5 and 0.5 as the slope.
Figure 7 shows the resultant calibration curves. These are flexible
(loess) curves.

[]

A line graph plots observed probability versus predicted probability.
The lines are plotted for intercept plus 1 and minus 1 and slope plus
0.5 and minus 0.5. All the lines have an increasing trend.

Blue lines in Fig. 7 show curves with non-zero calibration intercept.
This makes the model consistently over- or underestimate the risk over
the entire range of predicted probabilities. Orange curves represent
miscalibrations where the calibration slope is not 1. When it is larger
than 1, the model produces more extreme estimates: it underestimates the
risk in the low probability range and overestimates the risk for higher
predicted risks. Conversely, when the calibration slope is less than 1,
the model produces estimates that are closer to the prior probability of
the outcome.

Example 9.1.6 [Sensitivity of moderate calibration to smoothing]

We created a synthetic data set with 10 predictors and 1000 observations
and fit a model to this data. We checked moderate calibration on the
training data. For the calibration curve, we used local weighted least
squares smoothing (loess) with four different smoothing parameters.
Figure 8 shows the resulting calibration curves.

[]

A line graph plots observed probability versus predicted probability.
The lines are plotted for 0.2, 0.4, 0.7, and 0.9. All the lines have an
upward trend and overlap.

In Table 8, we show the ICI, E50 and E90 for the model. These are the
calibration indices of the same model; they only differ because of using
a different smoothing parameter for the flexible calibration curve.

Table 8

Illustration of sensitivity to smoothing in moderate calibration. The
ICI, E50 and E90 values were computed for the same model using four
different smoothing parameters

  Smoothing parameter   ICI     E50     E90
  --------------------- ------- ------- -------
  0.2                   0.027   0.030   0.104
  0.4                   0.022   0.029   0.107
  0.7                   0.018   0.025   0.110
  0.9                   0.020   0.027   0.111

Table 8 shows the effect of varying the smoothing parameter on the
Integrated Calibration Index (ICI), Harrell’s E50 and E90. These
calibration indices were calculated for the same model; they only
reflect changes in the smoothing parameter. The empirical confidence
interval of ICI (at smoothing of 0.7) was computed using the data
generating distribution of the outcome risk and was 0.011 to 0.041. Thus
all ICI values, regardless of the smoothing parameter, fall into the
confidence interval.

Clinical Usefulness

The measures discussed in section “Evaluating Model Performance”
describe how well a model can predict but give us very little
information about how useful a model would be in practice.

There are two critical concerns regarding the clinical utility of a
model. First, the different types of misclassification errors a model
makes can have different consequences and a balance has to be struck
between the benefits and the adverse consequences of using the model.
Second, when the model relates to treatment (or intervention), the
effectiveness of this intervention needs to be evaluated.

Weighted Specificity/Sensitivity, Weighted Precision/Recall

One consideration is that the two kinds of errors a model may make can
have different consequences. In an example of a cancer screening test,
false positives, patients where the test erroneously predicted a healthy
patient to have cancer can have less grave consequences than false
negatives, where patients with cancer are erroneously reported as being
cancer-free. We have discussed weighted confusion matrices earlier in
this chapter as a means for taking the different consequences of false
positives and false negatives into account.

Measures Related to Effectiveness

The expectation from an intervention is that it reduces some adverse
outcome or increases some beneficial outcome. Measures of effectiveness
compare rates of events among treated and untreated (control) patients.

The top portion of the Table 9 shows the number of patients with an
event (‘Event’) and without an event (‘No-Event’) among the treated
(column ‘Treated’) and untreated (column ‘Control’).

Table 9

Commonly used measures of clinical effectiveness

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | Treatment            | Control              |
+:=====================+:=====================+:=====================+
| Event                | TE                   | CE                   |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| No-event             | TN                   | CN                   |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Total (sum)          | TS                   | CS                   |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Absolute risk (AR)   | TE/TS                | CE/CS                |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | Absolute Risk in the | Absolute Risk in the |
|                      | treatment group      | control group        |
|                      | (ART) = TE/TS        | (ARC) = CE/CS        |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Absolute risk        | ARC-ART                                     |
| reduction (ARR)      |                                             |
+----------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Relative Risk (RR)   | ART/ARC                                     |
+----------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Relative risk        | (ARC-ART)/ARC = 1-RR                        |
| reduction (RRR)      |                                             |
+----------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Number need to treat | 1/ARR                                       |
| (NNT)                |                                             |
+----------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Odds ratio (OR)      | [$$ \frac{TE/ TN}{CE/ CN} $$]               |
+----------------------+---------------------------------------------+

Absolute risk is the proportion of patients in the treated (ART) or
control (ARC) groups with an event. This is a dimensionless measure
ranging from 0 to 1. The difference between ART and ARC is the Absolute
Risk Reduction (ARR), which directly relates to the effectiveness of
treatment in absolute terms: an ARR of 0.09 reduces the risk of event by
0.09 in the treatment group relative to the control group. However, ARR
offers no information about which part of the risk scale either the
treatment or the control group lies. For example, the same reduction of
0.09 can be more meaningful when ART = 0.01 and ARC = 0.10,
corresponding to ten fold reduction in risk, as compared to the case
when ART = 0.40 and ARC = 0.49.

Number needed to treat (NNT) is the reciprocal of ARR. The desired
interpretation of NNT is the number of patients needed to receive the
treatment to prevent one event that would have happened otherwise. This
interpretation is attractive in clinical practice because it is absolute
and in a unit that is easy to interpret (number of patients). The
interpretation of NNT, however, depends on clinical context, namely, the
disease prevalence and consequences of leaving the disease untreated.
Therefore direct comparison of NNT is only appropriate across treatments
of the same disease with respect to the same outcome.

NNT and ARR are equivalent, but NNT suffers from a number of drawbacks
that ARR does not. NNT is dimensioned (number of patients) while ARR is
not; the range of NNT is unbounded, while ARR is in the range of −1
to 1. When the treatment is ineffective, ARR = 0. Testing the
significance of ARR is straightforward by checking whether its
confidence interval contains 0. Conversely, when the treatment is
ineffective, NNT has a singularity. Therefore, statistically testing
whether a treatment is effective is problematic with NNT. Moreover, the
range of NNT has a “hole”: NNT cannot take values between −1 and 1.
Computing the confidence interval of NNT is possible by inverting the
upper and lower bounds of the confidence interval of ARR, but this does
not yield a correct confidence interval.

Relative risk (RR) operates on the proportional scale as opposed to
ARR’s absolute scale. RR thus eliminates the problem of having a
particular absolute difference reflect very different effectiveness when
clinical risk ranges are very different, but introduces a similar
problem: the same RR in patients with low risk could correspond to a
clinically meaningless risk reduction, while the same RR in higher risk
patients can be very meaningful. It is therefore recommended to report
both RR and ARR.

Since the measures form two large groups, OR and measures around ARR
(including RR, RRR, and NNT), in Fig. 9, we compare the behavior of OR
and ARR. We simulated two datasets. Both have 1000 patients in the
treatment as well as the control groups. In one data set, we fixed the
number of control patients with an event at 100 (corresponding to 10%
ARC) and in the other we fixed it at 300 (30% ARC). We varied the number
of patients with event in the treatment group from 50 to 350
(corresponding to ART of 5–35%). More effective treatments have lower
ART. The left panel depicts the odds ratio (OR) and the right panel
depicts absolute risk reduction (ARR). Note, that RRR is ARR/ARC, thus
with fixed ARC, RRR is just a scaled version of ARR. Similarly, NNT is
the reciprocal of ARR.

[]

Two line graphs plot odds ratio and absolute risk reduction versus
absolute risk in treated. The lines are plotted for A R C = 30 %, A R C
= 10 %, and no effect. Graph 1 has an increasing trend, while graph 2
has a downward trend. The line for no effect remains flat in both
graphs.

OR and ARR are consistent: when OR indicates better performance for the
treatment (lower OR), ARR also indicates better performance (higher
ARR). The event rate in the control group creates only a shift in ARR,
while it shifts as well as scales OR. The same difference between two
treatment effectiveness results can appear as a numerically larger
difference in OR. This has shown to have influenced treatment decision,

Measures of effectiveness fall into two groups: odds ratio (OR) and
measures related to absolute risk reduction (ARR) (including RRR, RR,
NNT). Both are invariant to scaling the number of treated or control
patients, but OR is also invariant to scaling the number of controls
(relative to the patients with events).

Pitfall 9.2.1

In case/control studies, measures of effectiveness that depend on the
prior of classes, are misleading when the balance of cases to controls
in the samples differs from the balance in the target population.

Best Practice 9.2.1

For case/control designs, use OR.

Relative risk (RR) and relative risk reduction (RRR) are relative
measures while absolute risk reduction (ARR) and number needed to treat
(NNT) are absolute.

Best Practice 9.2.2

Absolute and relative risk measures provide complementary information,
so whenever possible, both should be reported.

Best Practice 9.2.3

ARR and NNT convey the same information and differ in interpretation.
ARR is dimensionless, while NNT is measuresd in number of patients and
is preferred in clinical practice.

Pitfall 9.2.2

The range of NTT has a “hole”. This makes significance testing and
constructing confidence intervals difficult.

Net Benefit

Net benefit is a measure of the clinical utility of a model, which takes
into account not only the predictive ability of the model but also the
potential harm the application of a model can cause in practice.

Let us consider the scenario of a screening test, where patients with
positive screening result undergo a more invasive but more reliable
diagnostic test, while patients with negative screening result are not
considered further. The use of the screening test can cause (at least)
two kinds of harm. First, false negatives, patients who have the disease
but received a negative screening result, are left undiagnosed and
consequently untreated, thus they have higher risk of harm from the
disease. Second, false positives are patients who received a positive
screening result, underwent the invasive diagnostic procedure, incurring
the risk of adverse events associated with the diagnostic test, and were
found disease free. Harm from diagnostic procedure can include avoidable
stress, infection, or sepsis. Relative to applying the diagnostic test
to every patient, using a screening test can reduce the number of
patients who undergo the diagnostic test and thus reduces the harm
associated with the diagnostic test, but increases the risk of leaving
the disease undiagnosed (in false negative patients) and thus increases
the risk of harm associated with the undiagnosed disease. The net
benefit is defined as

[$$ \mathrm{NetBenefit}=\frac{TP}{N}-w\frac{FP}{N}, $$]

where N is the total number of patients, TP and FP denote the (number
of) true and false positives, respectively, and w is a weighing factor
representing the tradeoff between the harm caused by false positives and
false negatives. The weighing factor is determined by expert opinion, by
physician-patient joint decision making, or by cost analysis.

Interpretation. The interpretation of net benefit is the increase in TP
as a proportion of the population (or sample) after accounting for the
risk of harm both from false positives and false negatives.

Example 9.2.1 [Net benefit]

Consider a population of 1000 patients and a disease with 20%
prevalence. There are 200 patients with the disease and 800 without.
Further, consider a screening test that reported a positive result for
500 patients and 160 of them were true positives (and 340 were false
positives). There are 40 false negatives. A second test would report a
positive result for 400 patients, 150 of them true positives and 250
false positives, yielding 50 false negatives.

The second test has 10 more false negatives than the first test but it
has 90 fewer false positives. Suppose false negatives are very dangerous
and false positives are trivial, say false negatives are 20 times more
costly than false positives, then the net benefit of the first test is
TP/N−w FP/N = 160/1000–1/20 * 340/1000 = 0.143. This is higher than the
net benefit of the second test, which is
150/1000–1/20 * 250/1000 = 0.1375. Conversely, suppose that the
screening test is repeated annually and the disease takes years to
progress. In that case, the risk of false negatives can still be higher
than the risk of false positives, but to lesser extent than in the
previous example, say false negatives are “only” five times as costly as
false positives. In that case, the net benefit of the first test is
160/1000−1/5*340/100 = 0.092, which is lower than the net benefit of the
second test, which is 150/1000–1/5*250/100 = 0.10.

Decision Curve

Consider a screening test which yields a probability of outcome. To
obtain a positive/negative classification, the probability is
dichotomized using a threshold p: patients with predicted probability of
disease above p are positive and undergo the diagnostic procedure, while
patients with predicted probability of disease with less than (or equal
to) p are declared free of disease and are not considered further. As we
have already seen in this chapter, the choice of threshold p influences
the predicted positives, TP and FP, thus it influences net benefit. In
other words, a net benefit value can be computed for each possible (and
reasonable) threshold p and FP-FN tradeoff w.

The threshold p and w are related. Consider a threshold, slightly higher
than p. Without loss of generality, assume that reducing this threshold
to p increases the number of predicted positives by one patient. If the
model is well calibrated, then this patient has probability p of being a
case (actual positive) and 1-p of being a control (actual negative). If
the patient is an actual positive, then the number of true positives
increased by one (with probability p). If the patient is an actual
negative, then the number of false positives increased by one (with
probability (1-p)). At equilibrium,

[$$ \frac{TP}{N}-w\frac{FP}{N}=p-w\left(1-p\right)=0 $$]

yielding the relationships between p and w

[$$ w=\frac{p}{1-p}\kern1em \mathrm{and}\kern1em p=\frac{w}{1+w} $$]

When the output from a predictive model needs to be thresholded into a
clinical decision, (a) net benefit depends on this threshold and (b) the
threshold can be computed based on the assumed ratio of harm caused by
the two kinds of misclassifications, false negatives and false
positives.

Example 9.2.2

Returning to the net benefit example, if the first test results in
probabilities, and we believe that the consequence of false negatives is
20 times worse than that of false positives, then w = 1/20, and we
should set the classification threshold to p = w/(1 + w) = 1/21.

Decision curves plot the net benefit as a function of p along with two
default policies, Treat All and Treat None.

Figure 10 shows a decision curve for a hypothetical screening model.

[]

A line graph plots net benefit versus threshold. The lines are plotted
for model, treat all, and treat none. The lines for model and treat all
have a decreasing trend, while the line for treat none remains flat.

The horizontal axis corresponds to the classification threshold p, and
the vertical axis is the net benefit. The three lines represents three
policies. The blue solid line represents the policy of interest, which
is based on a machine learnt model. The model estimates the probability
of outcome in each patient. Patients with probability above the
threshold receive the invasive diagnostic test (“treatment”), those
below do not. The other two models are two default policies. The
horizontal black line is the “Treat none” policy, where no patient is
given the diagnostic test, while orange dashed line represents the
“Treat all” policy where every patient is given the invasive diagnostic
test (“treatment”).

Since net benefit measures the true positives treated under a policy as
a proportion of the entire sample minus the risk of harm, the “Treat
None” policy yields no true positives treated nor does it cause harm
from treatment, since nobody is treated. The orange line represents the
“Treat All” policy. Since we treat everyone, one would not expect the
net benefit to depend on the threshold, however, the threshold is
determined by the ratio of harm caused by false positives versus false
negatives, denoted by w in earlier sections. Net benefit does depend on
w. When the threshold is 0, p = 0, we assume that the treatment causes
no harm w = p/(1-p) = 0, and thus the net benefit is the prevalence of
disease in the sample. When the threshold is the prevalence of disease,
0.2 in this example, w = 0.2/0.8 = ¼, meaning that false negatives cause
four times as much harm as false positives. In this case, the net
benefit for the Treat All policy is TP/N - w FP/N = p - p/(1-p)
(1-p) = 0. As the threshold exceeds the prevalence, in other words the
ratio of harm from false negatives versus false positives exceeds
p/(1-p), the Treat All policy has a negative net benefit.

The blue line has a similar interpretation. If we believe that the harm
caused by false negatives is w times higher than the harm caused by
false positives, we select p = w/(1 + w) as the threshold and the net
benefit can be seen in the graph. For example, when the harm caused by
false negatives versus false positives is 1:4, w = ¼,
p = w/(1 + w) = 0.2 and the net benefit is 0.80. This is substantially
higher than the other two policies, both of which have net benefit of 0.

The figure shows that the model-based policy (blue line) has superior
net benefit over the two default policies over the entire range of FN:FP
harm ratio, and consequently, the entire range of classification
thresholds.

Relationship Between Net Benefit and AUC

Figure 11 depicts the relationship between AUC and decision curves. The
three panels correspond to three different disease prevalence: 10%, 20%
and 40% from left to right. Each panel is a decision curve plot,
analogous to Example 9.2.2, comparing three model-based policies, based
on models with AUC of 0.6, 0.7, and 0.8, and two default policies:
“Treat All” and “Treat None”. The horizontal axis is the classification
threshold p and the vertical axis is Net Benefit. Since the maximal net
benefit (achievable when treating the false positives cannot cause harm)
varies by the prevalence of disease, the vertical axis in the three
panels use different scales, namely 0 to disease prevalence.

[]

Three line graphs plot net benefit versus threshold for 10, 20, and 40
percent prevalence. The lines are plotted for 0.8, 0.7, 0.6, treat all,
and treat none. All the graphs have a downward trend and drop from the
top left. The line for treat none remains flat in all the graphs.

Generally, higher AUC results in higher Net Benefit regardless of
disease prevalence.

However, even models with reasonable AUC can underperform a default
policy of “Treat All”. For all three prevalence, the model-based policy
based on AUC of 0.6 performed worse than the “Treat All” policy. When
the prevalence is low (left panel), the extent to which it
underperformed (relative to the maximal achievable Net Benefit) is
greater than when the prevalence is high (right panel). Similar to the
“Treat All” policy, the model-based policy, even when based on a
reasonable model (AUC > 0.5), can have negative net benefit. This
happens when the cost of false positives is high and the predicted
positives do not have sufficient true positives to compensate for the
risk of harm from false positives.

Pitfall 9.2.3

Even models with reasonable AUC can underperform a default policy of
“Treat All”.

To further explore the relationship between Net Benefit and AUC, Net
Benefit can be expressed in terms of sensitivity and specificity.

[$$ \mathrm{NB}=\mathrm{sensitivity}\ast
\mathrm{prevalence}-w\left(1-\mathrm{specificity}\right)\ast
1-\mathrm{prevalence} $$]

This shows that similarly to AUC, NB is also balancing between
sensitivity and 1-specificity, however it adjusts for the prevalence of
the outcome and also for the ratio of harm caused by the two kinds of
misclassifications (false positives and false negatives).

Key references for clinical effectives are (chapter “Regulatory Aspects
and Ethical Legal Societal Implications (ELSI)” in [2], [17–20].

Health Economic Evaluation

In this section, we provide an overview of evaluating the health
economic effect of a new model or intervention [21–23]. Health economic
evaluations focus on evaluating health-related actions, such as new
models, interventions, therapies, practices, or policies, in terms of
their cost and consequences. Without loss of generality, we call these
actions “interventions”. Consequences include health benefits or
disbenefits from the new interventions, their side effects, and effects
this new intervention may have on other parts of the health system.

Health economic evaluations aim to evaluate the health benefits and
disbenefits of an intervention taking their cost into account.

Several kinds of health economic evaluations exist. Cost effectiveness
analysis (CEA) compares interventions that relate to a single common
effect that may differ in magnitude between alternative interventions.
For example, two treatments of the same disease may both extend life
(common effect) but to varying degrees at varying costs. Analyzing the
degree of extending life as a function of costs incurred constitutes a
CEA.

Although technically not a CEA, Cost Minimization Analysis (CMA) is
related. CMAs are applicable when two treatments achieve the same
outcome (to the same degree) but at different costs. In this case, the
treatment with the lower cost would be chosen.

The second type of health economic analysis is Cost Utility Analysis
(CUA). Similarly to CEAs, CUAs also compare two interventions in terms
of costs and health consequences, but unlike CEAs, the health
consequences of the interventions do not need to be common. Instead of a
specific clinical endpoint, CUAs utilize generic measures of health
gain, making the consequences comparable. This allows for the comparison
of programs across different areas of health care, where a common
clinical endpoint would not make sense. When a new program is
implemented, often another area needs to be disinvested. CUAs also
allows for accounting for health lost in the disinvested area in
comparison to health gained in the new program on the same scale. Such
generic measures of health include Quality-Adjusted Life Years (QALY),
Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALY), and Healthy years equivalent
(HYE), which we introduce in the next section.

The final type of health economic analysis we look at is Cost Benefit
Analysis (CBA). CBAs compare interventions, more generally, policies, in
terms of their costs and consequences, where the consequence is also
expressed in monetary terms. This can be useful for policy decisions,
where one of the interventions is not health-related and thus a
health-related consequence is inappropriate. Such analyses require
quantifying the monetary value of health, which is a complex topic in
its own right. In this section, we do not consider CBAs any further and
focus on CUAs, which are the most common types of health economic
evaluations, and CEAs, which are common when two treatments of the same
disease are compared (Table 10).

Table 10

Comparison of health economic evaluations

  Type of analysis              Clinical end-points                                                                                                                                                      Measure of consequence
  ----------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Cost effectiveness analysis   Common across the compared interventions                                                                                                                                 A natural measure for that common clinical end-point
  Cost minimization analysis    Common across the compared interventions                                                                                                                                 Interventions achieve the same consequence; they only differ in terms of cost
  Cost utility analysis         Clinical end-points for the compared intervention can be the same, but does not have to be                                                                               Generic measure of health (QALY, DALY, HYE)
  Cost benefit analysis         Clinical end-points for the compared intervention can be the same, but does not have to be. The end-point of some of the interventions do not even have to be clinical   Monetary value

Components of a CEA and CUA

Health economic analyses have three main components: (1) alternative
interventions compared, (2) estimation of costs, and (3) estimation of
benefit (consequence).

Alternative Interventions

To determine whether a new intervention is to be adopted, it needs to be
compared with alternative interventions. One of the alternatives can be
the current standard of care. Different alternatives can be mutually
exclusive, in which case they can be compared directly. The new
intervention can be used together with alternatives (adjuvant therapy),
in which case comparisons can be made among combinations of treatments
or sequences of treatments.

Care must be taken to include all relevant alternatives. The proposed
new intervention may outperform some but not all alternatives. Many cost
effectiveness measures posit that the new intervention can only be
adopted if it outperforms all alternatives.

Best Practice 9.3.1

Include all alternative interventions in a health economic evaluation.

Estimating Costs

Estimating costs naturally includes the direct cost of the intervention.
In an environment, where resources are limited, there is also an
opportunity cost associated with the intervention. When resources are
allocated for a particular intervention/program, other
interventions/programs may have to be disinvested. These disinvested
programs give up benefits, which is an opportunity cost, and it also
needs to be included in the cost calculation.

Best Practice 9.3.2

Include the opportunity cost as cost of intervention/program in a health
economic evaluation.

Measures of Benefit

CEAs and CUAs both measure the benefit of a new intervention in terms of
health gained. CEAs use more direct clinical outcomes, while CUAs use
generic measures of health. In this section, we review metrics of
health.

Direct clinical outcomes are very similar to clinical trial endpoints
and are usually natural measures of the outcome of interest.

For example, for lipid lowering drug, the clinical endpoint could be
reduction of major cardio-vascular events and a natural measure of that
could be 8-year incidence of major cardio-vascular events.

A common direct clinical outcome is mortality. Several natural
measurements exist for mortality including the extension of life in
years (a time to event outcome) or an incidence (e.g. 8-year mortality
risk).

When the clinical outcome of interest takes place in a long time frame
that makes analysis impractical, an intermediate end-point and its
natural measure can be used. Continuing with the lipid-lowering example,
an intermediate endpoint can be cholesterol reduction achieved and its
natural measure is the corresponding lab result. Another kind of
intermediate measures include cases detected in a screening test, or
process measures of diabetic control (such as percentage of patients
with a1c measured, feet examined, etc). Intermediate measures have to be
linkable to the clinical outcome of interest and the quality of these
measures depends on how strongly the intermediate outcome is linked to
the actual clinical outcome of interest.

Best Practice 9.3.3

Do not use intermediate end-points unless they are very strongly linked
to the outcome of interest.

Health is multidimensional and the above clinical outcome measures
typically capture one aspect of it: either the length of life or an
aspect that relates to the disease of interest. Generic health scores
have been proposed to measure multiple aspects of health simultaneously.

Health related quality of life (HRQoL) scores are generic health scores
that measure a patient’s health from multiple perspectives and do not
concentrate on specific diseases.

A commonly used measure HRQoL is the Short Form 13 (SF-13) consisting of
13 multiple choice questions and the SF-36 consisting of 36 questions
[24]. Both cover major health domains including whether health problems
limit patients’ daily activity, mental health problems limiting daily
activity, level of pain, vitality, and how patients perceive their
health. One problem with such multidimensional measures is that the
different dimensions, or the answers to the 36 questions, often need to
be summarized into a single value for analysis.

Another problem with the current measures is that quality of life and
length of life can represent a tradeoff. For example, a cancer patient
may select a treatment that offers better quality but shorter life over
another treatment with longer but lower-quality life. Ideally, a health
measure can capture both of these aspects of health into a single value.
The solution is to adjust the life years for quality of life giving rise
to the following measures.

Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALY) is a measure that weighs each
remaining life year proportionally to the quality of life. The weight is
determined by patient preference. QALY is a continuous valued measure,
where, by convention, 0 often represents death and 1 perfect health.
This is an interval measure, where 0 is arbitrary and health states
worse than death can take negative values.

Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALY) weighs each remaining life year
proportional to (the lack of) disabilities. Weights are determined by a
committee and are fixed. DALY is a discrete measure that can only take
seven different values.

Healthy Years Equivalent (HYE) creates a mapping, based on patient
preferences, from years remaining to equivalent years of completely
healthy life. The mapping can be determined, for example, by using a
series of questions asking the patients whether they prefer y years
(y > 1) in their current health or 1 year completely healthy life. When
the patients are indifferent, that is the equivalence point.

Generic measure of health that summarize a patient’s health into a
unidimensional measure include QALY, DALY, and HYE.

Decision Making Using CEA and CUA

Once alternative treatments are identified, associated costs are
estimated and a measure of benefit is selected, we now continue to
describe how these can be used for decision making.

Consider two treatment alternatives, A and B; B is the new treatment and
A is an alternative treatment such as the current standard of care.

Incremental cost Δ_(C) is the difference in cost between A and B. It
includes the additional acquisition cost of B (vs A) and any and all
additional opportunity costs. The incremental cost is not necessarily
positive: the new treatment can save cost or even an expensive new
pharmaceutical may lower opportunity costs. Incremental health benefit
Δ_(h) is the difference in health outcomes between A and B. If health
benefit is measured in QALYs, this represents the extra QALYs achieved
by using B over A.

Incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER) is the ratio Δ_(c)/Δ_(h),
which quantifies the cost increase (Δ_(c)) incurred to achieve a unit
health gain (e.g. 1 QALY).

A treatment is deemed cost effective if ICER < k, where k is the
cost-effectiveness threshold. The cost effectiveness threshold means
that diverting k units of health care resources from other parts of the
healthcare system to the new intervention is expected to displace 1 QALY
of health elsewhere in the health system.

Example 9.3.1 [Cost effectiveness]

Suppose treatment B has an incremental cost of $20,000 and an
incremental benefit of 2 QALYs. When the cost effectiveness threshold k
is $20,000/QALY, we expect to lose 1 QALY in the health system per every
$20,000. Therefore, using treatment B at the incremental cost of
$20,000, we expected to lose 1 QALY elsewhere in the health system. Now,
B also provides us health benefits. The incremental health benefit Δ_(h)
from treatment B is 2 QALY; while the health disbenefit lost in the
system is Δ_(c)/k = $20,000/$20,000 QALY = 1 QALY. Thus, the incremental
net health benefit is 1 QALY, which is positive, thus the treatment B is
considered cost effective.

There are three equivalent criteria for cost effectiveness:

- ICER < cost-effectiveness threshold: [$$
  \frac{\varDelta_c}{\varDelta_h}&lt;k $$]

- Incremental net health benefit is positive: [$$
  {\varDelta}_h-\frac{\varDelta_c}{k}&gt;0 $$]

- Incremental net monetary benefit is positive: Δ_(h)k − Δ_(c) > 0.

The first criterion is the definition of cost effectiveness: cost
effectiveness, that is cost per unit health gained, needs to be less
than a threshold k.

The second criterion examines cost effectiveness from the perspective of
health gained. The incremental health benefit Δ_(h) from the new
treatment is larger than the health we lose in other parts of the health
system (Δ_(c)/k) due to diverting Δ_(c) cost to treatment B.

The third criterion looks at cost effectiveness from a cost perspective.
It would cost Δ_(h)k dollars to achieve the same health benefit (Δ_(h))
that treatment B offers at the cost of Δ_(c). If the cost through
treatment B is lower, then treatment B is cost effective.

Cost Effectiveness Analysis Example

In this section, we present an illustration of how the health economic
impact of a machine learned model can be evaluated. The example is
adopted from [22] with the author’s permission.

Epithelial ovarian cancer has the highest mortality rate among cancers.
20–30% of the patients do not respond to the standard treatment of
cytoreductive surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy, and even in
patients with an initial response, 80% will recur and develop drug
resistant disease. Against this background, novel, targeted therapy
agents, such as Bevacizumab, have been developed. Earlier studies found
Bevacizumab to dominate (be more effective at a lower cost) the standard
treatment.

A ML model based on genetic biomarkers and clinical outcomes, was
developed to provide progression-free survival (PFS) benefit estimates
for patients on Bevacizumab therapy. Based on the predicted PFS
probabilities, patients were categorized into three groups: (1) 40% of
the patients without statistically significant PFS gain
(1.28 ± 1.45 months), (2) 40% with medium gain (5.79 ± 2.12 months), and
(3) 20% with the highest FPS gain (9.95 ± 1.53 months).

Three therapeutic strategies are compared. First, is the platinum-based
chemotherapy, the current standard of care at the time of the writing.
Second, Bevacizumab therapy added to the current standard for all
patients (universal). Third, Bevacizumab therapy is added to the current
standard for only the 20% patients who are predicted to benefit the
most.

+-------------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Strategy          | Incremental cost  | Incremental health | ICER   |
|                   |                   | benefit            |        |
+:==================+:==================+:===================+:=======+
| Baseline          | –                 | –                  | –      |
+-------------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Universal         | $60 k for         | 4.818 months = 2   | $360 k |
| application       | bevacizumab = $3B | quality adjusted   |        |
|                   | per year          | months             |        |
+-------------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
| ML-guided         | $2 k for test for | 9.95 months = 4.13 | $203 k |
| application       | all patients      | quality adjusted   |        |
|                   |                   | months             |        |
|                   | $60 k for         |                    |        |
|                   | bevacizumab × for |                    |        |
|                   | 20% of            |                    |        |
|                   | patients = $700 M |                    |        |
|                   | per year          |                    |        |
+-------------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+

Assumptions. The genetic test for the ML-based signature costs $2k per
patient. The Bevacizumab therapy costs $60k, including acquisition,
administrative and adverse events-related costs. The quality of life
adjustment is assumed to be the same across the three strategies and is
taken from [23]. Last, we assume 50k patients per year.

Universal application. Bevacizumab is given to all patients, thus no
testing is required. It is given in addition to the baseline treatment,
thus the incremental cost is $60k per patients, equaling $3B. On
average, patients gain additional 4.818 months (=2 quality adjusted
months) of life relative to the standard care, yielding an incremental
health benefit of 50 k × 2 = 100k quality adjusted life months = 8.3k
QALY. The incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER) is $3B/ (8.3k
QALY) = $360k per QALY.

ML-guided application. Bevacizumab is given only to the 20% patients in
the highest benefit group. The genetic test needs to be applied to all
patients and then 20% of the patients (10k patients) receive the
Bevacizumab therapy on top of the standard care. This leads to an
incremental cost of 50k × $2k for testing and 10k × $60k for the
Bevacizumab therapy, $700M in total. The patients who received this
therapy experience a health benefit of 9.95 months = 4.13
quality-adjusted months on average yielding an incremental health
benefit of 10k × 4.13 × 12 = 3.44k QALY. The ICER is $700M/ (3.44
QALY) = $203k per QALY.

Although the Universal application yields a higher incremental health
benefit (8.3k vs 4.13k QALY) it does so at a disproportionately higher
cost ($3B vs $700M), leading to a higher ICER.

The impact of model performance. The increased effectiveness of the
ML-guided application stems from the ML model’s ability to correctly
identify patients who benefit from the Bevacizumab treatment. A ML model
with lower performance could select patients with lower benefit,
yielding a lower incremental health benefit at the same incremental cost
(same number of patients treated), reducing the ICER, possibly rendering
the treatment ineffective. If a priori known, the institution’s
willing-to-pay threshold (highest ICER they are willing to pay for) can
be used to determine the minimal necessary model performance.

Calibration. The main responsibility of the model is to distinguish
between the 20% and the bottom 80% benefit groups. The implication is
that among models with similar discrimination, we prefer models that are
better calibrated at the higher end over those better calibrated at the
lower end of the estimated probability progression-free survival scale.

Estimators of Model Performance

Recall from chapter “Data Design” that modeling is inference, where a
model is constructed on a discovery sample, and we wish to use it in the
target population. To determine whether the model is suitable for use in
the target population, we have to estimate its performance in the target
population using the discovery sample. In this chapter, we present
several methods to achieve this.

The term estimator refers to the method we apply to estimate the
performance of a model. We compare estimators by assessing how well and
how consistently they can estimate the model performance. Bias is the
difference between the model performance estimated from the discovery
sample and the model performance in the (entire) target population.
Variance is the variability of the performance estimate across multiple
discovery samples. Specifically, if we were to repeat the analytic
process using different discovery samples, build a model on each sample,
and apply the estimator to compute the performance of the model, we
would obtain multiple estimates of the model’s performance. Variance of
the estimator is the variance of these performance estimates.

The goal of performance estimation is to infer the performance of a
model in the target population based the discovery sample. The method
used to estimate the model performance is referred to as an estimator.

Using the Plug-In Estimator is Generally a Bad Idea

The simplest method is to build a model on the entire discovery sample,
measure the model’s performance on the same discovery sample and use
this estimate as a “plug-in” estimate for the target population. This
estimate is also known as the resubstitution estimate, or resubstitution
error for error estimates.

From a very large population, a sample of 10, 20, …, 2000 patients were
drawn as a discovery sample. On this discovery sample a model (with 10
parameters) was constructed and was evaluated on the same discovery
sample. Then the performance of this model was evaluated in the original
population and compared to the estimated performance. Figure 12 shows
the estimated performance (blue line) and the actual performance (orange
line) as a function of the size of the discovery sample.

[]

A line graph plots A U C versus sample size. The lines are plotted for
estimated and actual performance. The line for estimated has a gradual
decreasing trend, while the line for actual has a sharp increase at
first and then moves with a mild slope.

For all sample sizes, the performance estimate is optimistic; for small
sample sizes, it is excessively optimistic. For small sample sizes, the
performance estimate has no variability, it is always 1. When the sample
size becomes large, the performance is estimated reasonably correctly.
Unfortunately, the sample size that is “sufficiently large” is not known
a priori, it depends on the number of parameters in the model and also
on the data itself: when predictors have high collinearity, a much
larger sample size is required, as compared to independent predictors.

Pitfall 9.4.1

Do not use the plug-in estimator. Its estimate is always optimistic,
sometimes excessively so.

The use of the plug-in estimator for estimating the performance of
models is not recommended at any sample size. When the sample size is
small, the plug-in estimate has the apparent advantage of using all
samples to build the model, but the performance estimates can be
arbitrarily biased. When the sample size is large, the plug-in estimate
has the apparent advantage of building only one model (which can be
costly at large sample sizes), but other estimators, e.g. the Leave-out
estimate, also builds only one model but gives a less biased performance
estimate.

Internal Validation

We will discuss problems with model fitting in chapter “Overfitting,
Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance:
Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and AI” in greater
detail, but for the current discussion, we consider two problems:
underfitting and overfitting. A model is underfitting the data if the
model fails to capture all available signal from the training data. This
generally happens, when the model has insufficient complexity.
Conversely, a model is overfitting the data, if the model also fitted to
the noise in the data. This typically happens when the model complexity
is too high.

Overfitting can be detected if a second sample from the same population
is available. The first sample, which was used to develop the model is
called the training sample (or development sample), while the second
sample is referred to as the validation sample (or test sample). When a
model is overfitting, its performance on the training sample will be
higher than on the test sample. The purpose of validation is to ensure
that the model performance estimated from the training sample remains
similar in the population. If this is true, the model is said to
generalize to that population. If this population is the accessible
population, the validation is an internal validation; otherwise, it is
external validation. In this section, we focus on model performance
estimators utilizing internal validation and in the next section, we
dive into the different kinds of validations a little deeper.

In internal validation, the goal is to verify that the model developed
on the discovery sample generalizes to the accessible population.

Leave Out Validation

In leave-out-validation, a randomly selected portion of the discovery
sample, a validation sample, is put aside, left out from training. The
discovery sample is thus randomly divided into a training sample and a
validation sample, implying that the training sample and the validation
sample are two independent random samples from the accessible
population. As long as the accessible population can be viewed as a
random sample of the target population, the training and test samples
are two independent samples of the target population. Thus the
performance of a model on the validation sample will be representative
of its performance on the target population.

In leave out validation, the discovery sample is divided into a training
sample for model development and a validation sample for model
evaluation.

For successful validation we have to pay attention to two details: the
definition of the sampling unit and the size of the validation sample
relative to the discovery sample.

Sampling unit. The discovery sample is a random sample from the
accessible population: whether a unit is selected from the accessible
population to the discovery sample does not depend on the selection of
other units. For example, in a diabetes risk model example, a sampling
unit can be a patient. Assume that from the accessible population, the
set of patients in the catchment area of the health system, a discovery
sample of patients is drawn at random. The probability of being included
in the discovery sample is constant across the patients in the
accessible population. Each patient can contribute multiple records.
Typically, all records of the selected patients are included. Thus, the
discovery sample is not a random sample at the level of records (if one
record of a specific patient is included, another record of the same
patient has a very high probability of being included) but is a random
sample at the level of patients. When the discovery sample is further
sampled to create the training and validation sets, the same sampling
unit must be used. If in the above example, records of one patient are
split across the training and test sets, the training and test sets are
no longer independent, even at the patient level: if some records of a
patient are in the training set, the probability of another record of
the same patient being in the test set is higher than the probability
that a record of a random patient from the accessible population is
included. For this example, sampling must be done at the patient level:
if a patient is selected to be a training patient, all records of this
patient must be included in the training sample; if the patient is a
validation patient, then all records of the patient must be included in
the validation sample.

Best Practice 9.4.1

Consider the sampling unit carefully.

Relative Size of the Training Versus Validation Samples

Best Practice 9.4.2

A typical leave-out validation size is 30% of the sample.

Pitfall 9.4.2

If 70% of the discovery sample is insufficient training data, you need
to consider other performance estimators (such bootstrapping or
cross-validation).

To illustrate the effect of the proportion of samples left out for
validation, we simulated a large population of observations with
outcomes. From this population, we draw discovery samples of varying
sizes, ranging from 50 to 5000. A 10-parameter model was constructed for
the outcome and its performance was estimated from the leave-out sample
(validation sample). The left panel in Fig. 13 depicts the bias, which
is the average absolute difference between the performance estimate from
the validation sample versus the actual performance on the population.
The right panel depicts the variability of the performance estimate. For
each discovery sample size, the experiment was repeated 50 times and the
standard deviation of the 50 performance estimates are reported.

[]

Two line graphs plot bias and variation versus sample size. The lines
are plotted for 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. Both graphs present a
decreasing trend.

As the fraction of samples left out for validation increases, the
samples available for training decreases. Figure 13 shows that the
larger the training sample size, the higher the actual performance. As
the fraction of samples left out for validation decreases, the
validation sample becomes too small to estimate the performance, and as
Fig. 13 shows, this results in both high variance and large bias. The
typical percentage of samples left out for validation is 30%. When the
discovery sample is sufficient for building a good model from 70% of the
samples, the remaining 30% is typically sufficient to estimate the model
performance.

Property. Even for modest sample sizes, the leave-out estimator is
relatively unbiased, however, it has very high variance.

Repeated Holdout

To reduce the variance of the holdout estimator, the estimation can be
repeated multiple m times, each with a different partitioning. This
process results in m performance (or error) estimates, which need to be
averaged.

Property. The repeated holdout estimator retains the same low bias and
achieves significantly lower variance than the (single, non-repeated)
holdout estimator. However, repeating the holdout estimation results in
higher computation cost.

Cross-Validation

There are two problems with leave-out validation. First, we use a small
portion of the discovery sample for training as we have to leave out a
portion of it for validation. This increases bias. Second, the portion
left out for validation is relatively small so the variance of the
performance estimate can be large. Cross validation addresses both of
these problems.

In k-fold cross validation, the data set is divided into k equal
partitions at random. Model evaluation proceeds iteratively, in k
iterations. In the kth iteration, the kth partition (fold) is left out
for validation and the remaining k-1 partitions are used for training. A
model is constructed on the k-1 partitions and predictions are made on
the leave out partition. Over the k iterations, we obtain predictions
for all k partitions and the predictions are evaluated.

Best Practice 9.4.3

For cross validation a typical number of folds is 10 in moderate sample
size and 5 in large sample sizes.

In ten-fold cross validation (CV), in each of the 10 iterations, 9 out
of 10 partitions are used for training, thus the model is constructed on
90% of the discovery sample. By the end of the 10 iterations,
predictions are obtained for all observations, thus the predictive
performance is evaluated on all instances in the discovery sample. The
downsides are twofold. First, in 10 iterations, we have built 10 models.
If building a model is costly, cross-validation can become very
expensive. This can be mitigated by choosing a smaller k. Second, the
procedure does not evaluate the performance of a specific model, but
rather the expected performance of a hypothetical model that we would
obtain by building it on (k-1)/k portion of the discovery samples.

Choosing k

The choice of k mainly impacts the sample size available for training
(model construction), which in turn, impacts performance in the
population. Any k ≥ 5 was found to yield very similar performance:
whether the model is constructed on 80% of the discovery sample (k = 5)
or 98% (k = 50) only had an impact on the performance for small sample
sizes. The larger the number of folds, the smaller the bias and the
variance (standard deviation of the performance estimates across 50 runs
for k and each discovery sample size combination), however the effect
diminishes beyond k = 5 (Fig. 14).

[]

Three line graphs plot bias, variation, and performance on population
versus sample size. The lines are plotted for 2, 5, 10, and 50. Graphs 1
and 2 have a decreasing trend, while graph 3 has an increasing trend.

Leave One Out Cross Validation (LOOCV)

Leave One Out Cross Validation (LOOCV) is a special case of cross
validation, where every observation is a partition. In other words,
k = N. LOOCV is most useful for small data sets, because in each
iteration, only a single observation is left out for validation. The key
drawback is the computation cost: by the completion of the LOOCV
process, N models will have been constructed.

Property. Cross-validation has low bias, but high variance. It has
significantly higher computation cost than the holdout estimation.

Repeated Cross-Validation

K-fold cross validation has low bias but relatively high variance. Some
of this variance, the so-called internal variance [25], is due to the
randomness induced by the partitioning. In order to reduce variance,
repeated cross-validation can be performed, where the k-fold
cross-validation process is repeated m times and the estimates are
averaged over the m repetitions.

Bootstrap

As k-fold cross validation represents a tradeoff of increased compute
cost to reduce estimation bias and variance, bootstrap is another step
in the same direction. In bootstrap estimation, replicas of the
discovery sample are constructed. If the discovery sample has N
observation, a replica of N observations is created by sampling from the
discovery sample with replacement. The replica will contain
approximately two thirds of the observations from the original discovery
sample, with some observations included multiple times. Conversely,
about a third of the original samples are not included in the replica.
These samples are called the out-of-bag (OOB) samples. A model is
constructed on the replica, and evaluated on the OOB samples. This
process is repeated typically 50 to several hundred times.

The advantage of the bootstrap is that the model is evaluated on the OOB
samples over multiple runs, thus the evaluation uses most (if not all)
discovery samples multiple times, yielding a stable estimate. The
drawback of the method is that it is known to be (pessimistically)
biased even on large samples and it is costly as it builds a model on
each replica, requiring the construction of potentially hundreds of
models. Similarly to cross-validation, the performance estimate is not
the performance of a specific model, but rather the expected performance
of a model that will be built on the discovery sample with the same
parameterization as the models in the bootstrap.

Effect of the Number of Bootstrap Iterations

Figure 15 shows the effect of the bootstrap iterations on the bias (top
left panel) and variance (top right panel) of the performance estimate.
The bottom panel depicts the performance of the models in the target
population. Since each bootstrap iteration uses a replica data set that
has the same number of samples as the entire discovery sample, the
performance of the models in the population does not depend on the
number of bootstrap iterations. There is some variation in the amount of
bias as a function of the number of bootstrap iterations, but the
differences are not statistically significant. The main difference due
to the number of bootstrap iterations is the variance of the performance
estimate. The higher the number of bootstrap iterations, the smaller the
variance. Consistent with recommendations in the literature, performing
iterations in excess of 100 or 200 has no appreciable effect.

[]

Three line graphs plot bias, variation, and performance in population
versus sample size. The lines are plotted for 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200,
and 500. Graphs 1 and 2 have a downward trend, while graph 3 increases
steeply at first and then moves with a mild slope.

Best Practice 9.4.4

When using the bootstrap estimator select a number of repetitions that
is sufficient for the problem based on related literature. Reported
minimum repetitions generally range from 100 to >500.

Property. The bootstrap has low variance but can have high bias even
when the sample size is large.

Best Practice 9.4.5

When using the bootstrap, estimate the bias and correct for it unless it
is negligible. If the bias is unknown or cannot be corrected, then a
different estimator must be used.

The 0.632 and the 0.632+ bootstrap

The key benefit of the bootstrap method is its low variance. However,
the bootstrap can be pessimistically biased even for large sample sizes.

The 0.632 bootstrap [26] addresses this issue by taking a weighted
average of the resubstitution error [$$ \hat{\varepsilon}_{resub} $$]
(which is typically very optimistic) and the bootstrap error [$$
\hat{\varepsilon}_{b0} $$]

[$$ {\varepsilon}_{b632}=\hat .368\hat{\varepsilon}_{resub}
+.632\hat{\varepsilon}_{b0} $$]

This correction was observed to be insufficient, thus when the
overfitting is assumed to be substantial, more weight is placed on the
bootstrap estimate. This gave rise to the 0.632+ bootstrap [27], defined
as

[$$ \hat{\varepsilon}_{b632+}=
\left(1-w\right)\hat{\varepsilon}_{resub}+\hat w\hat{\varepsilon}_{b0}
$$]

where the exact formulate for the weighing factor [$$ \hat w $$] can be
found in [28].

Comparing the Different Estimators

Several studies [4, 25, 28–30] have addressed the issue of comparatively
evaluating these estimators. The emerging conclusions are that:

1.  (a)

    LOOCV is unbiased but has high variance and can produce outlying
    estimates on small samples [25]

     

2.  (b)

    k-fold CV is nearly unbiased and with smaller variance than LOOCV.

     

3.  (c)

    Holdout estimator is unbiased but has high variance [30].

     

4.  (d)

    Bootstrapping is biased [28].

     

5.  (e)

    Repeating and averaging application of an estimator can drastically
    reduce its variance [28]. Recommended number of repeats is ≥50.

     

Best Practice 9.4.6

Use the least computationally expensive estimator that yields small
enough bias and variance in the problem at hand.

For very small sample size: consider as first choice Leave One Out Cross
Validation (LOOCV).

For small sample size: using a less-flexible classifier, the 0.632
bootstrap can offer the best performance but it can be biased [28].

For medium sample sizes: repeated balanced ten-fold cross validation.

For large samples sizes: holdout or five-fold Cross Validation or
corrected bootstrap.

Performance Estimation in the Presence of Missing Values

When the analytic data set contains missing values, we can follow two
strategies:

1.  1.

    We can first impute the entire analytic data set and then perform
    the evaluation on the imputed data set; OR

     

2.  2.

    We first partition (or resample) the analytic data set and then
    impute the missing values on each partition/resample separately.

     

The key issue is that when the model is implemented in practice, the
data that the model will be operating on (test data) may contain missing
values. If we follow strategy 1, our performance estimates may be too
optimistic. Following strategy 2 is costly but eliminates the danger of
biasing the error estimates (see also chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting
and General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and
Best Practices in Machine Learning and AI”).

Best Practice 9.4.7

Applying data imputation procedures on training data and using the
imputation model on the test data (in cross validation estimators):

1.  (a)

    Ensures that bias is avoided.

     

2.  (b)

    Mimics practical implementation of the final model (which has to be
    eventually deployed without the benefit of seeing a large number of
    the application population).

     

Pitfall 9.4.3

Imputation on all data may bias the estimation of classifier errors
(even if the imputation is blind to the outcome).

Parameter Tuning and Performance Estimation

Hyper parameter tuning as part of model selection is covered in chapter
“Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and
Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and
AI”. Here we re-inforce an important practice:

Pitfall 9.4.4

Tuning hyper parameters or other procedures on the entire data first and
then partition/resampling the data for evaluation can produce overly
optimistic predictivity estimates.

Best Practice 9.4.8

Tune the parameters of an algorithm separately on each fold/resample.

Example 8.4.1 [Parameter tuning and bootstrap Estimsation]

To perform bootstrap estimation with B iterations, we proceed as
follows. For each of the B iterations, we create a replica data set by
resampling the analytic data set. The replica is then partitioned into a
training and validation set. Models with various parameters are
constructed on the training set and the optimal (for this iteration)
parameter setting is selected using the validation set. A model is than
constructed using the entire replica and the parameter setting we just
selected. The performance of this model is then assessed using the
out-of-bag data as usual, yielding one of the B performance estimates.
At the end, the B performance estimates are summarized (e.g. arithmetic
mean, weighted mean, confidence interval, etc). Note that the parameter
settings do not necessarily coincide across the B iterations.

Example 8.4.2 [Parameter tuning and ten-fold cross validation]

The discovery sample is divided into 10 partitions. The estimation will
proceed in 10 iterations. In the ith iteration, the ith partition will
serve as test data and the remaining 9 partitions as development data.
The development data is partitioned into training and test sets. Models
with various parameter settings are built on the training set and the
optimal (for this fold) setting is selected using the validation data
(not to be confused with the test data – the test data (ith partition)
is set aside and is not touched!). Then a model is constructed on the
entire development data (9 partitions) with the parameter setting we
just selected and predictions are made for the test data (ith
partition). At the end, the predictions are evaluated. Note that the 10
parameter settings across the ten folds can be different.

A complete protocol for model selection is provided in chapter “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” and strategies to avoid overfitting
in chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence
and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning
and AI”.

Final Model

Model evaluation estimates the performance of a model construction
procedure rather than the performance of a specific model.

Consider for instance the k-fold cross validation. At the end of the
process, we have constructed k models. Similarly, a bootstrap estimation
with B iterations produces B models. Clearly, the performance estimate
we obtain is not the performance of any one of these models; it is the
expected performance of a model following the same model construction
procedure.

Best Practice 9.4.9

After error estimation has been accomplished and an optimal
hyperparameter value assignment has been identified, the final model has
to be built on the entire data set, with the same hyperparameter values,
and without conducting further internal error estimation.

Even if you are using an estimator such as leave-out validation, which
produces a model on the training set and evaluates this model on a
validation set, as the final model, construct a new model on the entire
discovery sample. The model constructed only on the training set
utilized fewer observations and is thus less stable and possibly more
biased than a model built on the entire discovery sample.

External Validation

The purpose of external validation is to ensure that a model derived
from a discovery sample generalizes to the target population, or more
precisely, to a different setting than that of the discovery sample.

Based on the changes in the setting, we distinguish between different
kinds of external validations [2].

Temporal validation. The data for the population to which we apply the
model is collected using a different time frame. As the standard of care
changes, the validity (or at the least the predictive performance) of
the model can vary. More recent patients, who are subject to the most
recent standard of care, can be more indicative of the future
performance of the model than earlier patients.

Temporal validation is performed by designating a particular time frame
for training and a different time frame for validation.

A special case of temporal validation is pseudo-prospective evaluation.
This is a leave-out validation, where patients with the most recent data
are left out for validation and the model is constructed on the data of
earlier patients.

Geographic validation. A model can be evaluated in a different
geographic location than the one it was developed in. This can take two
major forms. The first one is essentially an external validation of a
model, where an existing model is evaluated at a new geographic
location, for example, to determine whether the model can be applied to
patients at this new location. The second one is multi-site development
of a model. In this case, the discovery sample spans multiple geographic
locations and the goal is to construct a model that works well at all
geographic locations. Performance estimation in this context can take
the form of a leave-one-site out cross-validation, where performance
estimation is performed iteratively, in each iteration, leaving one site
out and constructing the model on the remaining sites.

Spectrum validation. The model is validated on patients whose disease is
more (or less) severe than those in the discovery sample. Such a
validation is useful, for example, when (say) an ICU model is applied to
patients “on the floor” (non-ICU wards).

Methodological validation. This is akin to sensitivity analysis. The
model is applied to patients, whose data was collected and processed
differently than the data of the discovery sample. This can be useful
when we aim to ensure that a model developed on registry data is valid
when applied to patient data from the EHR. It is reasonable to assume
that the registry data is curated, and as a result, is more complete and
is of higher quality.

Best Practice 9.4.10

If the sample size allows, pseudo-prospective (temporal) validation is
recommended in addition to the internal validation and other planned
external validations.

Best Practice 9.4.11

If the model was developed using public data, registry data, or other
external data, always make sure that it is valid on the target
population.

We conclude this chapter with the important observation that model
performance is dependent on the evaluation metric. For example, for
metric 1, model 1 > model 2; for metric 2 the reverse can be true. We
discuss real life examples in multiple chapters of the book.

Key Messages and Concepts Discussed in Chapter “Evaluation”

The purpose of evaluating a clinical model is to ensure that a model has
sufficient performance, is valid in the target population (and any other
population of interest), and is capable of achieving the clinical
objectives at a cost that is acceptable to the health system.

Confusion matrix (contingency tables) and related measures

Weighted confusion matrix, misclassification costs

ROC, Lorenz curves

Multiclass classification. One-vs-one, One-vs-All

Measures of predictive model performance for continuous outcomes.

Measures of predictive model performance for time-to-event outcomes.

Calibration. Calibration-in-the-large, weak, moderate and strong
calibration.

Hosmer-Lemeshow test.

Measures of clinical effectiveness.

Net benefit and decision curve.

Health economic evaluation.

The goal of performance estimation is to infer the performance of a
model in the target population based the discovery sample.

Performance /error estimator.

Internal validation

Holdout, Cross-validation, Repeated Cross-validation, Bootstrap, Bias
corrected bootstrap

Combining imputation and hyperparameter tuning with error/performance
estimation

External validation

Best Practices in Chapter “Evaluation”

Best Practice 9.1.1. Use evaluation metrics appropriate for the outcome
type.

Best Practice 9.1.2. Multiple metrics are needed to cover different
aspects of model performance. Use sets of measures that provide
complementary information.

Best Practice 9.1.3. Common complementary pairs of classifier
performance evaluation metrics include: (1) precision/recall; (2)
specificity/sensitivity; (3) bias/discrimination.

Best Practice 9.1.4. The ROC is much more commonly used than the Lorenz
curve and is more familiar to many readers.

Best Practice 9.1.5. Consider showing the Lorenz curve (possibly in
combination with the ROC) when low-risk patients are of particular
interest.

Best Practice 9.1.6 All of these measures are appropriate for Gaussian
data.

Best Practice 9.1.7 MSE is more sensitive to outliers than MAD.

Best Practice 9.1.8. When evaluating predictive model with continuous
outcomes that are heteroscedastic, consider using a residual that
normalizes the expected variance (such as the Pearson residual for
counts) or at least for the predicted value.

Best Practice 9.1.9. When the relationship between the predicted and
actual values is not linear, consider using a rank-based measure such as
Spearman or Kendall correlation.

Best Practice 9.1.10. The most common evaluation of a time-to-event
model is Harell’s C statistic (survival concordance).

Best Practice 9.1.11 Time-dependent predictions can be summarized into a
single value as (1) survival probability at the end of the study, (2)
survival probability at the median survival time, (3) or survival
probability at some clinically relevant time.

Best Practice 9.1.12 If an ROC is desired, time-to-event prediction can
be converted into classification outcomes at a specific (clinically
relevant) time point using the C/D strategy to plot the ROC.

Best Practice 9.2.1. For case/control designs, use OR.

Best Practice 9.2.2. Absolute and relative risk measures provide
complementary information, so whenever possible, both should be
reported.

Best Practice 9.2.3. ARR and NNT convey the same information and differ
in interpretation. ARR is dimensionless, while NNT is measured in number
of patients and is preferred in clinical practice.

Best Practice 9.3.1. Include all alternative interventions in a health
economic evaluation.

Best Practice 9.3.2. Include the opportunity cost as cost of
intervention/program in a health economic evaluation.

Best Practice 9.3.3 Do not use intermediate end-points unless they are
very strongly linked to the outcome of interest.

Best Practice 9.4.1. Consider the sampling unit carefully.

Best Practice 9.4.2. A typical leave-out validation size is 30% of the
sample.

Best Practice 9.4.3. For cross validation a typically number of folds is
10 in moderate sample size and 5 in large sample sizes.

Best Practice 9.4.4. When using the bootstrap estimator select a number
of repetitions that is sufficient for the problem based on related
literature. Reported minimum repetitions generally range from 100 to
>500.

Best Practice 9.4.5. When using the bootstrap, estimate the bias and
correct for it unless it is negligible. If the bias is unknown or cannot
be corrected, then a different estimator must be used.

Best Practice 9.4.6. Use the least computationally expensive estimator
that yields small enough bias and variance in the problem at hand.

For very small sample size: consider as first choice Leave One Out Cross
Validation (LOOCV).

For small sample size, using a less-flexible classifier, the 0.632
bootstrap can offer the best performance but it can be biased [28].

For medium sample sizes repeated balanced ten-fold cross validation.

For large samples sizes: holdout or five-fold Cross Validation or
corrected bootstrap.

Best Practice 9.4.7. Applying data imputation procedures on train data
and using the imputation model on the test data (in cross validation
estimators):

1.  (a)

    Ensures that bias is avoided.

     

2.  (b)

    Mimics practical implementation of the final model (which has to be
    eventually deployed without the benefit of seeing a large number of
    the application population).

     

Best Practice 9.4.8. Tune the parameters of an algorithm separately on
each fold/resample.

Best Practice 9.4.9. After error estimation has been accomplished and an
optimal hyperparameters value assignment have been identified, the final
model has to be built on the entire data set, with the same hyper
parameter values, and without conducting further internal error
estimation.

Best Practice 9.4.10. If the sample size allows, pseudo-prospective
(temporal) validation is recommended in addition to the internal
validation and other planned external validations.

Best Practice 9.4.11. If your model was developed using public data,
registry data, or other external data, always make sure that it is valid
on the target institution’s internal data.

Pitfalls Discussed in Chapter “Evaluation”

Pitfall 9.1.1. Don’t use mathematically related measures together. They
do not provide additional information.

Pitfall 9.1.2. Accuracy is very sensitive to the prevalence of actual
positives and negatives.

Pitfall 9.1.3 Lorenz curves depend on the prevalence of the disease;
ROCs do not.

Pitfall 9.1.4 Pearson residual is sensitive to small predictive values.

Pitfall 9.1.5. When the outcome is not homoscedastic, some ranges of the
outcome value (larger values) can dominate the evaluation.

Pitfall 9.1.6. R² is designed to measure the linear correlation between
the predicted and actual values. When this is not linear, R² is
inappropriate.

Pitfall 9.1.7 When a model produces time-dependent predictions, these
need to be summarized into a single value before the C statistic can be
computed.

Pitfall 9.1.10. Flexible calibration curves depend on the smoothing
applied to the curve.

Pitfall 9.2.1. In case/control studies, measures of effectiveness that
depend on the prior of classes, are misleading when the balance of cases
to controls in the samples differs from the balance in the target
population.

Pitfall 9.2.2. The range of NTT has a “hole”. This makes significance
testing and constructing confidence intervals difficult.

Pitfall 9.2.3 Even models with reasonable AUC can underperform a default
policy of “Treat All”.

Pitfall 9.4.1. Do not use the plug-in estimator. Its estimate is always
optimistic, sometimes excessively so.

Pitfall 8.4.2. If 70% of the discovery sample is insufficient training
data, you need to consider other performance estimators (such
bootstrapping or cross-validation).

Pitfall 9.4.3. Imputation on all data may bias the estimation of
classifier errors (even if the imputation is blind to the outcome).

Pitfall 9.4.4 Tuning hyper parameters or other procedures on the entire
data first and then partition/resampling the data for evaluation can
produce overly optimistic predictivity estimates.

Classroom Questions, Chapter “Evaluation”

1.  1.

    Does a model with higher performance always have better clinical
    impact?

     

2.  2.

    A classifier recognizes the color of traffic lights: red, amber,
    green. How would you report the performance of this classifier? What
    metrics would you use?

     

3.  3.

    We discussed that there are two kinds of measures: those based on
    residuals and those that describe how the predicted value co-varies
    with the outcome.
    1.  (a)

        Consider the log likelihood for a regression problem. Which
        group does it fall into?

         

    2.  (b)

        Consider the log likelihood for a classification problem. Why
        would you put (or not put) the log likelihood into these two
        groups?

         

     

4.  4.

    For models that maximize a likelihood (or minimize a negative log
    likelihood), it is common to use a likelihood-based information
    criterion (e.g. BIC, AIC) for model selection. What is the advantage
    or disadvantage of using these criteria instead of direct measures
    of predictive performance? What if the model is not a predictive
    model (e.g. a clustering)?

     

5.  5.

    What is the key issue in evaluating a time-to-event model? If there
    is no censoring, can you use binary classification measures to
    evaluate a time-to-event model?

     

6.  6.

    The decision curve has p (the threshold for positive classification)
    on its horizontal axis. If a classifier produces labels (as opposed
    to a score), can the decision curve still be useful? What
    information can it provide? (Hint: think of the relationship between
    p and w.)

     

7.  7.

    How does the net benefit change if I use a positive classification
    threshold p that is different from w/(1 + w)?

     

8.  8.

    Can a classifier with AUC 0.9 have an unfavorable ICER?

     

9.  9.

    When can a really expensive clinical test have favorable (low) ICER?
    1.  (a)

        The answer has to be verifiable through cost effectiveness
        analysis.

         

    2.  (b)

        The answer has to be verifiable through cost utility analysis.

         

     

10. 10.

    Cost Benefit Analysis compares policies in terms of monetary
    benefits taking costs into account. Expressing health benefit as
    monetary benefit is very controversial. Can you think of a
    healthcare scenario, where this is inevitable?

     

11. 11.

    If you are a healthcare administrator and you are debating between
    spending resources on a diet program to reduce obesity versus a new
    cancer treatment, what kind of a health economic analysis are you
    conducting?

     

12. 12.

    The calibration model for binary outcomes is a logistic regression
    model. Derive the calibration model for count outcome. Hint: how is
    the poisson model linearized?

     

13. 13.

    Suppose you are a hospital administrator. If you are going to build
    a model for use in your hospital, you should fully optimize your
    model for your population and the performance of the resulting model
    on other populations is irrelevant.

    1.  (a)

        Is this statement true?

         

    2.  (b)

        Suppose your model has an AUC of 0.85 on your population. If you
        find that this model achieves an AUC of 0.75 on a similar
        population, what do you do? Can you ignore it?

         

    3.  (c)

        Can you derive a benefit from training the model jointly on your
        and the other population and then updating it to better fit your
        own population?

         

    - What if the two populations only differ in a couple of variables?

    - What if most of the difference is due to the analyst’s definition
      of a disease?

    - What if the two population only differ in the prevalence of the
      disease? (Would that impact the AUC?)

     

14. 14.

    If your accessible population is the same as your target population,
    can external validation offer any benefit? (Hint: External
    validation is not limited to validation at other hospitals.)

     

15. 15.

    When you build your final model, you use the entire discovery
    sample. Let us focus on the bootstrap estimator. One reason for
    building a final model is that the bootstrap estimation process
    yields many models, one from each iteration. However, these models
    are all built on a replica of the discovery sample (has the same
    number of observations), so why can’t we just simply select one of
    the models and use that as the final model? What if we select that
    model at random? What if we select the best model?

     

16. 16.

    Examples 8.4.1 and 8.4.2 describe parameter tuning for bootstrapping
    and cross validation. In essence, we use leave-out validation on the
    model development data set to estimate the performance of the model
    for each parameter value. Is this the best approach if you have
    small data size? How could you use a more sample-efficient
    estimation method, such as cross-validation (instead of leave out
    validation) to tune the parameters? (Hint: the name of this approach
    is “nested cross-validation”.)

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References^([19])

1.  1.

    Park SY, Park JE, Kim H, Park SH. Review of statistical methods for
    evaluating the performance of survival or other time-to-event
    prediction models (from conventional to deep learning approaches).
    Korean J Radiol. 2021;22(10):1697–707. [also says that 63% of the
    papers used Harrell’s C.]
    https://www.kjronline.org/pdf/10.3348/kjr.2021.0223.Crossref

2.  2.

    Steyerberg EW. Clinical prediction models. A practical approach to
    development, validation and updating. 2nd ed. Cham: Springer;
    2019.Crossref

3.  3.

    Pepe MS. The statistical evaluation of medical test for
    classification and prediction. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
    2003.Crossref

4.  4.

    Rodriguez JD, Perez A, Lozano JA. Sensitivity analysis of k-fold
    cross validation in prediction error estimation. IEEE Trans Pattern
    Anal Mach Intell. 2009;32(3):569–75.Crossref

5.  5.

    Steyerberg EW. Lorenz curve (chapter 15.2.6). In: Clinical
    prediction models. A practical approach to development, validation
    and updating. 2nd ed. Springer. Cham; 2019.Crossref

6.  6.

    Davis J. and Goadrich M. The relationship between precision-recall
    and ROC curves., International Conference on Machine Learning,
    2006.Crossref

7.  7.

    Bex T, Comprehensive guide to multiclass classification metrics.
    Medium, 2021.
    https://​towardsdatascien​ce.​com/​comprehensive-guide-on-multiclass-classification-metrics-af94cfb83fbd.

8.  8.

    Delgado R, Tibau X-A. Why Cohen’s kappa should be avoided as
    performance measure in classification. PLoS One.
    2019;14(9):e0222916.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journal.​pone.​0222916.Crossref

9.  9.

    Tan P-N, Steinbach M, Karpatne A, Kumar V. Introduction to data
    mining. Pearson; 2018. ISBN:0133128903.

10. 10.

    Biecek P, Burzykowski T. Exploratory model analysis. 2020.
    https://​ema.​drwhy.​ai/​modelPerformance​.​html.

11. 11.

    Evaluating Survival Models. Scikit-survival 0.17.2 User Manual.
    https://​scikit-survival.​readthedocs.​io/​en/​stable/​user_​guide/​evaluating-survival-models.​html.

12. 12.

    Hanpu Z. Predictive Evaluation Metrics in Survival Analysis. R
    vignette. 2021.
    https://​cran.​r-project.​org/​web/​packages/​SurvMetrics/​vignettes/​SurvMetrics-vignette.​html.

13. 13.

    Rahman MS, Ambler G, Choodari-Oskooei B, Omar RZ. Review and
    evaluation of performance measures for survival prediction models in
    external validation settings. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2017;17:60.
    [Uno’s C]
    https://​www.​ncbi.​nlm.​nih.​gov/​pmc/​articles/​PMC5395888/​.Crossref

14. 14.

    Heagerty PJ, Zheng Y. Survival model predictive accuracy and ROC
    curves. Biometrics. 2005;61(1):92–105.Crossref

15. 15.

    Calster BV, McLernon DJ, van Smeden M, Wynants L, Steyerberg EW.
    Calibration: the Achilles heel of predictive analytics. BMC Med,
    2019;17(230) [Strong, moderate, weak and at-large calibration]
    https://​bmcmedicine.​biomedcentral.​com/​articles/​10.​1186/​s12916-019-1466-7.:17.

16. 16.

    Austin PC, Steyerberg EW. The Integrated Calibration Index (ICI) and
    related metrics for quantifying the calibration of logistic
    regression models. Stat Med. 2019;28(21) [Integrated Calibration
    Index (ICI), Harrell’s E (Emax, E50, E90)]:4051–65.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​sim.​8281.Crossref

17. 17.

    Schechtman E. Odds ratio, relative risk, absolute risk reduction,
    and the number needed to treat—which of these should we use? Value
    Health. 2002;5(5):431–6.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1046/​J.​1524-4733.​2002.​55150.​x.Crossref

18. 18.

    Hutton JL. Number needed to treat and number needed to harm are not
    the best way to report and assess the results of randomised clinical
    trials. British J of Hematol. 2009;146:27–30.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1365-2141.​2009.​07707.​x.Crossref

19. 19.

    BMJ evidence based medicine toolkit. How to calculate risk?
    https://​bestpractice.​bmj.​com/​info/​us/​toolkit/​learn-ebm/​how-to-calculate-risk/​.
    [Defines all these measures (except OR) without much fluff.]

20. 20.

    Szumilas M. Explaining odds ratios. J Can Acad Child Adolesc
    Psychiatry. 2010;19(3):227–9.
    https://​www.​ncbi.​nlm.​nih.​gov/​pmc/​articles/​PMC2938757/​.

21. 21.

    Drummond MF, Sculpher MJ, Claxton K, Stoddart GL, Torrance GW.
    Method for the economic evaluation of health care Programmes. 4th
    ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2019.

22. 22.

    Winterhoff B, et al. Developing a clinico-molecular test for
    individualized treatment of ovarian cancer: the interplay of
    precision medicine informatics with clinical and health economics
    dimensions. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2018;2018:1093–102.

23. 23.

    Barnett JC, Alvarez Secord A, Cohn DE, Leath CA, Myers ER,
    Havrilesky LJ. Cost effectiveness of alternative strategies for
    incorporating bevacizumab into the primary treatment of ovarian
    cancer. Cancer. 2013;119(20):3653–61.Crossref

24. 24.

    Saris-Baglama RN, Dewey CJ, Chisholm GB, et al. QualityMetric health
    outcomes^(™) scoring software 4.0. Lincoln, RI: QualityMetric
    Incorporated; 2010. p. 138.

25. 25.

    Braga-Neto UM, Dougherty ER. Is cross-validation valid for
    small-sample microarray classification? Bioinformatics.
    2004;20(3):374–80.Crossref

26. 26.

    Efron B. Estimating the error rate of a prediction rule: improvement
    on cross-validation. J Am Stat Assoc. 1983;78(382):316–31.Crossref

27. 27.

    Efron B, Tibshirani R. Improvements on cross-validation: the 632+
    bootstrap method. J Am Stat Assoc. 1997;92(438):548–60.

28. 28.

    Kim JH. Estimating classification error rate: repeated
    cross-validation, repeated hold-out and bootstrap. Comput Stat Data
    Anal. 2009;53(11):3735–45.Crossref

29. 29.

    Bengio Y, Grandvalet Y. No unbiased estimator of the variance of
    k-fold cross-validation. Adv Neural Inf Proces Syst. 2003:16.

30. 30.

    Burman P. A comparative study of ordinary cross-validation, v-fold
    cross-validation and the repeated learning-testing methods.
    Biometrika. 1989;76(3):503–14.Crossref

31. 31.

    Vickers AJ, Calster BV, Steyerberg EW. A step-by-step guide to
    interpreting decision curve analysis. Diagn Progn Res. 2019;3:18.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s41512-019-0064-7.Crossref

Footnotes

1

 

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_10

Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and AI

Constantin Aliferis¹   and Gyorgy Simon¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

Avoiding over and under fitted analyses (OF, UF) and models is critical
for ensuring as high generalization performance as possible and is of
profound importance for the success of ML/AI modeling. In modern ML/AI
practice OF/UF are typically interacting with error estimator procedures
and model selection, as well as with sampling and reporting biases and
thus need be considered together in context. The more general situations
of over confidence (OC) about models and/or under-performing (UP) models
can occur in many subtle and not so subtle ways especially in the
presence of high-dimensional data, modest or small sample sizes,
powerful learners and imperfect data designs. Because over/under
confidence about models are closely related to model complexity, model
selection, error estimation and sampling (as part of data design) we
connect these concepts with the material of chapters “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare
and Health Science,” “Data Design,” and “Evaluation”. These concepts are
also closely related to statistical significance and scientific
reproducibility. We examine several common scenarios where over
confidence in model performance and/or model under performance occur as
well as detailed practices for preventing, testing and correcting them.

The Critical Importance of Over Fitting and Under Fitting

As important over and underfitting are, they are commonly hard to grasp
by non-technical users of ML/AI models and systems, not because their
basic definitions are hard to comprehend and recall, but because they
tend to be created or to manifest in subtle ways and often can be hard
to detect before they create significant errors at the time of model
application or testing on human subjects. There are also significant and
pervasive misconceptions about OF and UF, stemming from earlier stages
in the science of ML/AI which we will clarify.

We first present a few classical and pedagogical examples of OF and UF
before proceeding with more precise definitions and systematic ways to
address them.

Introductory (Pedagogical) Example 1: Who Is the Teacher?

Consider the following thought experiment involving a university course
on ML/AI taught by the two lead authors of the present book. The
students are tasked with creating a computable rule (i.e. a decision
model that can run in a computer) that can classify individuals in the
classroom as belonging to either of 2 classes: (a) students, (b)
teachers. Numerous variables have been captured including the
structural, behavioral and other characteristics of all individuals
involved. Some of them are shown in the table below:

  Name            Wears suit and tie   Degrees   Presents material to the class   Has beard   Has accent   Wears glasses   Gender   Hands out assignments   Judo black belt   Listed in U catalogue as course instructtor   TRUE STATUS (response variable)
  --------------- -------------------- --------- -------------------------------- ----------- ------------ --------------- -------- ----------------------- ----------------- --------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------
  Simon           No                   PhD       Yes                              No          Yes          No              M        Yes                     Yes               Yes                                           Teacher
  Aliferis        Some-times           MD, PhD   Yes                              Yes         Yes          Yes             M        Yes                     No                Yes                                           Teacher
  Smith           No                   BSc       Yes                              No          No           No              F        No                      No                No                                            Student
  Zheng           No                   RN        Yes                              No          Yes          Yes             F        No                      No                No                                            Student
  Singh           Yes                  PharmD    Yes                              Yes         No           Yes             M        No                      No                No                                            Student
  LaFleur         No                   BSc       Yes                              No          No           Yes             M        No                      No                No                                            Student
  Bickman         No                   MD        Yes                              No          No           No              F        No                      No                No                                            Student
  Papado-poulos   No                   BSc       Yes                              Yes         Yes          No              M        No                      No                No                                            Student
  Chang           No                   MD, MS    Yes                              No          No           Yes             F        No                      No                Yes                                           Guest lecturer
  Jones           No                   PhD       Yes                              No          No           No              NB       Yes                     No                No                                            TA
  Schwartz        No                   BSc       No                               No          No           Yes             F        No                      No                No                                            Auditing student

In this thought experiment there is a number of models that would
classify correctly the participants in the class with respect to whether
they belong in the teacher or learner class. Some examples of perfectly
accurate models to identify teachers are: 

- Model 1: hands out assignments and has accent

- Model 2: has PhD and is male

- Model 3: wears suit & tie sometimes OR has judo black belt

- Model 4: name ends in “on” or starts with “a”

The more variables we measure, the more such accurate models we can
construct. Such models can achieve 100% accuracy in this class, however
they obviously do not generalize well to other similar ML/AI classes
across many other universities. We say that these models are overfitted.

Consider now the following examples:

- Model 6: Has beard and wears glasses

- Model 7: Has accent

- Model 8: Has beard or a judo black belt

These models can achieve modest/poor accuracy in this class, however
they may generalize to similar (low) accuracy to other similar ML/AI
classes across the many universities and alternative models exist with
better generalizable accuracy. We say that these models are underfitted.

Finally consider the following examples:

Model 9: person is listed in the university catalogue as instructor for
the course and hands out assignments.

This model can achieve 100% accuracy in this class and will generalize
to similar extent to other ML/AI classes across the many universities.
We say that such models are neither under nor overfitted.

The intuitions gained are that with datasets with a large enough number
of variables, it is easy enough to come up with models that are very
accurate in the train (discovery) data but that will fail to generalize
to the general population. Also that performance in the training data is
a poor indicator of performance in the population.

Introductory Example 2: Over and Undertraining ANNs

Figure 1 shows a classical experiment in training ANNs [1]. As the
number of weight update iterations increases, the model learns the
training data really well and its generalization performance also
increases (i.e., error decreases). There is however a “breaking point”
(or inflection point) where more training does increase accuracy in the
training data but decreases generalization performance.

[]

A line chart illustrates model error over training iterations, with
population error following a parabolic pattern, training data error
decreasing, and underfitting and overfitting trends.

The models to the left of the optimal point are underfitted and to the
right are overfitted.

The intuition gained is that there is a level of model “fit” that is
ideal for this data and anything above or below that point will lead to
worse generalization performance. Performance in the training data
remains a poor indicator of performance in the population, however.

Introductory Example 3: Rich Simon’s OF Demonstration for Genomics-Driven Discovery

In bioinformatics where dimensionalities are typically very high and
sample sizes small, OF is a particularly important danger. Simon at al
published the following empirical demonstration showcasing that
depending on how gene selection and model error estimation are
conducted, there are different degrees of biasing the estimates of model
generalization error [2].

[]

A block diagram with three branches rain and G S, Test, and Train and G
S. Different validation methods like Biased resubstitution and Fully or
Partially cross-validated are represented.

Simon et al. generated models using feature (gene) selection
(GS) procedures in data constructed so that there is no predictive
signal. They examined 3 protocols for combining the same feature
selection and classification algorithms:

Protocol 1 “Biased resubstitution” is when the gene selection takes
place on all data and the error estimation also takes place on all data.

Protocol 2 “Full cross validation” is when feature selection is done on
a training portion of the data, model is fitted in the training portion
and error is estimated in a separate testing portion.

Protocol 3 “Partial cross-validation” conducts feature selection on all
data, then models are built in a training portion and model error is
estimated in a separate testing portion.

Unbiased error estimation should indicate that a model fit in such data
should have no signal, that is perform as well as random coin flipping.
Indeed the “fully cross validated” protocol 2 (which we referred to as
nested cross validation chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle
of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML
Models”) is indeed unbiased. No cross validation (protocol 1) has large
bias that can reach estimates of perfect classification if enough
variables are used. Partial cross validation has in this analysis
setting intermediate bias, smaller than nested cross validation and
lower than no cross validation.

The intuitions gained are that we can produce highly biased error
estimates if our protocols are not set up properly to avoid bias,
especially in high dimensional data. Also the same algorithms for
classification, feature selection etc. can lead to dramatically
different quality of results depending of how they are arranged in
modeling protocols.

Introductory Example 4: Simple and Complex Surfaces

A classic demonstration of under and overfitting of a regression
function of a continuous outcome Y given a continuous input X is given
in Fig. 2. We see both training data (blue circles) and unsampled
population data (white circles). As shown the complex model (wiggly
line) fits the training data perfectly but fails in the population
(future) data. A simpler model (straight line) does much worse in the
training data, but better in the future data [3].

[]

Two line graphs illustrate predictor X against the outcome of interest
Y. One depicts a good fit, one overfitting, and one underfitting. A line
curve has an increasing trendline with training data and future data are
scattered around the curves.

In Fig. 2 above, the better model is one that is more complicated than
the straight line and less complicated than the complex wiggly one.

The intuition gained is that over/under-fitting are directly related to
the complexity of the decision surface and how well the training data is
fit. Successful data analysis methods balance training data fit with
complexity since: too complex model (to fit training data well) leads to
overfitting (i.e., model does not generalize) whereas: too simplistic
models (to avoid overfitting) lead to underfitting (will generalize but
the fit to both the training and future data will be low and predictive
performance small).

Definitions of OF and UF; the Broader Pitfalls of Overconfidence and of Under-Performing Models. Bias-Variance Error Decomposition View

- Training data error of a model M is the error of M on the training
  data used to derive M.

- True generalization error of a model M is the error of M on the
  population or distribution, from which training data used to derive M,
  were sampled from.

- Estimated generalization error of a model M is the estimated error
  (via an error estimator procedure applied on data samples) of M on the
  population or distribution from which training data used to derive M
  were sampled from.

In controlled conditions, for example in simulation experiments, the
true generalization error of any model can be known. Typically the true
generalization error is unknown when dealing in non-trivial real-world
problems, not constructed in the lab, however.

Typically (i.e., unless training sample is enormous), model training
data error used to estimate true generalization error leads to
downward-biased (unduly optimistic) estimates of generalization error.

Overfitting a model to data is creating a model that (a) accurately
represents the training data, but (b) fails to generalize well to new
data sampled from the same distribution (because some of the learned
patterns in the training data are not representative of the population).

Alternatively, an overfitted model is often defined as a model that is
more complex than the ideal model for the data and problem at hand.

Finally some authors define overfitting as learning “noise” in the data,
that is learning idiosyncrasies of the training data that are not
present in the population [1].

Similarly, the notion of OF applies at the method, modeling protocol and
system level whereby an overfitting ML/AI method, modeling system, or
modeling protocol/data science stack have a propensity to overfit models
to the data [4, 5].

An overfitting ML/AI method, system, stack, or protocol is one with
thepropensity to generate models that overfit.

Conversely:

- Underfitting a model to data is creating a model that represents the
  training data sub- optimally and also fails to perform well in the
  general population. More broadly, an under fitted model will have true
  generalization error that is larger than the true generalization error
  of the best possible model that can be fit with the data in hand.

- An underfitting ML/AI method, system, stack, or protocol is one with
  the propensity to generate models that underfit.

A model M cannot be both over and under fitted: the model, either
describes the training data well and generalizes worse, or it is
describes the training data poorly and also generalizes poorly, or
finally, it is ideally fitted and describes both the training and
population data as well as possible. From a complexity perspective, a
model is either more or less or equally complex than ideal for the data
and problem at hand. We will now delve deeper into these concepts using
BVDE (i.e., bias-variance decomposition of a model’s error).

Bias-variance decomposition perspective on OF and UF. As detailed in
chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, the BVDE
describes that a model’s error is (excluding of course measurement noise
and inherent stochasticity in the data generating function) a
combination of two error components: (a) a “bias” component and (b) a
“variance” component. Everything else being equal, a highly biased model
is less complex, while a lower bias one is more complex than ideal.
Small sample size corresponds to higher variance, while larger sample
size, leads to smaller variance error component. For a fixed sample size
and data generating function, there is an optimal model complexity
leading to smallest model error possible. Model complexity above this
ideal level corresponds to over-fitted models, while smaller complexity
corresponds to under-fitted models. Moreover, as a model is increasingly
overfitted because of increasing model complexity, the fit of the
training data will improve and thus the error on the training data will
decrease while the true model generalization error in the population
will increase.

We further point out a fundamental asymmetry between UF and OF:
empirical proof of OF of a model M1 can be obtained by showing that the
true generalization error of M1 is higher than what is expected by the
performance in training data.

However empirical proof of UF of a model M1 requires showing that there
is at least one other model M2 that has better true generalization error
than M1. M2 does not need be the optimal model attainable. M1 will also
have larger generalization error than the optimal model Mopt.

In other words UF is a relative property with respect to some optimal
model (or other higher-performing models) achievable under the
circumstances and not an intrinsic property of a model under
examination. Therefore establishing or preventing UF is harder and more
open-ended than establishing or preventing OF.

Whereas at face value establishing that a model is OF and/or UF requires
calculating its true generalization error, in practice we can circumvent
this (a priori formidable) difficulty by application of unbiased and
efficient estimators of true generalization error (see chapters “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” and “Evaluation”). It is also
possible to apply statistical theory to infer that a model’s estimated
generalization error is not accurate or to infer with high confidence
from small-sample estimates that true generalization errors E1 and E2 of
models M1 and M2 are not the same (see details in section “How ML/AI
Model OC is Generated in Common Practice” below).

We now address two concepts of broader significance:

- Over confidence in a model (OC) occurs when the analyst’s estimated
  generalization (population) error of the model is smaller than the
  true generalization error.

- Under confidence in a model (UC) occurs when the analysts’ estimated
  generalization error of the model is higher than the true
  generalization error.

- Over performance of a model (OP) (relative to a lower estimated
  performance expectation) occurs when the estimated population error of
  the model is smaller than the true population error. It is thus
  obvious that Under confidence in a model = Over performance of the
  same model.

- Under performance of a model (UP) occurs when the true population
  error of the model is lower than the best possible model, or other
  better performing models (that can be estimated from same sample size,
  on average). We can also talk about under performance relative to a
  high performance goal set during the model development planning stages
  (chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and
  Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”).

Under confidence in a model (or equivalently over performance of a
model) is not considered in practice a serious concern, however it
entails opportunity costs that may be significant. For example, it may
trigger expensive and time consuming but unnecessary additional modeling
efforts, and may deprive productive use of the model (in healthcare or
health science discovery) in the meanwhile.

Under fitting is a special case error of under-performance relative to
the best/better models that could be produced under the circumstances
specifically due to lower than ideal model complexity and so that the
lower performance is reflected both in the training data and in the
population.

Over fitting may or may not be a case of over-confidence in the models
produced (and over- interpretation of the modeling results). For
example, overfitting is a special case of overconfidence when the (low)
error in the training data is misinterpreted as an indicator of the
(higher) generalization error. If however, we overfit a model to the
training data but use an unbiased error estimator, then we will not have
either over or under confidence in this over fitted model.

The major (high-level) pitfalls that the present chapter addresses is:

Pitfall 10.1

Producing models in which we have over-confidence.

Pitfall 10.2

Producing models that under perform.

With corresponding high-level best practices:

Best Practice 10.1

Deploy procedures that prevent, diagnose and remedy errors of
overconfidence in, or overfitting of models.

Best Practice 10.2

Deploy procedures that prevent, diagnose and remedy errors of model
underperformance or underfitting.

Before embarking into specific situations where OC occurs, and
corresponding remedies, we introduce fundamental general principles
spanning statistics and ML that underlie these phenomena. These have
value for understanding and developing general approaches to prevent OC
and UP.

Fundamental ML Insights About the Three Sources of Overconfidence (OC), Under Performance (UP) and their Relationship to OF and UF: Biased Data Design, Biased Error Estimation, Poor Model Selection

1.  (a)

    As discussed, OF in one of its classic definitions occurs when the
    (low) error in the training data is misinterpreted as an indicator
    of the (higher) generalization error. This creates a seriously
    dangerous OC about the model in question. Similarly, if UF means
    failing to model the training data correctly in both training data
    and the population and such error is readily available to calculate,
    why do we ever under fit models?

    The answer related to real-life practice is that circa 2023 no
    professional practitioner of ML uses raw training data error to
    estimate generalization error. To the extent that even sophisticated
    but biased error estimators are used, the problems of OF and UF can
    still occur. Fundamental insight: as we explained previously, there
    is an ideal complexity for a model for which, per BVDE,
    generalization error is minimized. Unfortunately this complexity is
    rarely known a priori, hence we typically use empirical data
    analysis procedures to find the right complexity. These procedures
    are in practice a combination of search over a space of possible
    models (i.e., model selection) combined with an error estimation
    procedure used to evaluate the merit candidate models examined. If
    the error estimator is downward-biased (optimistic) and/or the model
    selection is incomplete, then it is in practice possible to find
    models that appear as better (=more promising) than they are by
    themselves (hence OF) or compared to alternative models (hence UF).
    In either case we encounter OC and/or UP problems.

     

2.  (b)

    Insight: Another way to view OC due to OF is that of learning
    “statistical noise”, or stated differently, over fitting by learning
    idiosyncratic characteristics or complex patterns of the data
    sample(s) that are by definition not representative of the
    population. Even when the error estimation procedures are not naïve
    (e.g. use of training data error to estimate population
    generalization error), the total sample itself (comprising both
    training and validation datasets) is not representative. This is an
    instance of the error due to high variance per the BVDE.

     

3.  (c)

    Insight: alternatively, learning such idiosyncratic characteristics
    may be the result of actively selecting (as opposed to randomly
    sampling) training data or because of poor data design such that the
    training data is not representative of the targeted population and
    application goals (non- random sampling or more generally mismatch
    of the available population with the target population as explained
    in the chapter on data design).

    These situations (i.e., poor sampling methods, poor error
    estimators) can lead to generalization error estimates that are too
    optimistic (biased downward) and learning spurious patterns
    translating into error in future application of the model that are
    not present in the training data.

     

4.  (d)

    Insight: with regards to UP, poor choice of training data can lead
    to UP, and the same holds true for error estimator biases. In
    addition, poor data design and model selection deficiencies can
    create UP.

     

To summarize, from a ML lens, OC and UP originate in 3 different
stages/aspects of ML modeling, and their combination:

1.  1.

    OC/UP created due to data design, primarily sampling, so that the
    models and generalization error estimates lead to OC or UP.

     

2.  2.

    OC/UP created due to error estimation so that the models’
    generalization error estimates lead to OC or UP.

     

3.  3.

    OC/UP created due to poor choice of model, that is the choice of
    model family, model fitting algorithm, model selection procedure
    etc., are such that models with OC/UP characteristics ensue.

     

Additional Insights Spanning ML and Statistics as they Relate to OC and UP: Reproducibility, Cross Validation, Nesting and Biased Post-hoc Reporting

1.  (a)

    Insight: reproducibility suggests generalizability; operationalizing
    reproducibility via independent data validation. A commonly-followed
    principle of biomedical science is that credible results (e.g., in
    our context, models that have small generalizable error) have to
    successfully reproduce, that is, models must have same performance
    in data independent of the data used to discover these results.

    We emphasize that as widely accepted this principle may be, its
    merits are not immutable but hold under assumptions. For example, in
    a classical statistical context, if we wish to verify that a
    statistical association found in data D1 reproduces in data D2,
    everything else being equal, sufficiently high power (type II error
    probability, of false negative results) and sufficiently low alpha
    (type I error probability, of false positive results) must be in
    place if we wish to conclude with high certainty that a reproducible
    result is a true one. Similarly, if we wish to verify that a model
    built from data D1 and having estimated generalizable error in the
    population of E1, by applying on data D2 with estimated error
    E2 = E1, then D1 and D2 must be sampled randomly from the same
    population and have high enough sample size so that comparison of E1
    and E2 is sufficiently powered at low alpha levels.

    Without these assumptions holding, an application of the principle
    of reproducibility may generate both false positive and false
    negative validation of original results.

    The way we typically operationalize this principle of validity via
    reproducibility, is by well-designed independent data set
    validation, and very commonly, holdout or cross validation varieties
    (although many other variants exist, the general principles still
    apply).

     

2.  (b)

    Insight: single dataset independent (holdout) validation is an
    unbiased estimator and protects against p-hacking and HARKing. We
    can use data D1 for fitting a model M1 and then apply it on
    independent data D2 and compare generalizable error estimates. This
    is mathematically equivalent to randomly splitting the original data
    into a training (TR) dataset and the rest used for validation or
    testing (TE) dataset. This is the “holdout estimator” [3] and the
    error measurement in TE is an unbiased generalizable error estimate.

    Application of the holdout estimator protects against so-called
    HARKing which stands for “Hypothesis testing After Results are
    Known” [6]. This is because the effective alpha of a null hypothesis
    rejected by both discovery (TR) and validation (TR) datasets is:
    (nominal alpha employed in TR * nominal alpha employed in TE). The
    total expected false positives in the discovery dataset TR will be
    (nominal alpha in TR * number of hypotheses tested). This is the
    alpha of using just one dataset. The total expected false positives
    of original discovery followed by independent validation will be
    (nominal alpha in TR * nominal alpha employed in TE * number of
    hypotheses tested). In other words the independent data testing
    reduces false positives by alpha (which is a very small number,
    typically never to exceed 5%).

    For our purposes of modeling with ML/AI, the “hypotheses” in
    question are typically one or more model(s) for which we test
    whether its estimated error meets or exceeds a performance
    threshold.

    If more than one validation datasets are used in sequential steps of
    independent validation, the probability of false findings drops
    exponentially fast to the number of validations. The effective alpha
    of being selected in both TR and (k-1) TE datasets is alpha^(k)
    which is a very small probability. For example, if alpha = 0.05 then
    the effective alpha of reproduced null hypothesis rejection in two
    independent datasets sequentially is 0.000125. In other words, when
    more than one validation datasets/steps are used, the probability of
    false findings drops exponentially fast to the number of
    validations. These same principles apply to ML/AI models whose
    validity we want to test.

     

3.  (c)

    Insight: multi-split data validation (NCV) is also unbiased and less
    susceptible to sampling variation. Because the split of the original
    data into TR and TE is subject to random sampling variation and some
    splits will not be such that both TR and TE are representative of
    the population (even though TR + TE may be) we often use n-fold
    cross validation (NFCV) which is also a (in practical terms)
    unbiased estimator and less susceptible to bad random splits
    (see chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical
    Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”).
    NFCV and its cousin, the repeated NFCV (RNFCV) approximates the
    less-variant but computationally very expensive (and almost never
    used in practice) all splits cross validation where all splits are
    employed and averaged over.

     

4.  (d)

    Insight: NCV and NFCV can still be biased via information
    contamination unless nesting is employed. Any procedure that
    transfers information about TE to TR can “contaminate” the
    unbiasedness of the CV estimator and lead to bias. Recall the
    seminal paper of Rich Simon et al. discussed earlier in this
    chapter, where they showed that feature selection can contaminate
    (i.e. bias) CV-derived error estimates if it is conducted in all
    (TR + TE) data and that when it is conducted separately in TR and
    TE, such contamination does not happen. Here is how this
    contamination takes place: by conducting e.g., feature selection on
    all data (using a univariate association filtering procedure in this
    case), we generate false positive features that happen to appear
    significant in this (TR + TE) dataset. Then we fit models with these
    false positives in TR. The model works well in TE because the
    features are specifically selected to work well in all data (i.e.,
    TR + TE). However the model will not work in the population because
    the features used in it include false positives (in Simon et al.
    experiment they were all false positives because the data was
    constructed to be devoid of predictive signal). In other words, the
    chosen features were within the false positive expectation of the
    feature selection procedure and thus by definition will not
    generalize in the population).

    Compare the above scenario with conducting feature selection
    separately in TR and in TE. The false positives of TR will not
    generalize to TE (because the effective probability of such random
    success is alpha² instead of alpha (see “Fundamental ML Insights
    about the Three Sources of over Confidence (OC), under Performance
    (UP) and their relationship to OF and UF: Biased Data Design, Biased
    Error Estimation, Poor Model Selection”, be hence very small, and
    thus no strong feature selection bias will manifest. With 10,000
    irrelevant features at nominal alpha = 0.05 we will obtain 50 false
    positives features that will lead to biased error estimation. With
    separate discovery (TR) and validation (TE) stages we will obtain 50
    false positive features from TR but only 2.5 (on average) of them
    will survive the statistical testing in TE. As it turns out 2.5
    random features do not have enough capacity to overfit a random
    distribution of a random outcome conditioned on 10,000 variables and
    thus the CV error estimate with independent feature selection is
    unbiased.

    Important notes:
    - The exact same type of bias can happen for any data pre-processing
      or analysis step including: data normalization, data imputation,
      any type of feature construction or transformation, and in general
      any other data input to a model that is created by processing the
      full data because these operations encode information about the
      data distribution that modeling algorithms can detect (hence
      biasing error estimates because of information transference about
      TE to TR).

    - CV contamination bias does not need to be linked to a supervised
      analysis step, that is linking the data processing to the values
      of the response variable we wish to model. Even access to the
      joint distribution of inputs in TE (i.e., without reference to the
      response variable’s values in TE) or to any subset of variables in
      TE may lead to models that have biased CV error estimates. For
      example, we may construct biased models and error estimates using
      Principal Component Analysis of the data, a procedure that is
      usually -but falsely- considered “failsafe” from over fitting (see
      assignment 12).

    - Whereas CV contamination may create biased models/error estimates
      under the above circumstances, whether it will happen and the
      degree of bias greatly depends on the safety measures employed by
      the unit-level (i.e., component) data procedures. For example, if
      in the classical Simon et al. experiment the feature selection is
      tightly controlled for family-wise errors, the bias will be
      eliminated (see assignment 1 and later chapter “Lessons Learned
      from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of Health
      AI/ML. Enduring Problems and the Role of Best Practices””). This
      implies that we can seek to avoid contamination altogether via two
      general approaches: one is by application of component procedures
      that anticipate and avoid contamination bias, or by employing
      non-contaminating protocols, of which nested CV is the
      paradigmatic example. We can (and often do) also deploy both
      measures in combination (see assignment 9).

     

5.  (e)

    Insight: CV nesting decouples TE from TR data and eliminates
    possibility for CV contamination bias. Recall form chapter “The
    Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety
    and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” that nested CV is CV where
    we split TR and TE sets as in usual CV and then split further the TR
    sets into TRTR (“traintrain”) and TRTE (traintest”) subsets (i.e.,
    applying an embedded “inner” loop of CV inside the TR data of the
    “outer” CV loop). In addition, all data processing (prior to
    modeling) happens separately in every TRTE dataset. Because this
    procedure separates data and conducts data pre-processing operations
    locally inside TR and subsets of it, there is no information
    transfer (aka contamination) about the modeling from TE to TR.
    Consequently, the CV contamination bias is eliminated. For a trace
    of how nested cross validation operates, and high level pseudo code
    the reader is referred to chapter “The Development Process and
    Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
    Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”. For development of the repeated
    nested balanced n-fold cross validation procedure by extending the
    hold out estimator and model selection see [3].

     

6.  (f)

    Insight: Holdout and NCV can also be biased via selective or
    post-hoc reporting. Both nesting and full protocol specification
    prevent this bias. In the context of real-life model development it
    is still possible to introduce bias in HO (holdout) and CV if we
    employ selective and post-hoc reporting. This type of problem occurs
    when many models are generated and the better ones are reported
    selectively. When this is a conscious decision by the creators of
    models, it amounts to a fraudulent representation of their
    procedures and results. As we will see, selective reporting may
    occur without ill intent, however, when the analysis plans and
    protocols are not well-controlled and not well-designed to avoid OC.

     

7.  (g)

    Insight: We can detect bias in biased modeling protocols if they are
    accurately and thoroughly described using special tests (described
    later in the present chapter). It is not possible to diagnose that a
    modeling protocol is biased if it is not thoroughly or accurately
    described.

     

Equipped with the general principles leading to OC and UP we will next
delve into more details of producing OC/UP models. We will also enrich
the discussion with pitfalls and corresponding BPs to avoid OC/UP.

The reader is reminded that the specific pitfalls and best practices
discussed here are strongly connected and provide additional technical
depth and operational (micro) guidance to the overall (macro and meso)
strategies and best practices of chapters “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems” (methods
development and validation) and “The Development Process and Lifecycle
of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML
Models” (model development and lifecycle).

How ML/AI Model OC Is Generated in Common Practice

Models Are Allowed to Have Inappropriately Large Complexity with Respect to Data Generating Function Complexity and to Available Sample Size

How do we measure model complexity? In older literature (and even today
in some cases) this situation, and overfitting more broadly, was
misconstrued as having too many parameters in the model (with respect to
the available sample size, and the fixed complexity of the data
generating function). With newer methods, the number of parameters does
not matter as long as any number of available protective methods are
used to reduce the effective model parameters and more generally the
complexity of the fitted models, all within an appropriate family of
learners (i.e., functions that match the form of the data generating
function) [3, 4].

The distinction between original parameters and effective parameters can
be made clear using the example of SVMs [3]. In this model family the
effective parameters (the support vectors, in other words these data
points defining the boundaries of each label class) cannot exceed the
sample size. Thus we may have for example 1,000,000 variables and sample
size n = 1000 which automatically restricts the number of effective
parameters to at most 1000 (a 3-order of magnitude reduction over the
initial data dimensionality in this example). It is also instructive
that SVM mathematical bounds on generalization error do not depend on
original data dimensionality but on the support vectors [4].

We have mentioned repeatedly so far that in general the complexity of
the model (the effective dimensionality of which is a major factor) must
be balanced against the complexity of the data generating function and
the sample size. In some more detail: (a) For a fixed complexity data
generating function, and a fixed sample size there is an optimal model
complexity that leads to the model with the best true generalization
error. Similarly, (b) for a fixed complexity data generating function,
and a fixed model complexity, there is a minimum sufficient sample size
that leads to the model with the true generalization error that is
within an acceptable distance delta from the optimal error achievable.
This follows from the “Bias-variance decomposition of error” discussed
earlier.

Ignoring Statistical Uncertainty

Observing that a model has an acceptable point estimate performance does
not guarantee generalizable performance since this estimate may be
subject to large variation due to small sample size. The 95% (or higher)
confidence interval (CI) of the estimate and/or the 95% credible
interval (CrI) must also be taken into account in order to establish
that the performance estimate will generalize [7, 8].

- X% Confidence Interval (CI) of a point estimate P of the performance
  of model M developed from a fixed sample of size n: the range of
  values containing X% of all point estimates when sampling multiple
  times, developing a new model for each sample and estimating its
  generalization error (or other performance metric), when the true
  value of developing a model from this population is P.

- X% Credible Interval (CrI) of a point estimate P of the performance of
  model M developed from sample of size n: the range containing with
  probability X% the true value of the generalization error (or other
  performance metric) of M applied to the population.

- The CrI may be viewed—in Bayesian terms—as equivalent in meaning to
  the credible region of the posterior probability density function of
  the model error in the population containing X% of the total density
  function symmetrically around the point estimate, given the data and
  prior knowledge. In practice however, the CrI can and is often
  estimated empirically with various procedures.

A subtler way to fall victim to small sample-induced statistical
variability is when the error estimator used has high variance that is
not taken into account, or when among various unbiased estimators a high
variance one is used instead of the lowest variance one. For example,
both the holdout estimator and the n-fold cross validation (NFCV)
estimator are unbiased/near-unbiased (respectively) however the holdout
has higher variance than the NFCV [3, 9]. This is why over-reliance on
“independent study verification: often (and falsely) treated by journals
and others as a “gold standard” is a pitfall that needs to be avoided.

Using Biased Estimators or Introducing Bias in Unbiased Ones

When the procedure for estimating generalization error is not unbiased,
or when the unbiasedness is compromised by implementation decisions, the
estimates will be upward or downward biased. Omitting correction of this
bias or applying an inappropriate correction leading to a downward error
estimate leads to overconfidence. At least two common situations lead to
such OC in practice:

1.  (a)

    The first case stems from using uncorrected or poorly corrected
    bootstrapping which is a biased estimator because it employs
    resampling with replacement [10]. The classifier model is produced
    by the learning procedures who see unnatural replicates of the same
    true cases in the data and thus may appear to perform better than in
    real life where such replicates do not exist (e.g., in omics data
    where the combination of high dimensional data inputs are unique for
    each subject, yet in bootstrapping based analyses they are viewed
    repeatedly as if they were naturally occurring in the population).

     

2.  (b)

    The second case occurs in temporal data analyses where there is a
    progressive distribution shift overt time. If the application of an
    unbiased estimator such as cross validation does not take into
    account time-dependent distribution changes, then a temporal bias
    will be introduced into a nominally unbiased estimation procedure
    (see chapter “Data Design”).

     

Uncorrected Multiple Statistical Hypotheses Tests, “Data Dredging”, “Fishing Expeditions”

The problem of multiple uncorrected statistical hypotheses manifests
when a researcher (or a ML/AI discovery procedure) conducts not just one
but many tests of statistical hypotheses and does not address the
combined effective false positive rate error across the totality of all
tests conducted. For example, consider an algorithm (or researcher, the
exact same principles apply) that conducts a test of association between
variables Vi and Vj in a data sample S. Such tests can be intermediate
steps of more complex algorithms, or be used to compare and evaluate
models.

Assume that for the observed level of association, the data sample size
and the desired type II error (i.e., probability to reject the null
hypothesis when it does not hold, i.e., the “power” of the test), the
type I error (i.e., the probability to generate a false positive
rejection under the null hypothesis) may be quite small, often set at
the level of at most 5%. Now if the researchers or ML/AI algorithm
conducts for example 1000 such tests, it will produce 1000*0.05 = 50
false positive results. Epidemiologists describe the problematic
practice of generating such false positives as “data dredging” or
“fishing expeditions” [11].

However these terms falsely imply to some non-technical audiences, the
wrong idea that whenever a discovery algorithm conducts massive amounts
of statistical tests for “unbiased” or “hypothesis free” discovery,
there will be unavoidable massive numbers of false positives. This is
not true, however, as these multiple testing can be corrected with many
powerful and practical ways as we will show in section “Preventing,
Detecting, and Managing UF/UP”.

The problem of uncorrected multiple hypothesis testing can also manifest
when we produce a number of models, the estimates of generalizable error
of which have considerable variance due to small sample size (as
explained before), and we falsely conclude that one or more have
desirable performance because of uncorrected multiple testing of the
significance or the performance estimates.

Note that so far it should be clear that the notion of OC is not
confined to model building and ML/AI, but is more general since it
encapsulates broader notions of producing generalizable knowledge from
small sample data, and is also related to classical statistical
considerations of reliable estimation and inference.

Selective Reporting of Results, “Filedrawer Bias”, “Publication Bias”

Imagine a modeler that aims to build an outcome classifier model for
outcome Ox on the basis of data inputs V. He proceeds as follows: he
develops 100 models by using a variety of techniques and estimates the
generalization error for each model. Then he reports the model with the
best error estimate but does not report that this was selected out of
100 models. This setup will invariably lead to over fitted/OC model
reporting as evidenced by the following simple demonstration: imagine
that none of these models has error better than flipping a coin (i.e.,
by chance, e.g. 50% accuracy for a binary outcome in a distribution with
prior probability of positives equal to 50%). However if the 99% CI of
estimated error for (e.g., sample size = 50 the sample size used is
[0.3, 0.68], then we expect that half of the models will show
accuracy >50% and some will be higher than 65%.

The data scientist of this hypothetical experiment may also apply a
calculation of 95% CI of a model that performs at accuracy 68% in this
sample size level ([0.53, 0.80]) and may conduct a statistical test
showing that the produced “best” model is statistically significantly
better than random chance (at 5% alpha). All of this string of errors
and over-interpretations is undetectable by statistical tests or by
reviewers unless they know the precise selection protocol employed.

“Analysis Creep” and Uncontrolled Iterative Modeling

A milder, all-too-common and often well-intentioned version of the file
drawer bias pitfall occurs in the form of non-rigorous iterative
analysis, which is sometimes refered to as bias due to “analysis creep”.
We illustrate by extending the previous hypothetical scenario:

Consider the data scientist of section “Selective Reporting of Results,
‘Filedrawer Bias’, ‘Publication Bias’” who this time builds the outcome
classifiers with careful cross validation where the data modeling
decisions are fixed in the training data and error estimation takes
place in the testing data portions of the cross validation. Assume that
estimated error is 20%. The PI of the scientific project (or project
manager of a commercial product based on the model) reviews the results
and suggests trying out an additional classifier algorithm. The data
scientist does so (repeating the same modeling protocol but with the new
classifier) and produces a new model with error 17%. An external
consultant reviews the results and suggests specific data transforms and
feature construction which lead (by application of same analysis
protocol on the same data) to a model with error 14%. In yet another
“improvement” step a new hire in the data science team decides to
explore some recalibration method that leads to a model with estimated
10% error. And so forth, until the final model appears to be a
near-perfect one.

The problem with this scenario is that no measures are taken to isolate
the introduction of new methods from the statistical variation of error
estimation so that the final model’s error estimates are not over fitted
to the specific train-test configuration used.

An especially challenging aspect of the “analysis creep” problem that
makes it invisible to even the most rigorous scientists who are not
experts in data science, is that each step may be well designed and
perfectly appropriate as a 1-step analysis, but when a series of such
steps is executed, then over fitting and over confidence take place.

Choice of a Few and Non-representative Datasets; Unusual Populations; Broad Claims From Too Few or Too Easy Datasets

Just like non-rigorous (intentionally, or not) selection of models can
create over fitted models and over interpreted results, the same is true
for datasets.

- This problem is particularly common in ML/AI method development where
  the developers of methods often choose themselves the datasets to test
  their methods. It is entirely possible that developers may choose to
  report performance of their methods in data that is “friendly” to the
  methods, and to omit reporting (or event testing) performance on
  harder datasets.

- This situation is also common in ML and data science competitions that
  pit dozens or hundreds of methods against one another over one or a
  small number of datasets such that the results are typically
  overly-specific to the small choice of datasets (as well to the
  specific data design and performance metrics used).

- A related problem arises in applied discovery settings where multiple
  data sets exist and only a subset is used for development and testing.

The above scenarios create a lack of generalizability problem where
certain methods or models perform well in some highly selected data or
populations and therefore fail to generalize beyond those (chapters
“Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI
Methods and Systems” and “Lessons Learned from Historical Failures,
Limitations and Successes of AI/ML in Healthcare and the Health
Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of BPs” give more details in
the context of limitations of competitions).

Many Teams, Same Data, No Coordinated Unbiased Protocol

Yet another version of the “analysis creep” and uncontrolled iterative
or parallel modeling pitfalls occurs when (typically) in cooperative
consortia or other large scale collaborative efforts, several teams are
working on analyzing the same data with different algorithms, analysis
protocols, error estimators etc.

In the absence of a coordinated unbiased model selection and error
estimation protocol that applies to all analyst teams, the statistical
variation of even good modeling methods with same large-sample
performance can lead to large apparent differences in performance in the
discovery data that do not generalize to the population. The problem can
be further compounded when the various teams employ learning algorithms,
model selection and error estimation methods with widely different
characteristics where the selected model overall can simultaneously
suffer from under-performance and over-confidence in it (see chapter
“Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of
AI/ML in Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the
Role of Best Practices” for findings from a major centralized benchmark
study revealing related problems).

Hard-to-Reproduce, Non-Standardized Data Input Steps

In some types of clinical as well in discovery data modeling the data
inputs may be subjectively assessed and these assessments may have a low
degree of reliability across different individuals or settings. If this
aspect has not been incorporated in the model performance estimation
(e.g., a single observer is responsible for all subjective assessments
in both training and test data) then inflated performance estimates are
produced.

Examples of this pitfall exist in a variety of settings, for example in
assessment by surgeons of operation aspects, in pathologist evaluation
of slides for less-than ideally standardized features, skin lesion
assessments, proteomic spectra peak determinations, etc.

Normalization/Data Transforms that Require Entirety of Sample

In some modeling settings data needs to be processed (e.g., via
normalization, discretization or other operations) by looking across the
totality of data, that is including train and test data. This
automatically creates the previously-discussed “contamination” of the
error estimates of the test set by the train set weakening their
independence and creating a bias in the error estimates.

Moreover from a purely practical viewpoint, the application of these
models on new data not used in the model development/evaluation cycle is
problematic because it requires re-normalization (or re-processing) of
all data starting from early model development to the latest
application.

Learners Learn the Wrong Patterns via Spurious Co-Occurrence

A classical example from epidemiology, involving causality, is the
“yellow finger” which when is due to tar-staining from smoking, predicts
several diseases resulting from smoking (e.g., lung and cardiovascular
diseases, cancer). However the classifiers in these cases cannot
discover that eliminating the yellow stains does not alter the disease
risk. That requires eliminating the confounding cause (smoking) and thus
such purely predictive findings/models do not generalize when
interventions are considered.

Selective Control of Factors that Can Lead to OC

Recall that R. Simon et al. showed the role of feature selection for
error estimation bias in high dimensional disease classification in
“complete”, “partial” and “no” cross validation. Every single analysis
step and parameter (not just feature selection) that affects the
performance of models and the error estimators has to be controlled
accordingly. This includes hyperparameters, model families,
normalization discretization, imputation etc.

OF and OC Problems in Patient-Specific Modeling

In recent years efforts have been made to develop models specifically
tailored to individual patients. These are commonly based on time series
data obtained from each individual and they may have predictive or
causal foci [12, 13].

The advantages of such modeling is that (1) they-- may avoid masking and
distribution-mix effects of population data and (2) may be able to focus
more effectively on mechanisms and characteristics of individuals for
precision and personalized medicine. Possible disadvantages are that
they (3) may require dense time series data, (4) they may fail to
leverage vast amounts of data from other individuals that apply to all
individuals in the population, (5) by their very nature they cannot
model severe and irrevocable, or rare or singular outcomes (e.g.,
death), (6) do not deal well with abrupt distribution shifts of the
individual (whereas same shifts may be learnable at the population level
and anticipated by population models) and (7) do not provide guarantees
for generalizing to other individuals.

Characteristics (6) and (7) are therefore related to possible over
fitting and over confidence.

Bespoke and Hand-Created AI Models

In certain types of AI modeling, most commonly in mathematical and
engineering-based modeling that may incorporate limited data-driven
aspects and is not fully automated as in ML, the ability to generate
large numbers of models by the same individuals and over short periods
of time is severely limited. This precludes the collection of large
numbers of models and datasets in which the success of such models can
be rigorously statistically evaluated. It is entirely possible under
these circumstances for a few models to be performing well in some task
yet the overall model building process is neither salable nor
demonstrably generalizable. Creation of a handful of successful models
by hand and evaluation on a handful of cases, for example a hand-crafted
model to predict the safety of a drug in a specific RCT, may say very
little about whether this model would apply to other RCTs and even less
about whether the modeling methodology could be carried out by other
modelers or for other drugs.

How UP ML/AI Models Are Commonly Created

Not Considering the Right Method Family, Not Considering Enough Method Families in Model Selection

- A common reason for under performant models is not exploring the right
  model family in model selection. For example, when the data generating
  function is non-linear and discontinuous but we explore only linear
  regression models. When the right family is not known a priori the
  corresponding problem is not exploring enough method families in model
  selection.

- The above are common occurrences when data scientists have strong
  preference for a small number or narrow methods, or when vendors focus
  on a specific technology that is used across diverse tasks even when
  it is not the most appropriate for the task.

Insufficient Data Preparation

This pitfall applies to all steps typically used for data preparation
such as feature construction and selection, normalization,
discretization, distribution transforms, etc. Such steps can greatly
enhance model performance when employed correctly or hurt performance
when they are ignored or conducted sub optimally.

Insufficient Model Selection Hyper Parameter Space

This pitfall occurs when the right model families are explored but
without sufficient exploration of their hyper parameter values.

1-Step Modeling Attempts

In chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and
Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” we elaborated on
the importance of initial modeling which typically must subsequently be
refined and enhanced (since the first attempt seldomly meets performance
goals in complicated modeling problems). A 1-stage analysis procedure
does not benefit from a graduated understanding of the data and task at
hand and their interaction with the modeling method deployed.

Ignoring Best Known Methods

In some cases for specific domains and tasks prior theoretical and
empirical work has established the predominance or superiority of
specific classes of methods. It is therefore likely to under perform if
these methods are not included in the model selection, at a minimum as
“starting points” with baseline performance that other methods must
match or exceed. See chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems” for proper scope of
empirically evaluating new methods and for appraising existing methods.

Ignoring Official or Reference Specifications on Methods Use

A commonly-encountered pitfall is applying strong methods but in ways
that are inconsistent with suggested use. These suggested uses include:
(a) the ways these methods have been previously tested during reference
method development and in validation phases leading to established
strong results; (b) the specific ways the inventors of these methods
have used them in the primary (“official”) publications associated with
them. Chapter “Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and
Successes of AI/ML In Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring
Problems, and the Role of Best Practices” describes case studies where
such bias led to suboptimal performance.

UP Problems in Models for Individual Patients

As explained previously in “OF and OC Problems in Patient-Specific
Modeling”, individual-specific modeling has a priori both advantages and
disadvantages over population-wide modeling. Characteristics (3), (4),
(5), (6) and (7) are linked to possible under performance of such models
relative to population based models.

Failing to Obtain Power Sample Analysis and More Generally to Control Effects of Sample Size on Modeling

In the absence of a power-sample analysis or knowledge of learning
curves, the modeler does not know whether better results can be obtained
by increasing the sample size, or what is the minimum sample size needed
to reach the stated goals of the modeling.

In ML the power-sample calculation problem is more complicated than
traditional statistical power-sample analysis. This is because in
inferential statistics we need to know what is the required sample size
to reject a null hypothesis with a desired alpha and power, and closed
formulas exist that describe this relationship for applicable
statistical tests. In ML however, in addition to the need to test a
model’s performance against a null hypothesis, we first need to find a
good model. Thus the power-sample calculation is further complicated by
the learning protocol’s learning curve that is the function that
describes the generalization error of the best model learned (on
average) as a function of sample size. Depending on the problem,
learning curves may suggest that we need more or less sample size than
the one needed to reject a null hypothesis centered on the model’s
performance. To make things worse, learning curves are not known a
priori for the vast majority of practical problems.

Based on the above we can summarize on the pitfalls related to OC and UP
including OF and UF.

Pitfall 10.1

Producing models in which we have over-confidence

10.1.1. Models are allowed to have inappropriately large complexity with
respect to data generating function complexity and to available sample
size.

10.1.2. Ignoring statistical uncertainty of strong point estimates of
perfromance.

10.1.3. Using biased estimators or introducing bias in unbiased ones.

10.1.4. Not correcting multiple statistical hypotheses tests.

10.1.5. Selectively reporting strongest models/results.

10.1.6. Conducting uncontrolled iterative modeling and succumbing to
“analysis creep”.

10.1.7. Using non-representative datasets, unusual populations, and
making strong claims from too few or too easy datasets.

10.2.8. Not coordinating analysis over many teams and same data via
appropriate unbiased protocols designed for collaborative work or
competitions.

10.1.9. Using hard-to-reproduce, non-standardized data input steps.

10.1.10. Employing normalization/data transforms that require entirety
of sample.

10.1.11. Allowing learners to learn the wrong patterns via spurious
co-occurrence; uncontrolled structural relations and biased sampling;
and ignoring domain knowledge that reveals the above.

10.1.12. Controlling only some of the factors that can lead to OC.

10.1.13. Inappropriate modelling for individual patients and over
interpretation of their generalizability.

10.1.14. Insufficient studies of scalability and generalizability in
bespoke hand-created AI models.

Pitfall 10.2

Producing models that are under performing

10.2.1. Not deploying the right model family in model selection; not
exploring enough method families in model selection.

10.2.2. Insufficient data preparation.

10.2.3. Insufficient exploration of the hyper parameter space during
model selection.

10.2.4. 1-stage modeling attempts.

10.2.5. Ignoring best known methods for task and data at hand (either as
baseline comparators or starting point).

10.2.5. Ignoring official specifications and prototypical (reference)
use of employed methods.

10.2.6. Models for individual patients: lack of dense time series data,
failure to leverage population models that apply to the specific
individual (including ignoring or under modeling severe and irrevocable
rare or singular outcomes), not addressing well abrupt distribution
shifts of the individual (whereas same shifts may be learnable at the
population level).

10.2.8. Failing to obtain power sample analysis and more generally
control effects of sample size on modeling.

Preventing, Detecting, and Managing OC and OF

We now address specific best practices for preventing overfitted models
and over confidence in models.

Manage Model Complexity with Respect to Data Generating Function Complexity and to Available Sample Size

Whereas manually balancing complexity against sample size is a
formidable hurdle, well-designed modern ML methods, protocols, and
systems encapsulate multiple methods that achieve this balance
automatically or semi-automatically:

1.  1.

    Regularization: is a methodology whereas model parameters’ values
    are driven to zero by model fitting algorithms, as much as data
    allows. Regularization is broadly used by “penalty+loss” learners
    (see chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML
    Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”) for example
    SVMs, Lasso regression, regularized classical statistical variants
    such as regularized Cox regression, regularized Logistic regression,
    regularized Discriminant Function analysis, etc. The “loss” term is
    a mathematical expression of how accurately a model represents
    training data, whereas the “penalty” term captures the combined
    complexity of the model (e.g., sum of squared weights of inputs).
    Regularization is sometimes closely related to the notion of
    function smoothness, that is the preference for modeling functions
    in which the impact of a small change in the data generating
    function inputs leads to small changes to the classification output
    (this is mathematically equivalent to the “maximum margin
    classifier” inductive bias of SVMs).

     

2.  2.

    Dimensionality reduction: is a set of methods that map the original
    input variables to a much smaller number of mathematical
    combinations (see chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
    Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and
    Health Science”). A prototypical example is Principal Component
    Analysis (and variants) where the original input variables are
    replaced by independent linear combination functions (the principal
    components, such that the totality of data variance is captured by
    the totality of the principal components). The fitted models use as
    inputs the reduced input representation or a subset thereof.

     

3.  3.

    Feature selection: (see chapters “Foundations and Properties of
    AI/ML Systems” and “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of
    Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”) is a
    set of methods that select a small number from the original
    variables such that ideally all information about the response
    variable is retained and all redundant variables are discarded.
    Strong feature selection helps reduce model complexity to the
    absolute necessary (i.e., only those features that have
    indispensable information about the response).

     

4.  4.

    Bayesian Priors and Bayesian ensembles: in Bayesian maximum a
    posteriori model selection-based modeling, prior probabilities over
    the model space considered can be used to ensure that models with
    appropriate (smaller) complexity are given more attention in smaller
    sample sizes and as sample size grows more complex models can be
    selected. Moreover, via Bayesian Model Averaging, many (all in
    theory, but just a few in practice in most practical settings)
    models can be combined to provide an “ensemble” classification.
    Complex models are expected to have smaller posteriors in small
    sample sizes than simpler ones and thus to drive more the overall
    ensemble decisions whereas in larger sample sizes, the opposite is
    true.

     

5.  5.

    Algorithm-embedded complexity control: several ML algorithms have
    embedded means to control complexity of produced models. For
    example, decision tree learners prune the trees when they reach
    branching points with small sample sizes. Random forest learners
    apply feature selection at each branching point of each fitted tree
    and forbid trees larger than a set size (which is a tunable
    hyper - parameter). ANNs map large input spaces to potentially
    smaller hidden layer spaces or incorporate pruning and other
    regularization steps. SVMs transform non-linearly separable input
    spaces to linearly separable ones via kernel functions. Structured
    Risk Minimization in SVMs progressively considers classes of models
    (corresponding to kernels) of strictly increasing complexity with
    guarantees strictly monotonic improvements in generalization error.
    Boosting methods start from simpler models and extend them to
    address only the cases not classified correctly. And so on (see
    chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML
    Methods Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science”).

     

6.  6.

    Statistical model/data complexity measures: classical examples being
    the AIC and BIC metrics [7] that are used in statistics to
    characterize models with respect to their complexity and fit against
    the training data. Simpler models are preferred by the human
    analysts, everything else being equal.

     

7.  7.

    Model selection and combination approaches: it is common to create
    and apply ML/AI model fitting and selection protocols that combine
    several of the above approaches.

     

Using nested cross validation approaches to find the best models and
estimate their generalization error is a common approach that allows
model complexity to grow only as much it helps improving estimates of
the true generalization error.

Characterize and Manage Statistical Uncertainty

Typically this entails: (a) Calculating confidence and credible ntervals
for models (and of the models’ parameter values when appropriate). (b)
Testing models against the null hypothesis (commonly being that: there
is no predictive signal in the data at hand, or a network model has
properties no different than a random one, etc.). This is easily
accomplished with a standard label reshuffling or other randomization
tests (chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade
and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”). (c)
Conducting tests of model stability (when appropriate) to sample size.
(d) Obtaining measures of stability of model output or decisions with
respect to variation in the model inputs. (e) Reducing sampling variance
by choice of most powerful/low variance estimators and protocols.
Especially for n-fold cross validation schemes, repeating the
analysis >50 times empirically has been shown to reduce train-test split
variance [14].

Use Unbiased Estimators or Correct Estimation Bias

Among classical estimators and model selection protocols Repeated n-fold
cross validation (RNFCV) is a particularly robust error estimator which
can also be used for powerful model selection when nested (RNNFCV). In
larger sample sizes a repeated nested holdout may be a more
computationally efficient alternative. Finally, in very small sample
situations a repeated nested leave on out can be used as alternative to
RNNFCV [3].

We also recommend “locking” models at some predefined stage in the
modeling process and not allowing further tampering with locked models.
Publishing open-box models can certainly provide a strong form of such
locking, although it may also be employed as an internal strategy during
model development. A similar, very stringent but much less practical
best practice is preregistering ML studies and models [15].

The exclusive use of independent data testing for establishing or
testing for generalizability is commonly and often required by journals,
funding study sections etc. It is NOT recommended however as a single,
or “privileged” validation methodology in the present volume, since it
is subject to between and within-population sampling variation so that
discrepancies between the model’s performance in the discovery + testing
CV datasets and the independent validation dataset may be due to: (1)
sampling from a different population, or (2) not having perfect power in
the independent validation dataset (see section “Additional Notes on
Strategies and Best Practices for Detection, Analysis and Managing Both
OC and UP” for Details). The latter danger is especially salient in
domains where sample sizes are never very large, or are very costly,
ethically challenging, or slow to obtain. Nested CV by comparison
eliminates the first source of errors since we ensure that the discovery
and validation datasets come from the same population. See also chapter
“Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of
AI/ML in Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the
Role of Best Practices” for a striking demonstration of variability
between discovery and validation sets and results in a landmark
benchmark study where same analyses were done with original and swapped
discovery-validation sequences [16].

Correct or Control Multiple Statistical Hypotheses Tests

The venerable but outdated Bonferroni correction is not recommended
since it reduces the power of the discovery procedure
dramatically relative to more modern procedures. The Benjamini- Hochberg
(or similar) methods for correlated and uncorrelated p-values can be
used to more effectively control the acceptable ratio of false positives
(e.g., the analyst can set thresholds on p-values that does not lead to
more than 10% false positive rate on the reported results) [17].

We also note that certain algorithms, for example constrained-based
causal modeling algorithms (e.g., GLL, LGL and others) have embedded
control of false positives due to multiple statistical testing [18].

Thoroughly Specify and Report the Procedure Used to Obtain Results

The entirety of the analyses and modeling applied on data must be
reported so that the possibility for over fitting is properly assessed
by third parties. We emphasize that even if the original model
developers share their modeling algorithms and data in full, unless they
specify the analyses employed in their entirety (i.e., entirety of model
selection and error estimation steps), it is not possible to determine
whether the models are over fitted without additional verification in
independent data. On the contrary, when the entirety of the analysis
protocol is disclosed, both the final model’s over fitting and the whole
protocol’s propensity to over fit or OC can be assessed (often with a
simple label reshuffling test as demonstrated in chapter “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”).

Conduct Iterative and Sequential Modeling via Unbiased Protocols

A robust and proven such protocol is the previously mentioned RNNFCV
protocol in which every new method or parameter value added to the
previous analysis steps is incorporated in the nested model selection
along with all other methods and the whole modeling is repeated from
scratch (ideally with previous model fitting steps cached for improved
tractability). Other such protocols may be constructed, but it is
essential for the modelers to establish first their robustness to bias
due to iterative modeling. Note that when we perform model selection
over k algorithms and their associated hyper parameter value sets in
RNNFCV, the results are mathematically equivalent if we first
model-select over the first methods, then insert the second, then the
third and the winner of the first two, and so on until all methods have
been examined. This demonstrates that since doing all methods at once is
not overfitting/producing over-confident error estimates, the sequential
procedure over the same set of methods, will not either.

See assignment 8 for a practical demonstration of proper vs improper
iterative modeling.

Use Representative Datasets, Appropriate Populations and Make Generalizability Claims from Appropriate Datasets

In all modeling settings, clinical or biological criteria must be used
to establish appropriateness of data used. Rigorous phenotypic
definition and extractions from the EHR, for example, will ensure that
only and all human subjects that apply to the modeling goals are
considered for discovery and validation (see chapter on Data Design).

When new method development or validation and benchmarking are pursued,
we recommend using all publicly available datasets that apply to the
task and if they are too many, to use a randomly-stratified selection of
representative datasets (e.g., with certain distributions,
dimensionalities, sample sizes, etc.). See also chapter “Principles of
Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”.

- In situations where discovery is pursued via secondary analysis of
  many pre-existing datasets, it is very common for results to disagree
  among the various datasets. One way to address the problem is to
  “Round-Robin” analysis and examine the nature and robustness of
  results when some of the data are used for discovery and some for
  validation.

- It is often useful in such situations of multi-dataset analyses, to
  adopt a different perspective and focus not on whether model M or
  property P discovered, e.g., in datasets 1–10 holds in datasets 11–20
  but, rather, what are the variant and invariant properties (both
  predictively and structurally) across this collection of datasets and
  what is the robustness of models developed in a subset of the datasets
  on the remainder datasets (with the round-robin analysis conducted so
  that it examines or approximates all possible discovery-validation
  splits).

- Stated differently, the discrepancies between datasets (and models
  summarizing properties of these data) should not be viewed
  automatically as “errors” but also considered as potentially valuable
  indicators of systematic differences between health care systems,
  research designs, model organisms etc., depending on the data
  measurement and sampling designs used.

Coordinate Analysis over Many Teams and Same Data via Appropriate Unbiased Protocols

The recommendations of “Conduct Iterative and Sequential Modeling Via
Unbiased Protocols” apply unchanged here as well.

Use Easy-to-Reproduce, Standardized Data Input Steps

Techniques to facilitate this practice include automating all subjective
input measurements and establishing equivalence or sufficiency of their
information content. Alternatively, establishing that subjective
measurements can be standardized via protocols that ensure low
interrater variability.

Employ Normalization/Data Transforms that Do Not Require Entirety of Sample

This is self-explanatory and follows directly from the nature of
validation-to-discovery information contamination that biases CV error
estimates as explained previously.

Prevent Learners from Learning the Wrong Patterns via Spurious Co-Occurrence; Control Structural Relations and Biased Sampling; and Incorporate Domain Knowledge and Face-Validity Expert Testing that May Reveal Spurious Learning

Essential to the above are robust batch processing bias and error
detection and correction protocols such as the ones routinely used in
high-throughput omics assay-based studies. Moreover, causal modeling
algorithms can reveal spurious and confounded relations and patterns of
bias. In addition, a diversity of datasets that fully covers the space
of application of the desired models must be used for training and
validation. Finally, model explanation techniques can be valuable by
revealing exactly what the learning algorithms and corresponding models
created by those have learned especially when combined with expert
review of such models (see chapter “The Development Process and
Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive
AI/ML Models”).

These latter precautionary practices unfortunately rely on existence of
sufficient domain theory that can be used to detect anomalies in the
models. It is entirely possible (and indeed common) in certain domains
for robust such theory to be lacking, however (e.g., in high-density
omics studies, or complex mental health/human behavior and other domains
where the complex mechanisms governing the data generating
processes have not been conclusively or completely established). It is
important in such cases to non over-interpret models and to test the
propensity of human experts to construct invalid conceptual explanations
in support of models (see chapters “Principles of Rigorous Development
and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems” and “The Development
Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” for expert biases and modeling of
expert judgment). It is equally important to always consider the
possibility that models encapsulate valid new knowledge previously
unknown in the field, thus an expert’s rejection of some model or result
should be a piece of evidence in evaluating model validity and not
grounds for immediate dismissal.

Control all Factors that Can Lead to OF/OC via TE→TR Contamination, by Using Nested Model Selection

The most important way to operationalize this is to use a nested
protocol for cross validation and error estimation as previously
explained, and at the same time ensure that all possible data analysis
steps that may transmit information from the test sets to the train sets
(and thus introduce bias in the error estimation) are isolated inside
the nested part of the protocol.

Carefully Combine Modelling of Individual Patients with Population Modeling

Most importantly, any individualized modeling must be compared with
population modeling and ensemble (combined) with population models
whenever appropriate and feasible.

Do Not Over-Interpret the Generalizability of Bespoke Hand-Created AI Models Unless Sufficient Validation Data Can be Obtained to Support Such Claims

Unfortunately bespoke, hand-crafted modeling efforts typically cannot
- by their very nature - be readily evaluated by automated procedures
and data for such evaluations are scarce. It is prudent in such cases to
address modeling successes and failures as isolated incidences.

Whenever it is feasible to create automated computable procedures that
replicate the bespoke methodologies, this allows transitioning
non-scalable human modeling to scalable and testable AI/ML modeling with
obvious advantages for increasing the scale, scope, speed,
cost-effectiveness and verifiability of similar modeling in other
problem domains/settings.

Preventing, Detecting, and Managing UF/UP (Table 1)

Practices 10.5.1.–10.5.7. in Table 1 are self-explanatory and follow
directly from the principles presented earlier. The next best practice
10.5.8. require some explanation, however:

Table 1

Lists specific practices for preventing under fitted models

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  10.5.1. Deploy and explore all appropriate learning method families in model selection
  10.5.2. Deploy and explore all relevant data preparation steps to the domain and task at hand
  10.5.3. Systematically and sufficiently explore the hyper parameter space
  10.5.4. Anticipate several preliminary and refinement modeling stages and incorporate in nested designs to avoid overfitting
  10.5.5. Inform analyses by literature so that best known methods for task and data at hand are explored
  10.5.6. Follow theoretically and empirically proven specifications and prototypical (reference) use of employed methods (including the official specific ways the developers of methods have presented in the corresponding primary publications)
  10.5.7. Models for individual patients: Use dense time series data, leverage population models that apply to the specific individual (including modeling severe and irrevocable rare or singular outcomes), search for and model abrupt distribution shifts of the individual (including learning and modeling shifts at the population level)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Conduct Power Sample Analysis and More Generally Characterize the Effects of Sample Size on Modeling. Use Dynamic Sampling Schemes Whenever Appropriate

With regards to the ML/AI power-sample planning as introduced in
“Failing to Obtain Power Sample Analysis and more Generally Control
Effects of Sample Size on Modeling”, contrary to classical statistical
hypothesis testing where closed formulas exist to calculate the minimum
required sample for achieving a desired alpha (% of false positive
rejections of the null, or type I error) and beta (probability of false
negative failure to reject the null under the alternative hypothesis, or
type II error, aka power) levels for some statistical test of choice,
when designing ML/AI modeling, two additional factors come into play the
first relevant to predictive modeling, and the second related to causal
modeling:

1.  (a)

    The learning curve of the used learning algorithm. The learning
    curve describes the errors of the algorithm’s output as a function
    of sample size. Generally the learning curves are not known and
    closed formulas do not exist.

     

2.  (b)

    The causal sparsity (i.e., density or connectivity) of the causal
    process that generates the data. A sparse causal data generating
    process requires less sample size to be discovered because the
    sample size required for conditional independence tests (CITs) that
    are at the core of causal structure discovery algorithms increases
    exponentially (in unrestricted distributions) to the number of
    conditioning variables in the CIT (see chapter “Foundations of
    Causal ML”). This latter number is directly linked to the density of
    the generating causal graph. After a causal graph has been
    discovered, causal effects of interventions need be estimated and
    these estimations also require sample size that grows exponentially
    to the controlled confounders which are similarly linked to the
    density of the causal generating process.

     

Whereas classical statistical power-sample analysis can be applied once
a good model or causal structure has been identified (to reject the null
predictive model or the estimate causal effects, with high confidence)
the sample size required for the predictive model discovery or the
causal structure discovery and effect estimation are separate
considerations. Indeed it is entirely possible for the sample size
required for the former to be larger, equal or smaller than the sample
size required for the latter.

10.5.8. Best practice strategies to address these sample size and power
design needs for ML/AI model building include:

1.  1.

    Using sensitivity analysis for results over convenience samples by
    iteratively reducing available sample size (sub-sampling on a
    convenience sample). If, for example, by reducing the sample size,
    models retain their predictivity, this strengthens the empirical
    argument that the learning curve has reached convergence and
    additional sample will not increase performance.

     

2.  2.

    Use of simulations, ideally with real life data where ground truth
    models are known or re-simulation (as covered in chapter “Principles
    of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and
    Systems”).

     

3.  3.

    Use of domain knowledge (if it exists) about the nature of causal
    structure underlying the data, or the nature of predictive or causal
    functions to be learned.

     

4.  4.

    Use of network-scientific knowledge about the nature of connectivity
    of real life networks.

     

5.  5.

    Reference to prior robust results in very similar domains to
    formulate and justify assumptions about a successful analysis.

     

6.  6.

    Use of dynamic sampling schemes such as adaptive trial designs,
    Bayesian posterior updating or active learning-based sampling.

     

Additional Notes on Strategies and Best Practices for Detection, Analysis and Managing Both OC and UP

1.  (a)

    Label reshuffling tests. The label reshuffling procedure (as for
    example employed by R. Simon et al. and elaborated in chapter “The
    Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety
    and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”) retains the joint
    distribution of input variables however it decouples (on average)
    the inputs to the response variable. Thus it creates an “on average”
    null distribution from which we sample data and build models.
    - By comparing the performance of the best model we found to this
      null distribution we can test the statistical hypothesis that it
      is as good as random choice (i.e., not reject the null).

    - Additionally, by looking at the mean of this null distribution we
      can establish whether the overall analysis protocol biases the
      error estimates (under the null) and by how much.

     

2.  (b)

    Reanalysis (with both original and unbiased or otherwise improved
    protocols, including single coordinated protocols as needed). This
    is especially important when one wishes to verify the validity of
    models produced by third parties. For example, when suspicion exists
    for selective reporting of analyses, or when suspicion of under
    fitting exists. It is not possible to conduct definitive “forensic
    style” re-analyses without having access to the full range of data
    and modeling protocols used in the original analyses. We caution
    that the ability to run “black box code” on the same data and
    reproduce the exactly same results, is inappropriately presented as
    a top-tier level of confidence by some guidelines (see discussion in
    chapter “Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and
    Successes of AI/ML in Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring
    Problems, and the Role of Best Practices”), yet it does not suffice
    because depending on how the black box operates, the models and
    performance estimates may be OC, UF, or both.

     

3.  (c)

    “Safety net” model application measures for ensuring that a model is
    not applied to the wrong person or population (see chapters “The
    Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety
    and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” and “Characterizing,
    Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML and AI Models in
    Clinical and Organizational Application” for details on
    models' “knowledge cliff” and managing prediction risk).

     

1.  (d)

    Model stability considerations. Variable coefficients or very large
    variation of output given small change in input variable inputs must
    be dealt with caution as they may imply OF/OC or UP/UF. However we
    note (without going into full technical details that would require
    very substantial space to cover), that it is entirely possible for
    unstable models, markers, causal edges, coefficients etc. to be
    meaningful and reproducible because of underlying equivalence
    classes in the data.

     

- Therefore unstable findings should be examined more deeply, but not
  discarded outright.

In summary the following best practices allow managing (i.e.,
preventing, diagnosis and/or correcting) OC and UP:

Best Practice 10.1

Deploy procedures that prevent, diagnose and remedy errors of over
confidence in, or over fitting of, models.

10.1.1. Manage model complexity with respect to data generating function
complexity and to available sample size using:

1.  1.

    Regularization

     

2.  2.

    Dimensionality reduction

     

3.  3.

    Feature selection

     

4.  4.

    Bayesian Priors and Bayesian ensembles

     

5.  5.

    Algorithm-embedded capacity control

     

6.  6.

    Statistical model/data complexity measures

     

7.  7.

    Model selection

     

8.  8.

    Combination approaches

     

10.1.2. Characterize and manage statistical uncertainty.

10.1.3. Use unbiased estimators of model performance or correct bias of
biased estimates.

10.1.4. Lock models at predefined stages in the modeling process and not
allow further tampering with locked models.

10.1.5. Correct multiple statistical hypotheses tests (explicitly or
implicitly).

10.1.6. Thoroughly specify and report the entirety of procedures used to
obtain models so that independent verification of generalizability is
possible.

10.1.7. Conduct iterative or sequential modeling via unbiased protocols.

10.1.8. Use representative datasets, appropriate populations and make
generalizability claims from appropriate datasets.

10.1.9. Coordinate analysis over many teams and same data via
appropriate unbiased protocols.

10.1.10. Use reproducible, standardized data input steps.

10.1.11. Employ normalization /data transforms that do not require
entirety of sample (or confine such within discovery and validation
datasets independently).

10.1.12. Prevent learners from learning the wrong patterns via spurious
co-occurrence; control structural relations and biased sampling; and
incorporate domain knowledge-based review that reveals spurious
learning.

10.1.13. Control via nested model selection all (and not just a few)
factors that can lead to OC.

10.1.14. If possible, combine modelling of individual patients with
population modeling.

10.1.15. Do not over-interpret the generalizability of bespoke
hand-created AI models unless sufficient number of validation data
sets can be obtained to support such claims. Consider creating
computable versions of model hand-crafting modeling when possible.

10.1.16. Use label reshuffling testing for evaluating the
overfitting/overconfidence bias of the whole analysis protocol.

10.1.17. Apply with appropriate caution Independent dataset validation
and be mindful of dangers of over-interpretation of positive and
negative results.

10.1.18. Instead of pursuing strict and exact reproducibility across
datasets, study the variant and invariant findings from these datasets.

10.1.19. Whenever possible, use reanalysis (with both original and
unbiased or otherwise improved protocols, including single coordinated
protocols as needed) when verifying the validity of models produced by
third parties.

10.1.20. Use domain knowledge and related face-validity tests by experts
to flag potential model errors. The experts themselves may be prone to
biases or domain theory may not cover models’ new findings so do not
over-interpret experts’ objections.

10.1.21. Apply “safety net” measures for ensuring that a model is not
applied to the wrong person or population.

10.1.22. Examine stability of models, parameters and other findings and
examine more deeply unstable findings. Be aware that it is possible for
unstable findings and models to be perfectly valid.

Best Practice 10.2

Deploy procedures that prevent, diagnose and remedy errors of model
under-performance or underfitting.

10.5.1. To maximize predictivity, deploy and explore all relevant
learning method families in model selection.

10.5.2. To maximize predictivity and generalizability, deploy and
explore all relevant data preparation steps to the domain and task at
hand.

10.5.3. To maximize predictivity, systematically and sufficiently
explore the hyper parameter space.

10.5.4. Anticipate several preliminary and refinement modeling stages
and incorporate them into sequential nested designs to avoid
overfitting.

10.5.5. Inform analyses by methods literature so that best known methods
for task and data at hand are always explored along with novel methods.

10.5.6. Follow theoretically and empirically proven specifications of
reference prototypical or official use of employed methods.

10.5.7. In models for individual patients: use dense time series data,
leverage population models, search for and model abrupt distribution
shifts of the individual (including learning and modeling shifts at the
population level).

10.5.8. Conduct power sample analysis and more generally characterize
the effects of sample size on modeling. In the absence of knowledge of
learning curves, use:

1.  1.

    Dynamic sampling schemes whenever appropriate,

     

2.  2.

    Sensitivity analysis for results over convenience samples by
    iteratively reducing available sample size (sub-sampling on a
    convenience sample),

     

3.  3.

    Simulations,

     

4.  4.

    Domain knowledge,

     

5.  5.

    Network-scientific knowledge,

     

6.  6.

    Reference to prior robust results in very similar domains,

     

7.  7.

    Dynamic sampling schemes.

     

Key Concepts Discussed in Chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General
Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices
in Machine Learning and AI”

Training data error of a model

True generalization error of a model

Estimated generalization error of a model

Overfitting a model to data

Overfitting ML/AI method, system, stack, or protocol

Underfitting a model to data

Underfitting ML/AI method, system, stack, or protocol

Over confidence in a model

Under confidence in a model

Over performance of a model

Under performance of a model

Confidence Interval (CI) of a point estimate P of the performance of a
model

Predictive Interval (PI) of a point estimate P of the performance of a
model.

Analysis creep

Sequential, iterative and multi-team analyses

Pitfalls Discussed in Chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General
Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices
in Machine Learning and AI”

Pitfall 10.1.: Producing models in which we have over-confidence

10.1.1. Models are allowed to have inappropriately large complexity with
respect to data generating function complexity and to available sample
size.

10.1.2. Ignoring statistical uncertainty of point estimates of
performance.

10.1.3. Using biased estimators or introducing bias in unbiased ones.

10.1.4. Not correcting multiple statistical hypotheses tests.

10.1.5. Selectively reporting strongest models/results.

10.1.6. Conducting uncontrolled iterative modeling and succumbing to
“analysis creep”.

10.1.7. Using non-representative datasets, unusual populations, and
making strong claims from too few or too easy datasets.

10.1.8. Not coordinating analysis over many teams and same data via
appropriate unbiased protocols designed for collaborative work or
competitions.

10.1.9. Using hard-to-reproduce, non-standardized data input steps. 

10.1.10. Employing normalization /data transforms that require entirety
of sample.

10.1.11. Allowing learners to learn the wrong patterns via spurious
co-occurrence, uncontrolled structural relations and biased sampling;
and ignoring domain knowledge that reveals the above.

10.1.12. Controlling only some of the factors that can lead to OC.

10.1.13. Inappropriate modelling for individual patients and over
interpretation of their generalizability.

10.1.14. Insufficient studies of scalability and generalizability in
bespoke hand-created AI models.

Pitfall 10.2.: Producing models that are under performing.

10.2.1. Not deploying the right model family in model selection; not
exploring enough method families in model selection.

10.2.2. Insufficient data preparation.

10.2.3. Insufficient exploration of the hyper parameter space during
model selection.

10.2.4. 1-stage modeling.

10.2.5. Ignoring best known methods for task and data at hand (either as
baseline comparators or starting point).

10.2.5. Ignoring official specifications and prototypical (reference)
use of employed methods.

10.2.6. Models for individual patients: lack of dense time series data,
failure to leverage population models that apply to the specific
individual (including ignoring or under-modeling severe and irrevocable
rare or singular outcomes), not addressing well abrupt distribution
shifts of the individual (whereas same shifts may be learnable at the
population level).

10.2.7. Failing to obtain power sample analysis and more generally
control effects of sample size on modeling.

Best Practices Discussed in Chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and
General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best
Practices in Machine Learning and AI”

Best Practice 10.1: Deploy procedures that prevent, diagnose and remedy
errors of over confidence in, or over fitting of, models.

10.1.1. Manage model complexity with respect to data generating function
complexity and to available sample size using:

1.  1.

    Regularization,

     

2.  2.

    Dimensionality reduction,

     

3.  3.

    Feature selection,

     

4.  4.

    Bayesian Priors and Bayesian ensembles,

     

5.  5.

    Algorithm-embedded capacity control,

     

6.  6.

    Statistical model/data complexity measures,

     

7.  7.

    Model selection,

     

8.  8.

    Combination approaches.

     

10.1.2 Characterize and manage statistical uncertainty.

10.1.3. Use unbiased estimators of model performance or correct bias of
biased estimates.

10.1.4. Lock models at predefined stages in the modeling process and not
allow further tampering with locked models.

10.1.5. Correct multiple statistical hypotheses tests (explicitly or
implicitly).

10.1.6. Thoroughly specify and report the entirety of procedures used to
obtain models so that independent verification of generalizability is
possible.

10.1.7. Conduct iterative or sequential modeling via unbiased protocols.

10.1.8. Use representative datasets, appropriate populations, and make
generalizability claims from appropriate datasets.

10.1.9. Coordinate analysis over many teams and same data via
appropriate unbiased protocols.

10.1.10. Use reproducible, standardized data input steps.

10.1.11. Employ normalization /data transforms that do not require
entirety of sample (or confine such within discovery and validation
datasets independently).

10.1.12. Prevent learners from learning the wrong patterns via spurious
co-occurrence; control structural relations and biased sampling; and
incorporate domain knowledge-based review that reveals spurious
learning.

10.1.13. Control via nested model selection all (and not just a few)
factors that can lead to OC.

10.1.14. Carefully combine modelling of individual patients with
population modeling.

10.1.15. Do not over-interpret the generalizability of bespoke
hand-created AI models unless sufficient validation data can be obtained
to support such claims. Consider creating computable versions of model
hand-crafting modeling when possible.

10.1.16. Use label reshuffling testing for evaluating the overfitting
bias of the whole analysis protocol.

10.1.17. Apply with appropriate caution independent dataset validation
and be mindful of dangers of over interpretation of positive and
negative results.

10.1.18. Instead of pursuing strict and exact reproducibility across
datasets, study the variant and invariant findings across these
datasets.

10.1.19. Whenever possible, use reanalysis (with both original and
unbiased or otherwise improved protocols, including single coordinated
protocols as needed) when verifying the validity of models produced by
third parties.

10.1.20. Use domain knowledge and related face-validity tests by experts
to flag potential model errors. The expert themselves may be prone to
biases or domain theory may not cover models’ new findings so do not
over-interpret experts’ objections.

10.1.21. Apply “safety net” measures for ensuring that a model is not
applied to the wrong person or population.

10.1.22. Examine stability of models, parameters and other findings and
examine more deeply unstable findings. Be aware that it is possible for
unstable models to be perfectly valid.

Best Practice 10.2: Deploy procedures that prevent, diagnose and remedy
errors of model under performance or underfitting.

10.5.1. Deploy and explore all relevant learning method families in
model selection.

10.5.2. Deploy and explore all relevant data preparation steps to the
domain and task at hand.

10.5.3. Systematically and sufficiently explore the hyper parameter
space.

10.5.4. Anticipate several preliminary and refinement modeling stages
and incorporate in sequential nested designs to avoid overfitting.

10.5.5. Inform analyses by methods literature so that best known methods
for task and data at hand are always explored along with novel methods.

10.5.6. Follow theoretically and empirically proven specifications of
reference prototypical or official use of employed methods.

10.5.7. In models for individual patients: use dense time series data,
leverage population models, search for and model abrupt distribution
shifts of the individual (including learning and modeling shifts at the
population level).

10.5.8. Conduct power sample analysis and more generally characterize
the effects of sample size on modeling. Use:

1.  1.

    Dynamic sampling schemes whenever appropriate,

     

2.  2.

    Sensitivity analysis for results over convenience samples by
    iteratively reducing available sample size (sub-sampling on a
    convenience sample),

     

3.  3.

    Simulations,

     

4.  4.

    Domain knowledge,

     

5.  5.

    Network-scientific knowledge,

     

6.  6.

    Reference to prior robust results in very similar domains,

     

7.  7.

    Dynamic sampling schemes.

     

Classroom Assignments and Discussion Topics

Chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and
Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and
AI”

1.  1.

    Consider Rich Simon’s experiment with the following modification:
    the feature selection method used is based on univariate association
    using a Hockberg-Benjamini control of false positive rate at 10%.
    This means that the features will be ranked by p-value of the
    association with the response variable and thresholded so that no
    more than 10% of selected features will be false positive correlates
    of the response variable.
    1.  (a)

        How many features will be selected if no feature has true signal
        for the response?

         

    2.  (b)

        What will be the error estimation bias of complete, incomplete
        and no cv schemes?

         

    3.  (c)

        Based on the above, does the Simon et al. conclusions hold
        regardless of the feature selection method?

         

    4.  (d)

        How would you modify the Simon et al. guidance?

         

     

2.  2.

    Is it possible that error of a classifier is 0 in the TR data, true
    optimal generalization error is >0 and this classifier is optimal?
    In other words, is it possible for a model to be optimal yet
    overfitted?

     

3.  3.

    Consider the following scenario describing two model selection
    procedures MS1, MS2 and MS3 each considering and selecting different
    sets of models with estimated and true generalization errors as
    described in the table. For simplicity assume no other models can be
    fitted in this setting.
      -------------------------------------------------- --------- --------- --------- ---------
                                                         Model 1   Model 2   Model 3   Model 4
      TR accuracy                                        0.95      0.90      0.75      0.65
      Estimated generalization accuracy by CV            0.80      0.88      0.78      0.70
      Estimated generalization accuracy by Estimator X   0.9       0.96      0.92      0.80
      True generalization accuracy                       0.80      0.88      0.76      0.73
      MS1 selects model                                  Yes       No        Yes       Yes
      MS2 selects model                                  Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
      MS3 considers model                                No        Yes       No        Yes
      -------------------------------------------------- --------- --------- --------- ---------

    1.  (a)

        What are you conclusions about OP, OC, OF, UF and UP of models 1
        to 4?

         

    2.  (b)

        What is your assessment of the bias of the generalization
        accuracy estimator X used here?

         

    3.  (c)

        Why CV does not exactly match the true generalization error,
        although it is unbiased?

         

    4.  (d)

        Which models are selected by each of MS1 to MS3? How would you
        characterize these model selectors?

         

     

4.  4.

    [ADVANCED] The label reshuffling procedure tests whether a model is
    statistically significantly different than a model without signal
    and simultaneously whether the overall modeling protocol has a
    propensity for producing over confident estimates. This holds under
    the null hypothesis (i.e. there is no signal in the data).
    1.  (a)

        The reshuffling takes place only in the response variable
        labels. Explain why we DO NOT randomize all variables (i.e.,
        both inputs and outputs).

         

    2.  (b)

        Bonus/research topic open problem: can you think of possible
        procedures that could test against alternative hypotheses (i.e.,
        against a user-postulated non-zero signal)?

         

     

5.  5.

    Consider years 2020–2021 of the COVID epidemic whereas many factors
    were constantly changing.
    1.  (a)

        What are some key factors that were changing?

         

    2.  (b)

        What challenges of the OF/UP/OC varieties does a situation like
        this creates for various types of AI/ML decision models?
        Consider ICU admission decision models as an example.

         

     

6.  6.

    Describe, by example or more general analysis, how a researcher can
    produce clustering omics data so that a published cluster model
    exhibits good diagnostic accuracy even though no such signal exists
    in the data.

     

7.  7.

    Comment on the following position: “whenever the true signal in the
    data is very high, it is more difficult to produce models with
    serious overconfidence errors; conversely as true signal approaches
    zero, the magnitude of possible OC error increases”. What are
    underlying assumptions in the above thesis?

     

8.  8.

    Consider the following (idealized and simplified) modeling
    situation. A data scientist is tasked by her manager to create a
    predictive model. She decides to use nested hold out (equivalent to
    NNCV with one fold) as follows: the total data is randomly split in
    mutually exclusive datasets TRTR TRTE and TE. She ensures that the
    prior of the binary response variable is the same in all three
    datasets. She considers 2 possible values for hyper-parameter H of
    ML algorithm A and estimates accuracy (0/1 error) as follows:
    +:------------+:------------+:------------+:------------+:------------+
    | Algorithm A                                                         |
    +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | Accuracy in | Accuracy in | Best value  | Accuracy in | Finally     |
    | TRTE for    | TRTE for    | of H        | TE of model | reported    |
    | H = 1       | H = 2       |             | with best   | accuracy of |
    |             |             |             | value of H  | best model  |
    +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | 0.80        | 0.90        | 2           | 0.85        | 0.85        |
    +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

    She presents the results to the project manager who suggests that a
    second algorithm B is used because it may increase accuracy. The
    results this time look like this:
    +:------------+:------------+:------------+:------------+:------------+
    | Algorithm B                                                         |
    +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | Accuracy in | Accuracy in | Best value  | Accuracy in | Finally     |
    | TRTE for    | TRTE for    | of H        | TE of model | reported    |
    | H = 1       | H = 2       |             | with best   | accuracy of |
    |             |             |             | value of H  | best model  |
    +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | 0.85        | 0.80        | 1           | 0.80        | 0.80        |
    +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

    She presents the results to the project manager who still is not
    satisfied with the result and brings in a consultant who suggests
    that a third algorithm C is used. The results this time look like
    this:
    +:------------+:------------+:------------+:------------+:------------+
    | Algorithm C                                                         |
    +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | Accuracy in | Accuracy in | Best value  | Accuracy in | Finally     |
    | TRTE for    | TRTE for    | of H        | TE of model | reported    |
    | H = 1       | H = 2       |             | with best   | accuracy of |
    |             |             |             | value of H  | best model  |
    +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | 0.75        | 0.80        | 2           | 0.90        | 0.90        |
    +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

    Based on the above the manager and the consultant conclude that the
    model produced by algorithm C is the best, it has generalization
    accuracy 0.90, and should be deployed.

    The data scientist (who recently read chapter “Overfitting,
    Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance
    Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and AI”) is not
    convinced however because she now suspects that an “analysis creep”
    situation has occurred leading to overconfidence in a model. She
    decides to conduct a nested holdout based analysis, this time
    analyzing all 3 algorithms simultaneously in the nested part (inner
    loop) of the cv design. The following table presents her results:
    +:------------+:---------+:---------+:---------------+:---------------+:---------------+
    | Algorithm A | Accuracy | Accuracy | Best           | Accuracy in TE | Finally        |
    |             | in TRTE  | in TRTE  | algorithm/best | of model with  | reported       |
    |             | for      | for      | value of H:    | best           | estimated      |
    |             | H = 1    | H = 2    | Algorithm A,   | algorithm/best | generalization |
    |             |          |          | H = 2          | value of H     | accuracy of    |
    |             |          |          |                | 0.85           | best model     |
    |             |          |          |                |                | 0.85           |
    |             +----------+----------+                |                |                |
    |             | 0.80     | 0.90     |                |                |                |
    +-------------+----------+----------+                |                |                |
    | Algorithm B | Accuracy | Accuracy |                |                |                |
    |             | in TRTR  | in TRTE  |                |                |                |
    |             | for      | for      |                |                |                |
    |             | H = 1    | H = 2    |                |                |                |
    |             +----------+----------+                |                |                |
    |             | 0.85     | 0.80     |                |                |                |
    +-------------+----------+----------+                |                |                |
    | Algorithm C | Accuracy | Accuracy |                |                |                |
    |             | in TRTR  | in TRTE  |                |                |                |
    |             | for      | for      |                |                |                |
    |             | H = 1    | H = 2    |                |                |                |
    |             +----------+----------+                |                |                |
    |             | 0.75     | 0.80     |                |                |                |
    +-------------+----------+----------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

    The manager and the consultant are perplexed.

    Assume the role of the data scientist and write a short report
    explaining how an OC error occurred in the first round of analyses
    and why the second analysis is unbiased. For simplicity, ignore the
    need to conduct tests of statistical difference between point
    estimates and interpret nominal accuracy point estimates as true
    ones.

     

9.  9.

    We saw that combining capacity control mechanisms provides augmented
    protections against overfitting/excessive capacity.
    1.  (a)

        Describe an existing protocol of your choice (or one that you
        construct) that combines 4 or more ways to control excessive
        model capacity.

         

    2.  (b)

        Bonus question [ADVANCED]: is it possible for such combinations
        to have negative effects on ability to control the capacity of
        the models produced?

         

     

10. 10.

    [ADVANCED]
    1.  (a)

        Show that in order to calculate the true positives rate (aka
        PPV) or a model’s decisions we need to know the prior of the
        distribution of the response variable.

         

    2.  (b)

        Show that an active learning sampling design alone does not
        allow the analyst to know this prior whereas a random sampling
        design does.

         

    3.  (c)

        What are the implications therefore of an active learning design
        for controlling the PPV?

         

     

11. 11.

    Is it ok to build under performing models in the context of
    exploratory research? Present a few situations where it might be a
    good idea and some where it is a bad idea.

     

12. 12.

    “Ocam’s Razor” is an epistemological principle that says that
    between two models that explain the data equally well, the simpler
    one is more likely to be true. How does this principle relate to the
    BVDE? Can you think of a counter example (HINT: consider causal
    modeling).

     

13. 13.

    (a) Describe how PCA can lead to OC errors.

    (b) Consider R. Simon’s experiment where instead of feature
    selection the analyst use a PC-mapping of the input data such that
    correlation with the response variable is maximized. Is this subject
    to the same bias that Simon et al. described?

    (c) How would you conduct unbiased error estimation using NNFCV
    whereas the data is PCA-transformed?

     

14. 14.

    [ADVANCED] Wolpert uses NFLT and OTSE to argue in [19] that cross
    validation is not better as a model selection strategy than doing
    the exact opposite (i.e., choose the model with highest error in the
    test data), which he coins “anti-cross validation”. If he is right,
    then what that Chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model
    Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in
    Machine Learning and AI” teaches as best practices for model
    selection and error estimation is only a heuristic strategy that may
    fail in as many situations as the ones that it will succeed. Refute
    these claims.

    HINT: focus your arguments either around the misalignment of OTSE
    with real-life modeling objectives/performance metrics, or
    alternatively/additionally with the misalignment of these objectives
    with averaging over all distributions rather the distribution in
    hand.

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Mitchell TM. Machine learning, vol. 1. New York: McGraw-hill; 2007.

2.  2.

    Simon R, Radmacher MD, Dobbin K, McShane LM. Pitfalls in the use of
    DNA microarray data for diagnostic and prognostic classification. J
    Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95(1):14–8.Crossref

3.  3.

    Statnikov A. A gentle introduction to support vector machines in
    biomedicine: theory and methods, vol. 1. World Scientific; 2011.

4.  4.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I. Challenges in the analysis
    of mass-throughput data: a technical commentary from the statistical
    machine learning perspective. Cancer Informat.
    2006;2:133–62.Crossref

5.  5.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Schildcrout JS, Shepherd
    BE, Harrell FE Jr. Factors influencing the statistical power of
    complex data analysis protocols for molecular signature development
    from microarray data. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4922.Crossref

6.  6.

    Kerr NL. HARKing: hypothesizing after the results are known.
    Personal Soc Psychol Rev. 1998;2(3):196–217.Crossref

7.  7.

    Harrell FE. Regression modeling strategies: with applications to
    linear models, logistic regression, and survival analysis, vol. 608.
    New York: springer; 2001.Crossref

8.  8.

    Steyerberg EW. Applications of prediction models. New York:
    Springer; 2009. p. 11–31.Crossref

9.  9.

    Duda RO, Hart PE. Pattern classification. John Wiley & Sons; 2006.

10. 10.

    Efron B, Tibshirani RJ. An introduction to the bootstrap. CRC press;
    1994.Crossref

11. 11.

    Andrade C. HARKing, cherry-picking, p-hacking, fishing expeditions,
    and data dredging and mining as questionable research practices. J
    Clin Psychiatry. 2021;82(1):25941.Crossref

12. 12.

    Neal ML, Kerckhoffs R. Current progress in patient-specific
    modeling. Brief Bioinform. 2010;11(1):111–26.Crossref

13. 13.

    Visweswaran S, Cooper GF. Patient-specific models for predicting the
    outcomes of patients with community acquired pneumonia. In: AMIA
    Annual Symposium, vol. 2005. American Medical Informatics
    Association; 2005. p. 759.

14. 14.

    Braga-Neto UM, Dougherty ER. Is cross-validation valid for
    small-sample microarray classification? Bioinformatics.
    2004;20(3):374–80.Crossref

15. 15.

    McDermott MB, Wang S, Marinsek N, Ranganath R, Foschini L,
    Ghassemi M. Reproducibility in machine learning for health research:
    still a ways to go. Sci Transl Med. 2021;13(586):eabb1655.Crossref

16. 16.

    Shi L, Campbell G, Jones WD. The MicroArray quality control
    (MAQC)-II study of common practices for the development and
    validation of microarray-based predictive models. Nat Biotechnol.
    2010;28(8):827–38.Crossref

17. 17.

    Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a
    practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc
    Series B Stat Methodol. 1995;57(1):289–300.

18. 18.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part II: analysis and
    extensions. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(1):235–84.

19. 19.

    Wolpert DH. What is important about the no free lunch theorems? In:
    Black box optimization, machine learning, and no-free lunch
    theorems. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2021. p.
    373–88.Crossref

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_11

From “Human versus Machine” to “Human with Machine”

Gyorgy Simon¹   and Constantin Aliferis¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

Abstract

This chapter first reviews areas where AI/ML and other automated
decision making performs well in hard problems in the health sciences.
It also summarizes main results from the literature comparing empirical
performance of AI/ML vs humans. The chapter then addresses foundations
of human heuristic decision making (and important related biases), and
contrasts those with AI/ML biases. Finally the chapter touches upon how
hybrid human/machine intelligence can outperform either approach.

Keywords

AI/ML system performanceCognitive biasesAI/ML system
biasesComputer-Human Joint Decision Making (“Human in the Loop”)

Evidence for Strong Performance of AI/ML in Healthcare and Health Science Problem Solving

There is a growing literature that establishes the ability of AI/ML for
complex problem solving in a variety of health domains, and compares ML
techniques among themselves, to traditional statistical methods, and
occasionally to human experts.

In a meta analysis of the ML-based Neurosurgical Outcome Prediction
literature involving 30 studies it was found that ML models predicted
outcomes after neurosurgery with excellent predictivity (median accuracy
and area under the receiver operating curve of 94.5% and 0.83,
respectively), and significantly better than logistic regression (median
absolute improvement in accuracy and area under the receiver operating
curve of 15% and 0.06, respectively). Some studies also demonstrated a
better performance in ML models compared with established prognostic
indices and clinical experts [1].

In a systematic review of 27 studies applying machine learning to oral
cavity cancer outcomes, it was found that the accuracy of models ranged
from 0.85 to 0.97 for malignant transformation prediction, 0.78–0.91 for
cervical lymph node metastasis prediction, 0.64–1.00 for treatment
response prediction, and 0.71–0.99 for prognosis prediction. In general,
most trained algorithms predicting these outcomes performed better than
alternate methods of prediction. They also found that models including
molecular markers in training data had better accuracy estimates for
malignant transformation, treatment response, and prognosis prediction
[2].

In a meta-analysis and systematic review of applications of machine
learning algorithms to predict therapeutic outcomes in depression (20
studies), classification models were able to predict therapeutic
outcomes with an overall accuracy of 0.82 (95% confidence interval of
[0.77, 0.87]). Also, pooled estimates of classification accuracy were
significantly greater (p < 0.01) in models informed by multiple data
types (e.g., composite of phenomenological patient features and
neuroimaging or peripheral gene expression data; pooled proportion [95%
CI] = 0.93[0.86, 0.97]) when compared to models with lower-dimension
data types (pooled proportion = 0.68[0.62,0.74] to 0.85[0.81,0.88]) [3].

In another systematic review and critical appraisal of ML applications
in vascular surgery over 212 studies were identified in which ML
techniques were used for diagnosis, prognosis, and image segmentation in
carotid stenosis, aortic aneurysm/dissection, peripheral artery disease,
diabetic foot ulcer, venous disease, and renal artery stenosis. The
median area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC)
was 0.88 (range 0.61–1.00), with 79.5% [62/78] studies reporting AUROC
≥0.80. Out of 22 studies comparing ML techniques to existing prediction
tools, clinicians, or traditional regression models, 20 performed better
and 2 performed similarly [4].

A systematic review of ML investigations evaluating suicidal behaviors
with 87 studies analyzed, found high levels of risk classification
accuracy (>90%) and Area Under the Curve (AUC) in the prediction of
suicidal behaviors [5].

In a systematic review of 23 studies of applications of machine learning
to undifferentiated chest pain in the emergency department, it was found
that multiple studies achieved high accuracy in both the diagnosis of
acute myocardial infarction (AMI) in the ED setting, and in predicting
mortality and composite outcomes over various timeframes. ML
outperformed existing risk stratification scores in all cases, and
physicians in three out of four cases [6].

In a systematic review and meta-analysis comparing deep learning
performance against health-care professionals in detecting diseases from
medical imaging, based on 69 studies, it was established that ML models
exhibited sensitivity ranging from 9.7% to 100.0% (mean 79.1%, SD 0.2)
and specificity ranging from 38.9% to 100.0% (mean 88.3%, SD 0.1). 14 of
these 69 studies compared the performance between ML models and
health-care professionals. Restricting the analysis to the contingency
table for each study reporting the highest accuracy found a pooled
sensitivity of 87.0% (95% CI 83.0-90.2) for deep learning models and
86.4% (79.9-91.0) for health-care professionals, and a pooled
specificity of 92.5% (95% CI 85.1-96.4) for deep learning models and
90.5% (80.6-95.7) for health-care professionals [7].

Finally a systematic review of over 42 studies evaluated the
applications of AI in pediatric oncology [8]. Of these 42, 20 studies
related to CNS tumors, 13 to solid tumors, and nine to leukemia. ML
tasks included classification, prediction of treatment response, and
dose optimization. The identified studies matched or outperformed
physician comparators via automated analysis and predicting therapeutic
response.

Quantitative Comparisons of AI/Ml Versus Human Experts

In addition to studies [1, 4–8] in the previous section that not only
studied ML model performance in absolute terms but also compared to
human experts, several more studies have focused on the comparison
between humans and AI/ML problem solving performance.

A large meta-analysis of 136 studies that were conducted between
1966-1988 compared the prediction performance of “mechanical procedures”
(i.e., data science models of various forms: statistical models,
actuarial tables, ML, or other) with that of human experts. The
meta-analysis found that given the same information about the cases, the
mechanical procedures outperformed the humans in 33–47% of the studies
by being substantially more accurate than clinical predictions and in
only 6–16% of the studies, human predictions were substantially more
accurate than the mechanical ones. In the remaining 37%–61% of studies,
humans and machines performed equally [9]. This shows that even with the
comparatively limited technology of the 70s and 80s automated decision
making was equal or superior to humans in 84–94% of the included
studies.

Early AI computer aided diagnosis (CAD or CADx) research produced
similarly promising results. In an application for diagnosis of
abdominal pain, clinicians without access to the CAD tool arrived at the
correct diagnosis with 71.6% accuracy, but with the aid of the CAD tool,
the accuracy reached 91.8% [10].

In addition to the DL vs human study of [7], another systematic review
found similar results, namely that the performance of AI was on par with
that of clinicians and exceeded that of clinicians with less experience
[11].

Many of the above studies report model performance “in the lab”, that is
not embedded in real-life clinical workflow/environment.

Pitfall 11.1

Even if a clinical AI system meets or exceeds expert-level performance
in the lab, this does NOT mean that (i) the system can be readily
adopted into clinical practice, (ii) will perform similarly when
deployed in practice, or (iii) that the evaluation metrics used
accurately reflect clinically impactful use of the AI model.

See the chapter entitled “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”
for details of bringing models into practice.

We also note that the above comparisons refer to problem–solving tasks
that both humans and machines can accomplish (albeit with different
accuracy, ease, etc.). There exist problems that are currently entirely
outside the capabilities of human decision making (e.g. making decisions
using hundreds of thousands, or more, molecular and genetic factors,
something that is routine in molecular oncology ML models; or inferring
complex causal relationships involving hundreds or thousands of
variables by inspecting transcriptomic or other data).

Human Biases Versus Machine Biases

Humans and computers approach problems fundamentally differently. In the
chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal
and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in
Healthcare & Health Science”, and “Foundations of Causal ML” we visited
the fundamental architecture and properties of AI and ML methods. We
will assume that the reader is already familiar with the kinds of
reasoning that humans can accomplish either in professional domains
(i.e., health care practice, or health science) or in everyday living.

We will highlight a few important shortcomings of human decision making
and examine to what extent machines can help overcome these
shortcomings. Reviewing the theory of human learning, judgement and
decision making at length is outside the scope of this book and the
interested reader is referred to the highly informative and concise
summary of human cognitive biases in [12], the prescriptive theory of
medical decision making in [13], the several investigations on clinical
decision making biases in [14] and the classic Nobel Prize-winning work
of Kahneman [15] on human heuristics and biases.

We will also shed some light, from a technical perspective, on what are
machine biases and how they arise or are prevented.

Human Memory Is Not a Storage Device

Contrary to common belief, human memory is not a device that stores
“material” (medical or science facts, experimental data,
interpretations, patient information, thoughts, discussion points,
feelings, etc.) and recalls them later. A study found that more than 90%
of the points made in a discussion were forgotten. The mind builds a
mental model of the “material” and fills in details through inference.
Our confidence in how accurate our recollection is relates to our
confidence in the inference rather than to our ability to recall facts
[16].

Humans Are Influenced by Context

Since memory is inferred, it is context-dependent. It is not just the
memory, but most of human interpretation is context-dependent, even down
to minute details. For example, in a list of items, we attribute more
weight to the first item than later items and we remember the most
recent (last) items better [17]. In some cases, where the contrast among
multiple alternatives is too high, we can become unable to assess the
middle alternative. In a similar vein, when a multitude of
characteristics is evaluated simultaneously, these evaluations influence
each other and the results correlate. This latter trait is exemplified
by real-life “superheros” who are perceived to be excellent in almost
all character traits we care about [18].

Questions can create a context [19]. The way questions are formed can
influence the answer. When open-ended questions are used, the respondent
may not consider all alternative responses, and may not think about the
most appropriate response. Conversely, when closed questions are used,
where the respondent has to select an answer from a list of
alternatives, alternatives can artificially increase the frequency of
answers that would otherwise be uncommon. When the question concerns a
measurement, the alternatives to a closed question can suggest a
baseline, a “normal” value, against which the respondents measure
themselves. Even the order in which questions are asked and the order in
which potential answers (for closed questions) are presented can
influence the answers. Fortunately, when the subject is knowledgeable
about the topic of the question, such influences are smaller. To reduce
bias in answers by respondents who are not knowledgeable, surveys often
include an option for “don’t know”. Finally, the wording of the
questions itself can influence the answer. Answers can change depending
on whether the question is asked in terms of gains or losses, lives
saved versus deaths.

Humans Are Not Inherently Rational Decision Makers.

A fundamental normative model of human decision making is the maximum
expected utility theory [15, 20, 21]. It describes decision making as
following from assigning utilities to outcomes and choosing actions so
that the expected utility will be maximized. Essential to such an
endeavor are: (a) to describe with accuracy and completeness all
relevant actions and outcomes in a problem of interest; (b) the ability
to assign consistently individual preferences (measured by utility) to
alternative outcomes; (c) the ability to calculate accurately the
probability of outcomes given actions, including calculating
probabilities of intermediate events outside the control of the decision
maker; and (d) the ability to calculate accurately the action
that maximizes the expected utility.

Not surprisingly, several examples have been shown in the literature
where humans make decisions that do not abide by several components of
expected utility-based reasoning. One important deviation is that losses
are more important than gains to a part of the population. Kahneman et
al. illustrates this through the following example. When decision makers
are presented with a pair of alternatives, where one alternative is a
sure loss of $500 and the other alternative is a gamble of losing $1000
with 50% chance and losing $0 with the remaining 50% chance, subjects
tend to choose the second option (i.e., avoid the sure loss). However,
when we frame the alternatives in terms of gains, with the first
alternative being a sure gain of $500 and the second alternative is a
gamble with 50% of winning $1000 and 50% chance not winning any money,
people tend to select the sure gain.

Prospect theory [21] is a decision making model that uses the perceived
value of gains and losses (as opposed to utility) as the basis of
decision making and utilizes value functions that take the above
asymmetry between the two into account. This model has the ability to
describe “irrationalities” (deviations from the normative “rational”
behavior that expected utility theory assumes) such as:

1.  (i)

    the diminishing value of gains and losses (the first $500 gain or
    loss is more important than the second).

     

2.  (ii)

    Certainty effects such as removing the last bullet from a gun in
    Russian roulette is worth more (has more value) than removing one of
    four bullets, although the expected utility (reduction in
    probability of death) is the same.

     

3.  (iii)

    Framing, where the expected value differs based on the reference
    point against which gains and losses are computed although the
    expected utility remains the same.

     

4.  (iv)

    Avoiding regret: humans are willing to give up “utility” to reduce
    the chance of feeling regret.

     

Humans Extensively Use Heuristics in Their Decision Making and Suffer From Related Biases

Because the human brain lacks the ability to execute complex
calculations fast, it has evolved to use approximate (so-called
“heuristic”) decision strategies that provide a fast solution that has
high likelihood to be correct (e.g., in an evolutionary context, to
prevent loss of life from predators or other circumstances that require
rapid decision making as opposed to accurate but slow decisions). These
heuristics have offered evolutionary benefits, however, they introduce
significant biases into the human decisions. Here we review some of the
heuristics we use and refer the interested reader to [12, 15] for more
complete and thorough treatments.

- Humans tend to determine (incorrectly) the probability that on object
  came from a group by the “representativeness” of the object with
  respect to the group. Given two groups, one group being more specific
  than the other, humans often attribute higher probability to belonging
  to the more detailed (more specific) group than the other, which
  contradicts fundamental axioms of probability.

- Humans follow a bias called law of small numbers in which they believe
  (erroneously) that small random sequences resemble large random
  sequences. In other words that properties conferred by the law of
  large numbers in statistics also apply to small numbers. This is
  related to the representative heuristic, entails difficulty to
  distinguish between random and non-random sequences, and suffer from
  gambler’s fallacy (believing that a small random sequence will exhibit
  distribution characteristics of a large random sequence).

- Humans suffer from attribution biases e.g., attributing accidental
  (random) successes to skill; and non-random failures to circumstances.

- The frequency (or probability) of events is often estimated by how
  easy it is to recall an occurrence of that event (availability bias).
  While it is easier to recall more frequent events, our ability to
  recall events also depends on factors other than frequency. Such
  factors include how easy it is to imagine the event happening and also
  the desirability or undesirability of the outcome. We tend to “block
  out” and thus underestimate the probability of undesirable outcomes.

- While assessing the probability of simple events is difficult,
  assessing the probability of compound events, which are conjunctions
  or disjunctions of simple events, is even more bias-prone.

- Once people form an initial assessment of the probability, they are
  slow to adjust it (Anchor bias). They adjust it in the right
  direction, but only to an insufficient extent. When the probability of
  an event is assessed relative to an anchor (in the form of higher or
  lower than a certain value, being the anchor), this anchor can bias
  the probability estimate upward or downward.

- Although experts are less affected, risk assessment is even more
  bias-prone than assessing the probability (or rather, rate) of events.
  This is because non-experts define risk more broadly than “number of
  events per time period”.

- A bias especially detrimental for medical and scientific reasoning is
  confusion of the inverse. In this bias, physicians confuse the
  sensitivity of a test for a disease diagnosis with the posterior
  probability of having the disease given the test. Or scientists
  confuse the p-value (i.e., probability of rejecting the null
  hypothesis) with 1-posterior probability that the alternative
  hypothesis is true. Or that the 95% CI of an estimated quantity
  contains with probability 95% the true value of the quantity.

- Calibration biases are confidence errors and typically overconfidence
  errors where humans believe that their probability of being correct is
  much higher than the true value.

There are many more human decision making biases that affect most
humans, including highly trained scientists and clinicians. We refer the
reader to the references above for related discussion. The most
important lesson is that there exist numerous cognitive biases and it is
exceedingly difficult to remove human cognitive biases entirely from
every decision humans make, even in the context of highly specialized
training received by clinicians and scientists. This represents a great
value proposition of AI/ML because none of the human cognitive biases
affect ordinary AI/Ml systems (unless the designer intentionally
constructs the AI.ML models to exhibit such biases, e.g., to simulate
and study human cognition).

AI/ML Biases

Recall from the chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”
that all ML systems have an inductive bias, which—as we explained—is not
a defect in their capacity for problem solving but simply denotes what
technical family of models they prefer (so that they can model the data
better). As long as the inductive bias elements (i..e., ML model family,
data fitting procedure, model performance function, model selection
procedure) are accurate representations of the domain, the ML model can
exhibit no negative “bias”.

One inadvertent negative bias, however, that can enter into ML models is
bias in the data provided for training. Let’s consider the
highly-publicized case of racial bias in a patient care prioritization
model [22] in which the model was supposed to prioritize care for high
risk patients, yet it was found to prioritize white patients higher than
black patients with the same risk. In brief, this model manifested a
social/inequity bias because it was given wrong data. Specifically, the
data, instead of presenting the actual severity of each patient,
substituted it with the healthcare costs for that patient. However,
there is a systemic bias in which higher costs are associated with white
patients than black patients of the same risk. By training the ML
algorithm with the wrong (biased) data, a model was produced that
exhibited unwanted (socially/racially biased) behavior.

We did not cover factors such as fatigue, distraction, illness, etc.
because they are not cognitive biases. However they are important and
are discussed in the context of computer-human decision making next.

Computer-Human Decision Making

In this section, we examine the question of whether, and if yes how,
computer problem solving can be combined with human problem solving in
order to improve performance.

We frame this question as follows:

- Under what general conditions can

- AI/ML-Assisted Decision Making (i.e., computer + human)

- outperform both

- Autonomous AI/ML Decision Making (i.e., computer only),

- and

- Autonomous Human Decision Making (i.e., human only).

Relative Strengths of human and AI/ML Decision Making

Let us begin our discussion by comparing the relative strengths of human
and AI/ML decision making.

Table 1 describes reason when human decision making can be superior to
AI/ML and vice versa, reasons why AI/ML decision making can be superior
to human. The table shows that human and AI/ML machine learning has
complementary strengths, combining them may offer benefits.

Table 1

Reasons why human decision making can be superior to AI/ML decision
making (top part) and reasons why AI/ML decision making can be superior
to human (bottom)

+:---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Reasons for Human > AI                                               |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1. Access to inputs/knowledge that machine models lack.              |
|                                                                      |
| 2. Knowledge about domain that is not captured in data that computer |
| sees.                                                                |
|                                                                      |
| 3. Specific interpretive abilities (e.g., images, language).         |
|                                                                      |
| 4. Culture/social/healthcare/science system awareness.               |
|                                                                      |
| 5. Ability to shift frames of reference and reasoning modes.         |
|                                                                      |
| 6. Ability to seamlessly combine symbolic and                        |
| quantitative/stochastic reasoning.                                   |
|                                                                      |
| 7. AI may be poorly performing due to using weak learners, bad AI    |
| design, bad data design; generally all pitfalls of AI/ML in this     |
| book and referenced literature.                                      |
|                                                                      |
| 8. Easier integration in existing workflows & other implementation   |
| barriers, including regulatory barriers.                             |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Reasons for AI > Human                                               |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1. Limits to human cognitive capabilities, e.g. high dimensional     |
| decision making; amount of information that can be stored in memory, |
| etc.                                                                 |
|                                                                      |
| 2. Humans have several cognitive biases that machines do not have.   |
|                                                                      |
| 3. Special AI/ML reasoning capabilities, e.g., learning complex      |
| model from data.                                                     |
|                                                                      |
| 4. Speed.                                                            |
|                                                                      |
| 5. Machines do not get tired, distracted, stressed, sick, socially   |
| influenced, etc.                                                     |
|                                                                      |
| 6. Machines can update data, knowledge bases, reasoning algorithms,  |
| almost instantaneously                                               |
|                                                                      |
| 7. AI cannot be gamed as easily by manipulating data inputs,         |
| selective results etc.                                               |
|                                                                      |
| 8. Cheaper across many dimensions/settings.                          |
|                                                                      |
| 9. Scalable.                                                         |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Assumption. For the discussion in this section, we assume that the human
and the AI/ML model has access to the same data.

Combining AI/ML can be discussed from several inter-related
perspectives, which we discuss next.

Potential Complementariness of Errors Made by Humans and AI/ML

Figure 1 shows the three possible scenarios describing how the errors of
the AI-Assisted Decision Making relates to the errors of the autonomous
human and those of the autonomous AI/ML.

[]

3 graphs for error relationships. a. 2 circles that represent humans and
computers are adjacent to each other. b. a. 2 circles for humans and
computers overlap each other completely. c. 2 circles for humans and
computers intersect partially.

Both computers and humans implement a function each that maps from the
problem input domain set to the decision set. By Error Domain of a
computer model or human decision function, we refer to the subset of the
input domain where the computer or the human (respectively) make
decision mistakes.

The blue circle represents the error domain of the human and the red
circle represents the error domain of the AI/ML model.

There are three possible scenarios. In scenario (a) on the left, there
is no overlap between the error domains of the human and the AI/ML
model: they make independent mistakes. Some of these mistakes are
predictable (blue/red parts of the error domains), so when we encounter
a case with input features in the human identifiable error domain we
will use the computer to make the decision. Conversely when we encounter
a case with input features in the AI/ML identifiable error domain we
will use the human to make the decision. When the input does not belong
to any identifiable error domain we can pick either decision randomly.

In scenario (b) in the middle, there is a perfect overlap between the
error domains of the human and the AI/ML model. They make mistakes
exactly for the same inputs, so we cannot easily (if at all) correct the
mistake.

Scenario (c) is in between (a) and (b). There is overlap in the error
domains, and decision mistakes can be corrected easily in the non-gray
(identifiable) and non-overlapping portions of the error domains.

Weak Learning Theory

Roughly, ensemble theory states that weak learners, learners that
perform only minimally better than random, can be combined to form a
highly performant ensemble [23]. Neither the human, and most likely,
neither the AI/ML model is a weak learner; in a clinical setting, we
would expect them to perform substantially better than random. However,
the weak learning theory still allows us to combine these (actually
strong) learners to form an even more performant system. We have already
seen examples of methods to combine weak learners, gradient boosting in
chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science”. Other methods, including
error correcting coding, etc., exist [23].

Knowledge About the Target Function

While the human and the AI/ML have access to the same data, the human
can have knowledge of some regions of the target function, that the
AI/ML algorithm was unable to learn. Universal function approximation,
optimal classification and other theories operate in the sample limit
(assuming access to unlimited number of observations), however, most
AI/ML endeavors face a (sometimes severe) limitation of samples.
Therefore, it is possible, that AI/ML cannot learn the target function
correctly in some regions of the input space. In contrast, the human may
have knowledge about the target function (which, of course, the human
did not obtain from the data).

ROC Convex Hull

We have already seen examples in the “Evaluation” chapter (Figure
9.1.2.) of different classifiers (with different inductive biases)
having different performance characteristics, resulting in ROC curves
that favored one classifier in one region of the curve and a different
one in a different region. Provost and Fawcett [24] proposed a method of
combining classifiers so that the resulting ROC curve is the convex hull
of the original ROC curves. Although such combinations can improve
performance over the individual classifiers, this strategy is not yet
optimal. Further development of combining ROC curves (e.g. [25, 26])
successfully improved upon the optimality of the combined classifiers.
By viewing the human decision making as a black-box classifier, these
techniques can be used to combine the human and AI/ML decision making.

Stacking

We have already discussed stacking in the “Ensemble Methods” section of
the “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare and Health Science” chapter. Recall that
stacking is a modeling approach, where multiple models (base learners)
are trained on the same data (or some variant, e.g. bootstrap re-sample,
of the data) and the outputs from these models are combined by another
model (meta-learners). Stacking strategies differ in the ways base
models are trained and combined. Optimal stacking strategies have been
explored in several domains [27, 28].

In the application of stacking to the problem of combining human and
AI/ML, base models can be (i) any AI/ML model, (ii) the human, (iii) or
an AI/ML model “mimicking” the human. (“Mimicking” refers to
approximating an unknown complex function with a simpler function, or
several simpler functions, learnt from data, in some of the input
regions.)

Strategies for Human-AI/ML Hybrid Decision Making

The inputs to the decision making are described in the left half of
Table 2. These include:

  --------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  DATA      Data that both the computer and human have access to. There is no other data that either the human or the computer can access.
  C         A fixed computer model that was constructed before attempting to build the combined decision support system.
  H_(RT)    “real-time” human decision making (i.e., per usual practice)
  H_(EST)   “estimated” a model previously constructed to accurately mimic human decision making. Typically this model will use data under ideal human decision making conditions (expert human without superlative performance record, without distractions or fatigue, etc.).
  --------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The properties and priorities are described in the right side of the
table. The column “Likely Pred. Opt.” denotes whether the combined
decision making is likely predictively optimal, specifically from the
perspective of exposing the hybrid learner to all available data and the
interactions among features that may have not been captured by either
prior computer models C, or humans H (and thus cannot be modeled by
simply ensembling C, H).

The “Computer → Human Effects Risk” column indicates whether or not a
risk of error due to human biases (rubber stamping decisions of C, alert
fatigue, automation bias, etc.) exists. Specifically, “±” denotes that
these biases if present can be addressed in the data design and workflow
engineering, including in both cases, by blinding the human to the
computer’s decisions.

The column “Human Risk” refers to the susceptibility to unmanageable
error because of fatigue, distractions, work overloading.

Finally, “Gaming Risk” refers to conscious or subconscious tendency to
“steer” the model’s output towards desired outcomes by modifying the
human decisions accordingly.

The rows of Table 2 contain the actual strategies ranging from S1 to
S10. The phrase “rand” refers to randomization, where the human (H_(RT))
is randomly blinded (or not) to the computer predictions. This allows
for estimating the influence of the computer output on the human
decision maker.

Table 2

Concrete strategies for constructing Human-AI/ML hybrid decision making

+-----+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|     | Modeled Hybrid computer/human designs                                                             |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
|     | Inputs for modeling                   | Properties & Priority of the design                       |
+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+----------+
|     | DATA    | C       | H_(Est) | H_(RT)  | Likely  | Computer → Human | Human   | Gaming  | Priority |
|     |         |         |         |         |         |                  | Risk    |         |          |
|     |         |         |         |         | Pred.   | Effects Risk     |         | Risk    |          |
|     |         |         |         |         | Opt.    |                  |         |         |          |
+:====+:========+:========+:========+:========+:========+:=================+:========+:========+:=========+
| S1  | –       | +       | +       | –       | –       | ±                | –       | –       | THIRD    |
+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+          |
| S2  | –       | +       | –       | +       | –       | ±                | +       | +       |          |
+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+          |
| S3  | –       | –       | +       | –       | –       | –                | –       | –       |          |
+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+----------+
| S4  | –       | –       | –       | +       | –       | –                | +       | +       | SECOND   |
+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+----------+
| S5  | +       | +       | +       | –       | +       | –                | –       | –       | FIRST    |
+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+          |
| S6  | +       | + rand  | –       | +       | +       | –                | +       | +       |          |
+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+          |
| S7  | +       | –       | +       | –       | +       | –                | –       | –       |          |
+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+          |
| S8  | +       | –       | –       | +       | +       | –                | +       | +       |          |
+-----+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+----------+
|     | Pure C or Hybrid designs (No modeled inputs)                                                      |
+-----+---------------------------------------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+----------+
| S9  | Computer                              | –       | –                | +       | +       | THIRD    |
+-----+---------------------------------------+---------+------------------+---------+---------+          |
| S10 | Human                                 | S10 same as S4                                 |          |
+-----+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+----------+

The strategies in Table 2 range from pure AI/ML-only decision making
(S1) to pure human-only decision making (S10).

S1-S8 are hybrid designs where we build models to learn accurate
decisions using inputs described in the columns under “Inputs for
modeling”. For each decision function, the inputs are designated by the
‘+’ signs in the appropriate input columns. For example, S6 constructs a
decision function using data (DATA D), the pre-exising fixed AI/ML model
(C), and the real-time human decision (H_(RT)). This results in a
decision function

F (instance(i) from D, Computer model outputs on instance(i), Human
decisions on instance (i))

which is trained on all instance(i) in D, s.t. the decision error is
minimized.

Note that strategies S5, S6 do not require blinding the human to the
computer decisions since any negative effects of the human being exposed
to a computer model’s decisions are eliminated by the absence of
exposure to them in S5 and by randomization on purpose in S6.

Note that S7, S8 also do not require blinding of the human to the
computer since any negative effects of the human being exposed to a
computer model’s decisions are eliminated by the absence of exposure to
them. However in model application time with a real time human decision
making, the new model may negatively affect the human and thus the S8
models will require monitoring for such effects.

Human risks in Human-AI/ML Hybrid Decision Making

Human risks include decision fatigue [29], and other factors, such as
distractions, illness, overwork, etc., As we saw, human decision making
is sensitive to context. Thus a factor to consider is the alteration of
the human performance in the context of combined decision making with
the aid of a computer system. One instance of this problem is automation
bias in which when humans are presented with many correct decisions by
an AI model, humans become more susceptible to just “rubber stamping”
the model’s decisions without much critical thinking [30]. This is a
critical factor that influenced regulatory rationale, and which we
discuss further in chapter “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal
Societal Implications (ELSI)”. The converse is true, as well. When a
clinical decision support system burdens a clinician with
wrong/unnecessary alerts, alert fatigue [31] arises and the human may
ignore subsequent alerts.

Empirical studies of Human-AI/ML Hybrid Decision Making

In terms of empirical demonstration of the potential to improve
performance by combining human and AI/Ml capabilities, image analysis is
particularly conducive to AI-clinician collaboration. Computer-aided
detection (CADe) systems do not aim to offer a diagnosis instead of the
physician, but detect and highlight regions in the image that are
suspicious and require closer inspection. In a study where skin lesions
were classified as malignant vs non-malignant, experts achieved 66%
accuracy, while the CADe system (expert aided by AI) achieved 72.1%
(±0.9%) [11].

In two highly-cited systematic reviews [32, 33] Haynes et al. reported
that across 97 studies of the effectiveness of CDS, strong evidence was
found that the performance of human decision making was improved
(although these improvements were not directly linked to patient
outcomes) [32]. A more recent systematic review of 38 studies found that
66% of the studies reported positive provider performance (while none
reported negative provider performance) and 61% of the reviewed studies
reported positive patient outcomes (while none reported negative patient
outcomes) [34].

Conclusions

In the present chapter, we presented systematic review and meta analysis
literature, which covers hundreds of studies, providing strong evidence
that AI/ML in healthcare and health science problem solving exhibits
strong performance, that is usually superior to human decision making
(when direct comparisons were made). The chapter also addressed human
biases and contrasted them with AI/ML biases. These are of fundamentally
different nature and we have different ability to control them. In the
final part of the chapter we provided an analysis of conditions under
which humans+AI/ML can outperform both humans alone and AI/ML alone. We
also provided broad guidance for implementing such combined decision
making and examples from the literature where AI/ML-assisted decision
making provided performance benefits.

We close this chapter with a needed clarification: the approach to the
topic was driven by a data science functional perspective in which there
are several knowns and unknowns. Specifically, we know the exact inner
workings and input-output behavior of AI/ML models we have built; we can
also measure the input-output behavior of humans; much is known about
human decision making biases and how machines overcome those. At the
same time little is known about the inner workings of the human brain’s
decision making apparatus. From an empirical perspective we can model
this human decision making as a “black box” decision function and
analyze the error structures so that we can construct hybrid systems
with smaller error.

As the phenomena of alert fatigue, decision fatigue, and automation bias
show, the implementation of hybrid systems in practice is much more
difficult and less controllable than the implementation of AI/ML models
alone. Psychology, cognitive science, neuroscience, human-computer
interaction, human factors engineering, and implementation science aim
to all help with successful implementation. Here we just scratched the
surface of what is possible.

Key Messages and Concepts Discussed in This Chapter

AI systems, both from the first and second wave of AI in medicine, have
achieved diagnostic performance on par with expert clinicians, often
outperforming less experienced professionals.

These systems achieved best success when AI was used to complement the
professionals (e.g. they were used for consulting or for computer-aided
detection) rather than trying to offer diagnoses without input from the
professional.

Adoption of these systems is slow for a variety of reasons that relate
to two key themes (i) lack of trust and (ii) lack of consideration for
the clinical workflow.

The strengths of AI systems are complementary to those of human
professionals.

Human decision making introduces biases in several ways which are
largely different from the biases that AI systems introduce.

Pitfalls discussed in This Chapter

Pitfall 11.1 Even if a clinical AI system meets or exceeds expert-level
performance in the lab, this does NOT mean that (i) the system can be
readily adopted into clinical practice, (ii) will perform similarly when
deployed in practice, or (iii) that the evaluation metrics used
accurately reflect clinically impactful use of the AI model.

Best Practices discussed in This Chapter

Best Practice 11.1. Consider the possibility that a hybrid system may
outperform human or computer decisions.

Best Practice 11.2. Examine the topology of errors in human and computer
models.

Best Practice 11.3. Explore ensemble learning as a strategy for building
hybrid decision models.

Best Practice 11.4. Work with implementation experts for bringing
complex human/AI decision making into the clinical or scientific
settings.

Classroom Assignments & Discussion Topics in This Chapter

1.  1.

    How would you ensure that an AI system versus a clinical expert
    comparison is carried out in a fair manner? How would you establish
    a gold standard? How would you ensure that the clinicians and the AI
    system work with the same information? Can you think of evaluation
    metrics that favor AI or the clinical expert? Can/should blinded
    comparisons be used?

     

2.  2.

    In models of human decision making, we described the difference
    between utility and value. What implications does this distinction
    have on the design of AI objective functions?

     

3.  3.

    We explained that the way questions are formed can influence the
    answer. Also, when the respondent knows(!) the answer, such effects
    are minimal. How could the way questions are asked influence
    clinical decisions made by a clinician alone, a clinician in a
    shared decision making framework with the patient, and by an AI
    system?

     

4.  4.

    We described four main groups of factors that introduce bias into
    human decision making. These were (i) memory, (ii) context, (iii)
    rational/irrational decision making, and (iv) heuristics.
    1.  (a)

        Which of these factors present in a patient can influence the
        decision making?

         

    2.  (b)

        Which of these factors present in a clinician can influence the
        decision making?

         

    3.  (c)

        Which of these factors are relevant to healthcare research?

         

    4.  (d)

        Which of these factors will impact a purely AI decision making?
        Think of potential impact during the development and the use of
        the system.

         

    5.  (e)

        Which of these factors will influence an AI assisted decision
        making?

         

    6.  (f)

        Which of these factors can be corrected by AI assisted decision
        making?

         

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Senders JT, Staples PC, Karhade AV, Zaki MM, Gormley WB, Broekman
    MLD, Smith TR, Arnaout O. Machine learning and neurosurgical outcome
    prediction: a systematic review. World Neurosurg.
    2018;109:476–486.e1. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​wneu.​2017.​09.​149.
    Epub 2017 Oct 3Crossref

2.  2.

    Adeoye J, Tan JY, Choi SW, Thomson P. Prediction models applying
    machine learning to oral cavity cancer outcomes: a systematic
    review. Int J Med Inform. 2021;154:104557.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ijmedinf.​2021.​104557. Epub 2021 Aug
    18Crossref

3.  3.

    Lee Y, Ragguett RM, Mansur RB, Boutilier JJ, Rosenblat JD, Trevizol
    A, Brietzke E, Lin K, Pan Z, Subramaniapillai M, Chan TCY, Fus D,
    Park C, Musial N, Zuckerman H, Chen VC, Ho R, Rong C, McIntyre RS.
    Applications of machine learning algorithms to predict therapeutic
    outcomes in depression: a meta-analysis and systematic review. J
    Affect Disord. 2018;241:519–32.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jad.​2018.​08.​073. Epub 2018 Aug 14. Erratum
    in: J Affect Disord. 2020 Sep 1;274:1211–1215Crossref

4.  4.

    Li B, Feridooni T, Cuen-Ojeda C, Kishibe T, de Mestral C, Mamdani M,
    Al-Omran M. Machine learning in vascular surgery: and critical
    appraisal. NPJ Digit Med. 2022;5(1):7.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41746-021-00552-y.Crossref

5.  5.

    Bernert RA, Hilberg AM, Melia R, Kim JP, Shah NH, Abnousi F.
    Artificial intelligence and suicide prevention: a systematic review
    of machine learning investigations. Int J Environ Res Public Health.
    2020;17(16):5929. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijerph17165929.Crossref

6.  6.

    Stewart J, Lu J, Goudie A, Bennamoun M, Sprivulis P, Sanfillipo F,
    Dwivedi G. Applications of machine learning to undifferentiated
    chest pain in the emergency department: a systematic review. PloS
    One. 2021;16(8):e0252612.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journal.​pone.​0252612.Crossref

7.  7.

    Liu X, Faes L, Kale AU, Wagner SK, Fu DJ, Bruynseels A, Mahendiran
    T, Moraes G, Shamdas M, Kern C, Ledsam JR, Schmid MK, Balaskas K,
    Topol EJ, Bachmann LM, Keane PA, Denniston AK. A comparison of deep
    learning performance against health-care professionals in detecting
    diseases from medical imaging: a systematic review and
    meta-analysis. Lancet Digit Health. 2019;1(6):e271–97.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S2589-7500(19)30123-2. Epub 2019 Sep 25.
    Erratum in: Lancet Digit Health. 2019 Nov;1(7):e334.Crossref

8.  8.

    Ramesh S, Chokkara S, Shen T, Major A, Volchenboum SL, Mayampurath
    A, Applebaum MA. Applications of artificial intelligence in
    pediatric oncology: a systematic review. JCO Clin Cancer Inform.
    2021;5:1208–19. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1200/​CCI.​21.​00102.Crossref

9.  9.

    Grove WM, Zald DH, Lebow BS, Snitz BE, Nelson C. Clinical versus
    mechanical prediction: a meta-analysis. Psychol Assess.
    2000;12(1):19–30.Crossref

10. 10.

    Dombal FT, Leaper DJ, Staniland JR, McCann AP, Horrock JC.
    Computer-aided diagnosis of acute abdominal pain. Brit Med J.
    1972;2:9–13.Crossref

11. 11.

    Shen J, Zhang CJP, BangSheng J, Chen J, Song J, Liu Z, He Z, Wong
    SY, Fang PH, Ming WK. Artificial intelligence versus clinicians in
    disease diagnosis: systematic review. JMIR Med Infom.
    2019;7(3):e10010. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2196/​10010.Crossref

12. 12.

    Plous S. The psychology of judgement and human decision making.
    McGrew-Hill; 1993.

13. 13.

    Sox HC, Higgins MC, Owens DK. Medical decision making.
    Wiley-Blackwell; 1998.

14. 14.

    Dowie J, Elstein, A. S. (Eds.). Professional judgment: a reader in
    clinical decision making. Cambridge University Press; 1988.

15. 15.

    Kahneman D, Slovic P, Tversky A. Judgment under uncertainty:
    heuristics and biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press;
    1982.Crossref

16. 16.

    Loftus EF, Palmer JC. Reconstruction of automobile destruction: an
    example of the interaction between language and memory. J Verbal
    Learning Verbal Behav. 1974;13(5)

17. 17.

    Miller N, Campbell DT. Recency and primacy in persuasion as a
    function of the timing of speeches and measurements. J Abnorm Soc
    Psychol. 1959;59(1):1–9. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​h0049330.Crossref

18. 18.

    Thorndike EL. A constant error in psychological ratings. J Appl
    Psychol. 1920;4(1):25–9. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​h0071663.Crossref

19. 19.

    Plous S. How questions affect answers. Section II in the psychology
    of judgement and human decision making. McGrew-Hill; 1993.

20. 20.

    Sox H. Expected value decision making. Chapter 6 in medical decision
    making. Wiley-Blackwell; 1998.

21. 21.

    Kahneman D, Tversky A. Prospect theory: an analysis of decision
    under risk. Econometrica. 1979;47(2):263–91.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​1914185.Crossref

22. 22.

    Obermeyer Z, Powers B, Vogeli C, Mullainathan S. Dissecting racial
    bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations.
    Science. 2019;366(6464):447–53.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​science.​aax2342.Crossref

23. 23.

    Duda RO, Hart PE, Stork DG. Pattern classification. 2nd ed. John
    Wiley and Sons; 2000.

24. 24.

    Provost F, Fawcett T. Robust classification for imprecise
    environments. Machine Learning J. 2001;42(3):203–31.Crossref

25. 25.

    Peter A. Flach and Shaomin Wu. Repairing concavities in ROC curves.
    In Proceedings of the 19th international joint conference on
    artificial intelligence (IJCAI’05), pp. 702–707; 2005.

26. 26.

    Barreno M, Cardenas A, Tygar JD. Optimal ROC curve for a combination
    of classifiers. Adv Neural Inform Process Syst. 2007;20

27. 27.

    Džeroski S, Ženko B. Is combining classifiers with stacking better
    than selecting the best one? Machine Learning.
    2004;54:255–73.Crossref

28. 28.

    Ray B, Henaff M, Ma S, Efstathiadis E, Peskin ER, Picone M, Poli T,
    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A. Information content and analysis methods
    for multi-modal high-throughput biomedical data. Sci Rep.
    2014;4(1):4411.Crossref

29. 29.

    Persson E, Barrafrem K, Meunier A, Tinghög G. The effect of decision
    fatigue on surgeons' clinical decision making. Health Econ.
    2019;28(10):1194–203. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​hec.​3933. Epub 2019
    Jul 25Crossref

30. 30.

    FDA. Clinical decision support software; draft guidance for Industry
    and Food and Drug Administration Staff; 2019.
    https://​www.​federalregister.​gov/​documents/​2019/​09/​27/​2019-21000/​clinical-decision-support-software-draft-guidance-for-industry-and-food-and-drug-administration.
    Accessed 12 Dec 2022.

31. 31.

    Co Z, Holmgren AJ, Classen DC, Newmark L, Seger DL, Danforth M,
    Bates DW. The tradeoffs between safety and alert fatigue: Data from
    a national evaluation of hospital medication-related clinical
    decision support. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020;27(8):1252–8.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​jamia/​ocaa098.Crossref

32. 32.

    Garg AX, Adhikari NK, McDonald H, Rosas-Arellano MP, Devereaux PJ,
    Beyene J, Sam J, Haynes RB. Effects of computerized clinical
    decision support systems on practitioner performance and patient
    outcomes: a systematic review. JAMA. 2005;293(10):1223–38.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​jama.​293.​10.​1223.Crossref

33. 33.

    Hunt DL, Haynes RB, Hanna SE, Smith K. Effects of computer-based
    clinical decision support systems on physician performance and
    patient outcomes: a systematic review. JAMA. 1998;280(15):1339–46.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​jama.​280.​15.​1339.Crossref

34. 34.

    Kruse CS, Ehrbar N. Effects of computerized decision support systems
    on practitioner performance and patient outcomes: systematic review.
    JMIR Med Inform. 2020;8(8):e17283.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​2196/​17283.Crossref

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_12

Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML in Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of Best Practices

Constantin Aliferis¹   and Gyorgy Simon¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

This chapter covers a variety of cases studies-based incidents and
concepts that are valuable for identifying pitfalls, suggesting best
practices and supporting their use. Examples include: the Gartner hype
cycle; the infamous “AI winters”; limitations of early-stage knowledge
representation and reasoning methods; overfitting; using methods not
built for the task; over-estimating the value and potential or early and
heuristic technology; developing AI disconnected with real-life needs
and application contexts; over-interpreting theoretical shortcomings of
one algorithm to all algorithms in the class; misinterpreting
computational learning theory; failures/shortcomings of literature
including technically erroneous information and persistence of incorrect
findings; meta research yielding unreliable results;
failures/shortcomings of modeling protocols, data and evaluation designs
(e.g., competitions); failures/shortcomings of specific projects and
technologies; and also contextual factors that may render guidelines
themselves problematic. These case studies were often followed by
improved technology that overcame various limitations. The case studies
reinforce, and demonstrate the value of science-driven practices for
addressing enduring and new challenges.

Keywords

Non-monotonic progress in AI/MLAI Hype Cycles and AI wintersCase studies
of commercial and academic AI/ML limitations (and ensuing
progress)Enduring problems in AI/ML

Significant Advances in Health AI/ML are the Result of Non-monotonic Progress with Many Failures Followed by Successes. Learning from Case Studies

The AI/ML toolkit available currently to health data scientists is
nothing sort of extraordinary. The algorithms, systems and theory of
today have capabilities than a few decades ago seemed beyond the realm
of the possible. Examples include: the ability to operate predictively
with miniscule sample sizes and dimensionalities that exceed the 10⁶
variables range; the routine capability to classify and extract meaning
from text and other unstructured data; the ability to discover causation
reliably without experiments; the ability to guide experiments so that
the number and cost of experiments is minimized; the ability to explore
quadrillions of non-linear variable interactions in seconds on simple
personal computers by using kernel methods; automatic protection against
overfitting by deploying regularized/shrinkage methods; powerful
auto-modeler systems with performance matching and exceeding those of
experts; powerful image recognition. We also have autonomous vehicles,
industrial robotics, embedded decision support and control systems,
natural language understanding and translation, cyber security enabling
systems, sophisticated knowledge representation and data models that
support complex data harmonization and reuse at scale and speed. Many
more success stories and capabilities are discussed throughout this
volume (see indicatively chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: The Need
forBest Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML” and in the cited
literature.

These achievements of AI/ML did not happen smoothly, however. In many
cases they involved setbacks, pursuing dead ends, and learning from
painful mistakes. To this day, there are many systematic suboptimal
AI/ML practices that incur substantial costs for health care and the
health sciences.

The purposes of this chapter are to discuss a sample of prominent and
paradigmatic case studies where failures provided incentive and
inspiration for the field to advance and new and improved technologies
to emerge. Also these showcase the value of best practices (BPs)
advocated in the present volume. Finally, these case studies point to
areas where future major improvements are likely to occur if a more
rigorous and BP-driven health AI/ML is pursued.

The Gartner Hype Cycle

The concept of a “Hype Cycle” is commonly attributed to the Gartner
management consulting company [1]. Figure 1 describes a common
historical pattern where the emergence of new technology is followed by
a surge in expectations strongly overestimating true capabilities and
potential (Exuberant optimism aka “Peak of inflated expectations”) that
is followed by a dramatic drop of expectations that strongly
underestimate the true capabilities and potential of the technology
(“Trough of disillusionment”).

[]

A line graph of the expectations versus time. The line follows a steep
trend, descends, and increases. The path consists of exuberant optimism,
disillusionment, enlightenment, and a plateau of real value.

These expectations may be of scientists, technologists industry,
investors, customers, funding agencies, the general public, etc. across
the health care and health science ecosystems. As both technology and
sentiment mature, a period of increasing understanding of the technology
and is evolving capabilities follows (“Slope of Enlightment”) and then
converges to an accurate and lasting appraisal of the technology’s
merits (“Plateau of real value”).

“AI Winters”

The term “winter” with regards to a field of science or technology
refers to a prolonged period of reduced public expectation, research
support and industrial market growth. Essentially its is a prolonged
Trough of disillusionment to use Hype Cycle terminology. The opposite is
referred by “spring”, i.e., prolonged periods where expectations,
support and financial growth are high [2–4].

The field of AI in the middle of 20th century generated vast enthusiasm
and funding support. The early pioneers made strides in establishing
many foundational results and methods in the field. The general
sentiment was that in short period of time “hard AI” would be
feasible—i.e., intelligent systems that would possess general
intelligence capabilities on par or better than humans. However a number
of setbacks drained this enthusiasm and drastically undercut AI’s
growth.

The two main AI winters in the USA occurred between 1974–80 and 1987–93
with parallel and overlapping AI winters internationally. These
reflected real and perceived failures and disappointment in: scaling up
from toy-sized problems to real-life complexity, spoken language
understanding, artificial neural network limitations, the collapse of
the LISP machine industry, limitations of logic-based systems for broad
inference, the limited success of expert systems, and the failure of
Japan’s Fifth Generation project to meet its goals.

The main causes of the above failures (or perceived failures) can be
traced to the excessive hype (expectation exuberance) relative to what
was known, established, and proven in terms of theoretical capabilities
and empirical performance, effectiveness and other properties that the
present volume has described at length. The field, in hindsight,
mismanaged expectations and failed to impose the necessary
self-discipline for proceeding from the space of unknown properties and
capabilities to the space of guaranteed performance in a systematic and
science-driven manner. Figure 2 depicts the interplay among these
factors. Notice the immense distances between actual capabilities and
promises (D2, corresponding to actual “Hyped) and the unknown distances
between unknown properties and promises made (D1, D3, depicting
potential hype).

[]

An illustration of 4 blocks. A, Poorly understood properties of A I
methods and science. B. Unknown properties of future A I methods and
science. C. Promised results in the near future. D. Actual capability of
A I technology. D 1 connects blocks A and B. D 2 connects blocks C and
D. D 3 connects B and C.

The following components of the AI winters were or continue to be
particularly relevant to the aims of health AI/ML:

Perceptron Limitations

A notable setback was the discovery that perceptrons could not learn
non-linear data generating functions [5]. A perceptron is essentially a
single node in neural network (chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health
Science”), which linearly combines its inputs and outputs them through a
non-linear function. The above discovery pertains to the fact that a
single layer of perceptrons (i.e. a single-layer neural network) cannot
learn non-linear functions. Because the space of non-linear functions is
vast and many real-life problems exist in it, this was a major blow to
the credibility of the nascent AI technology and industry sector.

Eventually these fears proved to be unfounded: on one hand, with the
discovery of the Back Propagation algorithm by Werbos [6] and the
related work by Rummelrhart, McClelland, and the PDP (parallel
distributed programming) group (comprising, among others, such
luminaries as Nobel Prize winner Francis Crick and future Turing award
winner Geoffrey Hinton) and others, new improved science and technology
of artificial neural networks (ANNs) using multi-layered networks
trained with the Back Propagation algorithm [7] gave a theoretically
powerful and practical way to model non-linear domains.

Moreover, from a practical perspective, as discussed in chapter
“Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, linear models can still
be very effective since in low sample situations, due to Bias-Variance
Decomposition of the Error (BVDE), high bias (e.g., linear) learners
will often lead to better generalization error even if the large sample
data generating function is not linear. In addition, whereas a
non-linear discriminative function is not perfectly learnable with a
linear model, if some common mitigating factors are present (i.e.,
unbalanced priors of the inputs or correlated inputs [8]) then a linear
discriminant can discover the existence of signal and can achieve
accuracy up to within a vanishingly small factor. It is not an accident
that the most used (and arguably successful) modeling method in the
health sciences are linear statistical models since on average (as
opposed to worst case) in small sample designs such models are very
useful.

Back Propagation-Based ANNs and the Vanishing (Or Exploding) Gradient Problem

Back propagation is a very effective ANN training algorithm for ANNs
with a small number of hidden (intermediate) layers. However, when it
comes to building ANNs with many hidden layers (which are very powerful
in some domains) it suffers from a critical weakness, the vanishing or
exploding gradient problem. In backpropagation, the model is trained by
making empirical adjustments (based on derivatives of empirical error of
model output) to weights of ANN units of successive layers. The
exploding/vanishing gradients problem refers to the situation when these
errors grow very fast to the number of layers and very quickly lead to
parameterizing ANN weights with essentially useless noise.

A New Improved Technology of ANNs Followed

Deep ANNs aka “Deep Learning (DL)” (see chapter “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare &
Health Science”) overcame this problem by a simple (but very effective)
alteration in the mathematical form of the ANN units. Some of the key
innovations that allowed Deep Learning ANNs to differentiate from
standard multi-layered ANNs include: RELUs (Rectified Linear Units) as
transfer functions (they allow for non-linear learning and do not suffer
from derivatives vanishing/explosion); convolution layers and filters;
pooling/downsampling (to reduce dimensionality and overfitting); and
multiple iterations of Convolution-Pooling-RELUs (for hierarchical
features extraction) [9, 10]).

Roughly at the same time, another technological and scientific
breakthrough occurred when a new class of ML algorithms, Support Vector
Machines (SVMs) emerged based on the work of Vapnik, and his
collaborators Cortez, Boser and Guyon [11–13]. This class (see chapter
“An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science”) was based on a uniquely
powerful combination of regularization, quadratic optimization
formulation of the learning problem (which guarantees optimal search as
opposed to ANNs and many other ML algorithms that conduct incomplete and
error-prone parameter space search), dealing with non-linearities with
immense efficiency using kernel functions (discovered in mathematics
40 years before, but not used before in applied ML) and dealing with
model selection using structured risk minimization.

Another very powerful classifier that is widely adopted in the health
sciences is Random Forests that combines ideas from decision trees,
bagging, off-sample error estimation, random feature selection and
capacity control [14].

Together these three predictive modeling technologies are highly adopted
and very complementary. DL has dominant image recognition and generative
function empirical performance due to powerful automatic construction of
higher-order features. SVMs have dominant performance and efficiency
(sample and time complexity) in a large number of predictive health
tasks (e.g., clinical and omics data modeling) [13, 15–17]. Random
Forests and Boosting are also very powerful across a range of healthcare
and health science domains. Several more powerful ML algorithms have
been developed and are in wide use (see chapter “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare &
Health Science”).

Current Limitations (and Opportunities for Improvement) of DL

As powerful and useful as DL methods are, they still have significant
limitations that need be recognized and overcome, not only to achieve
better results but to manage expectations and avoid a possible new AI
winter. Such limitations (as explained and referenced in chapter “An
Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable
in Healthcare & Health Science” as well as several other chapters in the
present book) include: lack of effective formal causal properties both
in terms of adequate expressiveness, reliable discovery and consistent
inference; lack of a theory ensuring over fitting avoidance (note that
several empirical overfitting avoidance methods have been developed and
are used); large sample requirements and questionable performance in low
sample situations; a fundamentally heuristic approach to model
development and model selection; black box nature with limited
explainability; limited capability for shift invariance of image
recognition; limited accuracy advantages over conventional “vanilla”
statistical comparators (such as logistic regression—see
extensive empirical literature later in the present chapter) in several
applications, typically when the sample size is insufficient or the
problem is low dimensional; and incomplete and sub-optimal search of
parameter space. Published claims about high performance of DL in health
applications has been linked by several meta analyses to biased designs,
as demonstrated by extensive literature discussed later in this chapter.
We will also address limitations of DL in the commercial space (game
playing, self-driving cars) that has led to a more measured appreciation
of the technology’s strengths and limitations. Such an appreciation when
combined with dedicated research based on property-ensuring principles
(e.g., BPs in chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”) and safe deployment (e.g.,
BPs in chapter “Characterizing, Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of
Error of ML & AI Models in Clinical and Organizational Application”) has
the potential to reduce the limitations and reduce the possibility for a
new AI winter [4].

What’s in a Link: The Importance of Semantics in AI Models and Methods. From Problems with Early Semantic Networks to Those of Modern Network Science and Pathway Discovery

Chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” discussed semantic
networks as simplified and graphically interpretable offshoots of First
Order Logic (see chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”).
As semantic networks started proliferating, it became obvious that they
did not share the same technical meaning (semantics) and additionally,
because of lack of precise semantics, their output and behavior were
unknown, or unsound. These grave limitations were elucidated in a
landmark paper by Woods which attracted the attention of the symbolic AI
community and sparked needed improvements in semantic network
technology. Modern forms of the earlier SNs, e.g., the Semantic Web, and
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KRR) methods and tools draw
their power and integrity to these earlier SNs [2, 18–20].

However, the problem of unclear, undefined, inconsistent semantics in
graphical KRR is not eliminated. Today it manifests in other classes of
AI/Ml, most notably in biological pathway discovery algorithms, and
network science models.

Pathway reverse engineering methods in biology and other basic health
sciences, seek to discover, represent, and reason with the ways of
interaction (control, signaling, regulation etc.) among biological
(metabolic, genetic, proteomic, hormonal, immune etc.) molecules [21].
In both cases it is imperative to clearly and unambiguously specify the
precise meaning of the edges in the network model, and equally
importantly specify how the algorithms used to develop such mechanisms
guarantee that all and only those relationships that obey these meanings
are output by the algorithms. Among the many available methods in use in
numerous papers however, (a) the semantics are undeclared, ambiguous, or
lacking important properties, and (b) while algorithms are fully
specified, what is unspecified is how the operation of the algorithms
ensures the intented interpretation of the output.

For example, in biological pathway reverse engineering most formalisms
and algorithms in use do not enforce causal semantics, nor the Causal
Markov Condition, or the Causal Faithfulness Condition or other
conditions that are required to ensure causal interpretation (see
chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”). For example, heuristic and
ultimately false use of edges to denote strong univariate correlation as
a determinant of direct causation; heuristic/false use of edges to
denote non-zero weights in regularized regressors among the studied
entities.

The United States National Research Council defines network science as
"the study of network representations of physical, biological, and
social phenomena leading to predictive models of these phenomena" [22].
But how do such network representations can be used for predictive
modeling? More specifically how a network representation built using
edges denoting similarity, physical connectivity, cross-entropy,
geographical distance (to mention a few of the commonly used network
science approaches) can be used for prediction? What confers to such
networks predictive modeling capabilities? And why are such capabilities
(if they exist) better than, say, the minimal threshold comparator of
statistical baseline methods such as logistic regression that have
(among other desirable properties) provable large-sample error
optimality for many identifiable distributions?

The result of these limitations is that numerous models in existence are
routinely over-interpreted, in some cases misleading, and likely to
generate many false positive and false negative results in translational
and clinical applications.

Rule-Based AI, Expert Systems, Heuristic Systems, Limitations of Bayesian Learners and Disconnect Between Systems and Real-World Problems

Rule Based AI and Formal Expert Systems

One dimension of AI’s winters was the failure of knowledge-driven
Rule-Based systems to provide a viable means for achieving hard AI
(machines with general intelligence indistinguishable or superior to
that of humans) as well as problem-focused Expert Systems. Japan, for
example, launched the (in hindsight very ambitious) Fifth Generation
Computer Systems (FGCS) project which aimed to achieve a large portion
of these goals and altogether disrupt the computing technology landscape
in a remarkable time span of 10 years. Notably, the project was using
logic programming as its main programming language.

The reasons for these disappointing cases can readily be appreciated
now: attacking the AI problem at its broadest scope versus a
smaller-scoped divide-and-conquer approach [23] was in all likelihood a
strategic error given the difficulty and the heterogeneity of problem
requirements across the total problem spaces or interest. Rule-Based
systems and other KRR technology of the time lacked the flexibility to
deal with the very fluid reasoning that humans exhibit (e.g., reasoning
with uncertainty, perception, image recognition, learning, intuitively,
effortlessly, and reflexively in many instances) [2]. Deriving their
problem-solving knowledge from experts is limited by the fact that
experts typically cannot explain their problem-solving capabilities [24,
25] or when they can, their explanations cannot be faithfully captured
in rules or other existing KRR formats. One can also observe cycles of
huge emotional and other investment in one tool, methodology, or
approach that created “divides” across “camps”. For example, the
non-monotonic logic vs probabilistic divide, or the connectionist vs
symbolic divide [26], etc. Finally any effort to link the R&D and
success of AI/ML to creating simulacra of human intelligence may be
destined to be confined to what humans are already good at without
extending these capabilities to discovery in new problems where humans
do not perform well (or could never perform well because of
intrinsic limitations of their cognitive apparatus).

Heuristic Systems

The problems with the formal systems of the 80s and 90s led many to
pursue ad hoc, aka heuristic systems and methods [27, 28]. These have
had a considerably prominent presence in early medical informatics, and
also re-surfaced, for example, with prominent commercial products in the
2000s, as well as with approaches that dominated earlier stages of
high-throughput assay-driven biology and translational science. A
properties-based overview and structural analysis of the
heuristic-to-formal system spectrum is given in chapter “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems”. Here we will reiterate the key concepts
from a crises-leading-to-improvements perspective.

Striving to attain the lofty AI goals in the earlier history of the
field, attempts were made to overcome the difficulty and cost of
establishing formal systems. Some researchers, especially when faced
with complex domains, felt that the formal systems of the time (see
chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” for properties and
characteristics of those) were too restrictive for designing successful
AI solutions. Instead, they hoped that systems attempting to encode
problem-solving strategies directly, without being restricted by the
rules and structure of a formal foundation, would provide an approach
that would be easier to engineer and would yield good results - at least
“good enough, often enough”. For example, the DxPlain system which was
designed to perform large-scope diagnosis (and adopting its heuristic
precursor, INTERNIST-I’s knowledge representation and reasoning
algorithm) was heuristic because it lacked a formal AI foundation and
formal properties.

In a vigorous debate that lasted for many years, proponents of heuristic
systems argued that to the extent that they worked well empirically,
they should be perfectly acceptable, especially if more
formally-constructed systems did not match the empirical performance of
heuristic systems and if constructing formal systems or establishing
their properties was exceedingly hard. Proponents of formal systems
counter-argued that this ad-hoc approach to AI was detrimental since one
should never feel safe when applying such systems, especially in
high-stakes domains.

There is no arguing about the fact that formal foundations provide a
roadmap for both problem solving and incremental improvements to
existing systems. They make understanding the theoretical and empirical
properties of AI/ML models and systems easier. In turn, such
understanding does not always guarantee optimal systems, but gives a
roadmap that enables safe navigation of the complex technological
terrain of applied AI/ML. Heuristic development, on the other hand, is
based upon the availability of the rather nebulous and uncontrollable
ingredients of human inspiration and intuition. It is also conducive to
engaging adoption of technology that is not safe, exactly because its
functions and hence risks, are not understood well enough. This
represented a “scruffy” approach [2] to an endeavor that, it is now
evident with the benefit of the progress that has been achieved over the
years, needed to employ science-driven solutions.

From a modern scientific perspective, the historical emphasis on
heuristic systems seems much less meaningful today than in the earlier
days of AI, because of the scientific advances in the field that led to
the huge success and dominance of formal methods [2, 29]. It is now
evident, that heuristic systems are pre-scientific or early-scientific
technological artifacts in the sense that a true scientific
understanding of their behavior does not exist (yet) and that with
sufficient study in the future, a comprehensive understanding of a
heuristic system of today can be obtained. In other words the heuristic
system of today (or the past) will be the formal system of tomorrow
[28]. Thus heuristic vs formal, if interpreted in terms that imply a
special distinctive intrinsic nature, is a false dichotomy using
misleading language.

Today’s science and technology of AI/ML supports instead the
distinction: AI/ML systems with well understood properties (theoretical
but also empirical performance), versus systems that lack these
properties. There is an evolutionary path from heuristic systems (aka
pre-scientific informal systems) to scientifically understood and
validated systems.

Chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” further elaborates
the landscape and epistemological journey from heuristic to formal:
pre-scientific/heuristic, to intermediate level systems, to fully-mature
fully-reliable and science-backed systems. Chapter “Principles of
Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”
presents a concise summary of the main properties of all main AI/ML
methods showing that due to the immense progress of the past few
decades, we now have an extensive AI/ML method toolkit with
well-understood behaviors.

The modern significance of this topic is that regrettably many new AI/ML
methods and systems (or old methods applied to completely new areas)
both in academia and industry lack established properties for
performance and safety. It is not uncommon for such systems to be rushed
to real-life application, and it is an ongoing battle to establish such
properties before they can gain the trust and adoption they hope for,
especially in high-stakes domains, such as medicine and the health
sciences. Of particular relevance to today’s AI/ML are: (a) systems or
methods that are well understood/proven in a problem domain that are
thrust in a different domain where they do not have well-established
scientific foundations (e.g., IBM Watson Health, Large Language Models
(LLMs), Deep Learning clinical applications on account on success on
non-medical domains, or Shapley values for explaining ML models—see
chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and
Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”, etc.). (b)
Numerous bespoke bioinformatics “pipelines” constructed for the needs of
a particular study but lacking well-defined generalizable properties.

Disconnect Between Early AI Systems and Real-World Needs and Workflows

Many of the early efforts in health AI/ML were driven by intellectual
curiosity and less by the actual problems that patients or healthcare
systems were facing. Consequently, the resulting systems were
disconnected from (a) patient care needs, (b) patient care workflows,
(c) needs of the system of science. A classic example is that of early
diagnostic systems that attempted to solve a problem that was not
pressing or was evaluated in a different population. Using one out of
many similar examples of that era, INTERNIST-I was designed for accurate
diagnosis of patients across internal medicine—whereas most patients in
internal medicine clinic are not admitted for diagnosis and moreover,
diagnosis is challenging for human internists in a small minority of
diseases and few patient cases within those. Additionally, the data
entry into the systems was disruptive of clinical workflows at the time
[30] because of lack of EHRs and CPOE (computerized provider order entry
systems) [31].

In addition, the collection of data inputs in the healthcare domain is
in most cases sequential over time and dynamic (i.e, conditional on
prior findings) [32]. The selection of which tests to run at each time
point is a major decision that reflects a partial differential diagnosis
and is not within the decision sphere of AI systems confined to a
single-point-in-time decisions. This biases conventional performance
evaluation based on complete medical records upward to very significant
degree. Finally INTERNIST-I in particular, was evaluated for cases so
hard (NEJM challenge cases) that in many cases only patho-anatomic
examination (usually on biopsies obtained after patient surgery or
death) was able to resolve the underlying disease (i.e., the diagnosis
in such cases likely cannot be reliably made with data available to the
AI system or the physicians) [33].

The compounding of these factors together rendered such systems very
valuable from a technology exploration perspective but of limited use in
practical terms and this was reflected in a landmark paper by
Hunt, Haynes et al., which established very limited impact of the AI
technology of the time on patient outcomes [34]. Most of the above
factors were also recognized in an influential paper by Miller himself
et al. that declared the death of the “Greek Oracle model” for AI
decision support. These authors advocated instead for a softer
knowledge-based “catalyst” model, assistive in nature, that would work
in parallel with physicians and thus they modified the INTERNIST-I
system into its successor QMR formulated as an electronic textbook of
internal medicine with inferential capabilities. Unfortunately this
re-formulation was also not adopted widely in practice, most
likely because it did not address pressing real-life needs [30].

The many practical problems associated with Expert Systems of both the
rule-based or heuristic varieties were overcome by the subsequent
adoption of ML data-driven algorithms. This technology was made
applicable across a wide spectrum of applications because of the
availability of vast troves of data (e.g., in the EHRs, the WWW, and
mass-throughput molecular assays) combined with powerful ways to prevent
over- and under-fitting (see chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and
General Model Overconfidence and Under-performance Pitfalls and Best
Practices in Machine Learning and AI”).

Limitations of Early Bayesian Learners and Emergence of BNs

The earliest conceptual application of AI/ML Bayesian reasoning in
medicine, to our knowledge, is outlined in Ledley and Lusted [35]
whereas a very early empirical application in a real-life domain using
data-driven modeling, to Warner et al [36].

As explained in chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of
Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science”, brute-force
application of Bayes’ rule incurs an exponential space and time
complexity which renders it infeasible outside all but the most trivial
problem domains. Because of these factors early Bayesian classifiers
where used with severe restrictions, typically in the form of “Simple”
or “Naïve” Bayes which assumes that the target response (e.g., disease
classification) comprises mutually exclusive categories, and that the
inputs (e.g., disease findings) are independent of each other given the
findings (see chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” and
“An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science”). These assumptions are
obviously most often false in healthcare and health sciences and entail
substantial error in some applications. This led to research that took
place over 2 decades and gave rise to improved formalisms, the most
important of which is Bayesian Networks (discussed in chapter
“Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” in terms of properties, in
chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science” in terms of ML, and in
chapter “Foundations of Causal ML” in terms of causality). This new AI
technology was probabilistically correct and thus handled uncertainty
optimally. It was flexible enough to model any distribution and at the
level of space and sample complexity that the distribution required
without unrealistic assumptions. BNs also allowed sound and complete
forward and backward rule chaining inferences to take place [37, 38].

Intractability of BN Inference. Ability to Learn BNs from Data

The new and highly appealing formalism of BNs was quickly discovered to
be worst-case intractable in inference both in the exact and approximate
cases [39, 40]. Newer research, however, produced approximate inference
algorithms that advanced the tractability of the formalism on large
numbers of variables, e.g., [41]. Moreover, it was soon discovered by
Herskowitz and Cooper that BNs could be learnt from data using
entropy-based scoring and shortly afterwards, by Cooper and Herskowitz,
using Bayesian scoring [42, 43]. Heckerman et al. developed a modified
family of Bayesian scores that could observe likelihood equivalence,
which says that data should not help discriminate network structures
that represent the same assertions of conditional independence [44].

Overfitting and Over-Confidence in Models: Problems, Advances and Persistent Challenges

As detailed in chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model
Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in
Machine Learning and AI”, overfitting in AI/ML is the creation of models
that because of their high complexity work well in the discovery data
but do not generalize well in the broader population. Over-confidence is
a broader class of problems in which we expect the models to perform
better than what their true error is (regardless of the models’
complexity). Overfitting is typically a byproduct of how algorithms fit
models to data whereas over confidence may involve error estimation and
data design faults as well (see chapters “The Development Process and
Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive
AI/ML Models” and “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model
Overconfidence and Under-performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in
Machine Learning and AI” for detailed analysis). Over-fitting and
over-confidence can happen both in knowledge-driven and hand-modeled AI
as well as in data-driven ML modeling.

In the early years of ML, overfitting avoidance was enforced by various
factors and practices, e.g.: the natural dearth of high-dimensional
datasets, by eliminating most variables from modeling using often crude
feature selection strategies, by the statistical practice of
analyst-driven “model specification” as opposed to extensive
computational search in model space, by application of “pruning” of
models after they were constructed, by application of inductive biases
that—ceteris paribus—preferred simpler models over more complex ones,
and other strategies and practices. Unfortunately, not all of the above
practices were sufficient to address the problem. For example, in
classical statistical regression, so-called step-wise procedures were
shown to lead to substantially overfitted models with biased error
estimates [45]).

In the 90s and onward, however, a newer generation of highly regularized
learners (see chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” and
“An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science”) were put to practice, with
built-in resistance to overfitting and mathematical error bounds that
ensured that model complexity was automatically tailored to the data
generating function’s complexity and the available data. Notable such ML
methods include penalty+loss learners such as SVMs and Regularized
regression of various forms (chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health
Science”). Some other ML algorithms enforce implicit regularization in
the form of model priors (Bayesian ML [43, 44]) or maximum allowed model
size (e.g., Random Forests [14]) or via several formal and ad hoc
regularization mechanisms in Deep Learning [9, 10].

Additional advances came in the form of principled, theoretically
optimal and empirically powerful feature selection algorithms in the
early 2000s and onward, which constrain the model complexity immensely
before modeling even begins (e.g., reducing without loss of
predicitivity, the modeled variables from, indicatively, 139,000
variables to 32 variables and from 100,000 to 6 variables in some
representative applications [46–51].

Powerful nested protocols that combine model selection with error
estimation so that over fitting and over confidence would be avoided
also emerged as extensions to the previously well-known theory of
cross-validation [52].

These protocols’ importance was firmly established in genomic data
analysis by the work of R. Simon et al [53] but are of universal
applicability. The above new methods can be combined to strengthen the
overall resistance to overfitting.

With modern algorithms and model selection, error estimation, and safe
deployment protocols (see chapters “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health
Science”, “Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and
AI Methods and Systems”, “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”,
“Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and
Under-performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and
AI”, “Characterizing, Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML &
AI Models in Clinical and Organizational Application”), avoiding
overfitting can be practically ensured in modern ML modeling.
Unfortunately there are still obstacles that need be addressed:

1.  (i)

    There is a significant education and adoption gap, since the
    concepts of overfitting and unbiased error estimation and the
    methods to address them are not as widely known (or universally
    practiced) especially by many stakeholders and beneficiaries from
    AI/ML (basic scientists, translational and clinical scientists,
    health care administrators, etc.).

     

2.  (ii)

    While independent validation of models (chapter “The Development
    Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
    Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”) is usually required by many
    journals, these validations may fail because of discovery-validation
    population mismatches or due to under-powered validations, and not
    because of over fitting. In other words, failure to pass independent
    set validation can generate false negatives. By comparison,
    cross-validation (properly executed) may only fail if the accessible
    population differs from the target population (i.e., a data design
    issue, see chapter “Data Design”).

     

3.  (iii)

    At best, independent validation is more of a forensic failure
    analysis tool (i.e., why a model may have failed) than a
    preventative strategy (i.e., how to construct the model so that it
    will not fail).

     

4.  (iv)

    Hand-made model construction is widely practiced in biomedical
    engineering and other fields but without theoretical or practical
    assurances that the development practices that led to one successful
    model will generalize in other domains.

     

5.  (v)

    Widely-used ML algorithms such as DL still to this day lack a
    well-developed theory that prevents overfitting and ensures
    generalization. In an intriguing paper [54] Zhang et al show that DL
    networks can perfectly learn random noise, memorize data fully, and
    these behaviors are not affected by regularization measures.
    Although empirical evidence suggests that DL learners often do
    resist overfitting, the reasons are not well understood. It is
    entirely possible that practical DL models exhibiting excellent
    classification errors in some domains were made possible simply due
    to the large sample sizes used to train them. At this time DL
    algorithms may be safer to use in data-rich settings.

     

6.  (vi)

    Results from most ML competitions and challenges are inexorably tied
    (by design) to a small number of datasets and the set of loss
    functions used in the competition. This is a problem of
    over-confidence in a model which formally is a broader class of
    problems encompassing overfitting. As an indicative example, when
    Narendra et al compared a number of (highly reputable) DREAM
    challenges winning algorithms for pathway reverse engineering and
    contrasted them with additional algorithms with fresh datasets, very
    hard gold standards, and using a variety of loss functions, the
    previous winners did not exhibit superior performances and in some
    cases were substantially under-performing especially with respect to
    several loss functions not originally examined [21]. Moreover, the
    choice of loss functions dramatically reversed the rankings of
    algorithms’ performances in many cases.

     

Ignoring the Data Design and Learning Protocol (Model Selection, Error Estimation) Effects on Modeling Success

Recall from chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” that
the architecture of a ML method is defined by the tuple: < L, MF, DD, S,
MLS, GM>, in other words, the combination of a modeling language (L)
(that describes the model space S), the model fitting procedure (MF)
that parameterizes models to data, the data design (DD) that samples
data from a population, a search procedure (MLS) that explores the model
space and a goal/merit function (GM) used to evaluate each model.
Typically, the focus on most ML and data science is on the “algorithm”
which is meant to correspond to <L, MF, S, GM>. It is also common to see
discussions of how the sample size may affect ability to learn specific
classes of target functions [55, 56].

What is omitted from most technical and lay public discourse alike,
however, are the effects of data design (Chapter “Data Design”) and
model selection and error estimation (Chapters “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”, “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-sensitive AI/ML Models”, “Overfitting, Underfitting and
General Model Overconfidence and Under-performance Pitfalls and Best
Practices in Machine Learning and AI”). For emphasis, let us represent
the success of AI/ML for a particular problem-solving endeavor with the
following Fig. 3, which we invite the reader to always keep in mind in
the context of AI/Ml projects:

[]

An illustration represents algorithm plus data design plus model
selection and error estimation leading to success or failure of A I or M
L in terms of performance and safety.

This brings us to two enduring problems in historical and modern
practice or AI/ML:

Effects of Protocols on Overall Model Performance Are Very Strong

In present day AI/ML practice it is common to encounter situations where
the choice of model selection and error estimation protocol may
negatively affect or even nullify good properties of ML algorithms. For
example in [57] the largest (to our knowledge) empirical benchmark of
text categorization algorithms and protocols was conducted. Among other
findings, they established that apparently minor alterations in the
protocols used (with respect to their ideal specification), led to
reduction in model predictivity as large as from >0.9 AUC to 0.72 AUC (a
truly massive degradation in performance) (Fig. 4).

[]

A bar graph of the A U C versus model selection protocol. All the bars
are above 0.8 except the bar oracle, which is 0.7, and it is
highlighted. Data are estimated.

In the field of genomics, a landmark study was conducted by the
Microarray Quality Consortium [58] MAQC-II project, where 36 independent
teams analyzed six microarray data sets to generate predictive models
for classifying a sample with respect to one of 13 endpoints indicative
of lung or liver toxicity in rodents, or of breast cancer, multiple
myeloma or neuroblastoma in humans. The teams generated predictive
models and tested the models on data that had not been used for
training. Model performance depended largely on the endpoint and team
proficiency while different approaches generated models of similar
performance.

A major finding was noticing “substantial variations in performance
among the many K-nearest neighbor algorithm (KNN)-based models developed
by four analysis teams … Follow-up investigations identified a few
possible causes leading to the discrepancies in performance. For
example, DAT20 fixed the parameter ‘number of neighbors’ K = 3 in its
data analysis protocol for all endpoints, whereas DAT18 varied K from 3
to 15 with a step size of 2.”

Second, there are clear differences in proficiency between data analysis
teams and such differences are correlated with the level of experience
of the team. Moreover the study found that the internal validation
performance from well-implemented, unbiased cross-validation shows a
high degree of concordance with the external validation performance in a
strict blinding process.

It was also found that swapping train and test sets led to different
results (with same modeling approaches). This “fragility” of independent
dataset validation reinforces the guidance provided in several places in
the present volume about not over-interpreting differences in
performance to an independent validation if internal validation has been
executed properly. However, it was also noted that the correlation of
the independent validation with the reversed order of modeling-testing
was further reduced in teams with less experience, showing the effect of
proper modeling practices.

The consortium concluded that “Finally, applying good modeling practices
appeared to be more important than the actual choice of a particular
algorithm over the others within the same step in the modeling process.
This can be seen in the diverse choices of the modeling factors used by
teams that produced models that performed well in the blinded
validation”.

On the basis of these findings, MAQC-II set forth 4 general guidelines
(incorporated in the present volume in several chapters) covering: good
design, proper (internal) cross validation (or similar quality error
estimation and model selection), caution about pitfalls of independent
(external) validation, and not contaminating modeling data with test
data information.

The findings of the MAQC-II project suggest that when the same data sets
are provided to a large number of data analysis teams, many groups can
generate similar results even when different model building approaches
are followed. In this particular domain at least, the effect of protocol
is more important than the algorithm used.

In another important benchmark study, Statnikov et al [17] showed that
previously published early reports showing the superiority of Random
Forests over other algorithms for cancer microarray data classification
were an artifact of the protocols used to run the algorithms. When the
“reference” use (i.e., one suggested by the methods’ inventors) was
followed in a common model selection and error estimation protocol, the
results changed in favor or the SVM family of models.

Effects of Data Design on Overall Model Performance Are Very Strong

As we saw in Chapter “Data Design for Biomedical AI/ML”, the data
design, may affect in a myriad of ways the ability or ease and
efficiency of drawing specific conclusions and attaining models with
desired characteristics, often independent of learning algorithm. Also
it was shown that with the same algorithms employed, some designs do not
allow certain inferences at all or within reasonable resources, or
exhibit large variation in quality of results. Yet, treatment of data
design considerations while abundant and very sophisticated in
statistics, in AI/ML they seem to often receive less scrutiny by
practicing data scientists, vendors and the public. Some examples
follow:

Issues with ML Challenges

As discussed in Chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”, ML challenges serve two
fundamental purposes. One is the education of scientists from different
fields about the problems the challenge addresses and giving them data
and a platform to experiment. The second purpose is to explore which
algorithmic methods are better at a particular point in time for a
particular problem. Well-designed challenges can generate valuable
information and enhance interdisciplinary engagement. In most cases,
however, challenges suffer from fixing a data design and the error
estimator thus removing from consideration, study, and improvement, two
out of the three determinants of ML success (Figure 3).

Challenges also routinely restrict the design of modeling by
pre-selecting variables, and over-simplifying the statement of problems,
sometimes to meaningless extremes. Consider as representative example of
thousands of similar challenge datasets, a high-ranked dataset in the
competition platform Kaggle [59]. Participants are asked to build models
to predict stroke based on the following features:

  gender, age, hypertension (has: yes/no), heart_disease (has: yes/no),
  ever_married, work_type( "children", "Govt_jov", "Never_worked",
  "Private" or "Self-employed"), Residence_type ("Rural" or "Urban"),
  avg_glucose_level, bmi, smoking_status ( "formerly smoked", "never
  smoked", "smokes" or "Unknown"). Stroke is defined as (1 if the
  patient had a stroke or 0 if not).

Such a formulation of the problem omits very significant aspects
previously established in the clinical literature
(e.g., important factors to be measured, prior successful models,
precise and meaningful descriptions of the clinical context of use for
such models). It is furthermore representative on a systematic pattern
of many competition platforms to reduce challenging scientific problems
to ‘toy’ versions, that are not fully informed by prior science, are
often devoid of medical or AI/ML technical context, have dubious choice
or features and coding, lack proper design flexibility -including
statements of target and accessible populations- and so forth (see
Chapter “Data Design for Biomedical AI/ML” why problem statements and
data as the one described here lack basic pre-requisites for making
scientific advances).

Challenges also suffer from incomplete or highly biased representation
in the competitor pool. Most of participants in challenges are either
students or interested scientists but from different areas and thus
typically having limited skill in tackling the problem. Another
limitation is that not all appropriate algorithms are entered in a
challenge and when they enter, they are not executed necessarily
according to optimal specifications. Finally, challenges typically
involve a very small number of datasets that do not represent a large
domain. Such representative coverage typically requires many dozens of
datasets or more in the same comparison. One final defining
characteristic of challenges, is that they externalize and distribute
the cost of method benchmarking to volunteer participants (and this
explains in part their proliferation for commercial purposes as a
low-cost R&D alternative business model).

Despite these limitations, a select number of challenges that are
designed to a high degree of quality, when interpreted carefully and
with the appropriate qualifications, can provide empirical scientific
information that could supplement the centralized and distributed
benchmark designs (details in Chapter “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”). For
examples of well-designed, and carefully interpreted challenges the
reader may refer to the challenges conducted by the ChaLearn
organization [60].

Other Persistent Issues Related to Common Data Design Deficiencies

We briefly mention here a number of additional areas negatively affected
by suboptimal data design choices (or by not paying enough attention to
data design): Active learning algorithms entail gathering data in which
the natural priors of the target response classes are typically unknown.
However, such knowledge is necessary for characterizing model errors by
loss functions that are prior-dependent (e.g., positive and negative
predictive value). This creates obstacles to safe model deployment (see
Chapter “Characterizing, Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML
& AI Models in Clinical and Organizational Application”). The
shortcomings of EHR data for secondary analysis in terms of data
incompleteness and bias are widely appreciated (and often exaggerated).
An important issue that receives much less attention with EHR-based data
designs is the lack of power. For example, the PheWAS design for
genotype-phenotype correlation discovery [61] is an modern design that
aims to bridge the clinical with the genomic worlds. However, in a
fragmented health system like the USA’s, such designs are hampered by
the difficulty in pooling data across provider organizations, and
harmonizing the population characteristics and risk of biases. As such,
the discovery is confined to single systems or small pools of those. The
limited genomic variable scope in EHRs incurs an exceedingly small a
priori probability for discovery, and these two factors together,
further exacerbate the low power issue. Newer Big Science designs e.g.,
VA’s MVP project [62] or the AllOfUs project [63] are poised to overcome
these difficulties. Power-sample design, is harder in ML because
knowledge of learning curves is required but often only empirically
known (see Chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical
Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” for
guidance). In some cases assumption-driven and early data-fitted
empirical learning curves failed to produce unbiased estimates (as for
example occured in [64]).

Causality in Early and Modern ML

One of the most foundational aspects of AI/ML for improving health
outcomes and the healthcare system and for driving advances in health
science discovery is causality, its discovery, representation, and
modeling. We will thus discuss in the present chapter several historical
and modern challenges and successes involving causal knowledge.

“Correlation Does Not Imply Causation” and the Falsely Implied Impossibility of Discovering Causality Without Experiments. Problems with RCTs and Low-dimensional Experiments

For many years, the celebrated statistician Sir Ronald Fisher’s famous
warning about the inappropriateness of concluding that A is causing B
(or vice versa) from the fact that A and B are correlated, was
inappropriately extrapolated to the notion that only experiments could
discover causality. In the clinical health sciences the randomized
controlled trial (RCT), a methodology with a long history [65–67] has
been viewed as the sole arbiter of reliable causal discovery.

Fisher’s statement is quite benign since, properly interpreted, implies
that not all correlations between A and B entail that A → B or A ← B but
rather that a confounder may be responsible for the correlation: A
← C → B. So it follows that if we observe that A and B are correlated,
then they may or may not cause one another. If we observe that A and B
are uncorrelated, on the other hand, in the majority of distributions, A
is not causing B and vice versa. The presence of correlation thus
provides evidentiary support for the existence of causation and lack of
correlation effectively precludes it [68].

If we are interested in causes (or effects) of variable A we can
typically discard all variables X that are uncorrelated with A.
Variables Y that are correlated with A, are candidate causes or effects
of A. If the possible confounders of A and Y are measured and we know
who they are, we can control them analytically (by SEMs or regression,
see Chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”) or by matching. These facts led
to widespread practices in epidemiology where a large pool of correlates
where established by data analysis as well as putative confounders and
the correlates were examined for vanishing conditional correlations with
A given the assumed confounders. If the non-zero correlation of Y with A
becomes zero (aka vanishes) conditioned on the complete set of measured
confounders C, then A is not causing Y or vice versa. If the conditional
correlation is not zero, then this supports the existence of a causal
relationship between A and Y.

A variant of this analytical control methodology, propensity scoring,
was introduced by [69]. In propensity scoring, the fundamental idea is
that the analyst builds a predictor model of the exposure, and controls
the correlation of exposure and outcome by conditioning on the score of
the predictor. If this conditional correlation of the exposure and the
outcome vanishes, then the exposure does not cause the outcome.

Additional heuristic causality rules (Hill’s criteria or Koch’s
postulates [70–72]) were often overlaid on correlative analytics in
order to support or weaken causal interpretation.

There are major limitations with all of the above approaches,
however [68, 73]:

1.  (a)

    Even if the confounders are all measured, it is not always known
    that they are confounders. Wrong causal conclusions are likely if
    the controlling or matching variables are, or include,
    non-confounders.

     

2.  (b)

    If even one of the confounder is not measured, (i.e., it is “hidden”
    or “latent”) then they cannot be controlled analytically or by data
    design with the previous approaches.

     

3.  (c)

    The heuristic criteria were shown to be invalid and misleading.

     

4.  (d)

    The assumptions that would ensure correctness of propensity scoring
    are not testable within the propensity scoring theory. Moreover as
    was shown in a vigorous peer-reviewed debate [74, 75], Pearl and
    others showed that in a very large class of models, conditioning on
    the propensity score introduces errors in the estimation of causal
    effects and that the theory of propensity scoring could not test for
    these problematic cases.

     

Randomized causal experiments or RCTs are typically used to confirm or
reject the causal nature of a hypothesized causal relationship. RCTs and
other randomized experiments nullify (on average) all confounders
between treatment/exposure and outcome even if these confounders are
unknown and unmeasured.

As useful as RCTs are, they also have significant limitations (and the
same is true for other randomized experiments); here we will summarize
only the salient limitations mainly with respect to scalability,
feasibility, scope, and completeness [68, 73]:

- RCTs are a confirmatory and not a discovery procedure.

- RCTs are very expensive and time-demanding.

- RCTs are infeasible in many settings.

- RCTs are unethical in many settings.

- RCT execution commonly fails for a variety of reasons (e.g., accrual
  failure, lack of power).

- RCTs reveal remote or direct causation and do not determine direct
  causation.

- RCTs cannot be used to develop system-level causal models (i.e., full
  causal specification of the data generating process). See in
  particular the important results from the theory of causal discovery
  summarized in Chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”
  that show the severe limitations of 1-variable-at a time or fragmented
  experiments with regard to ability to learn the whole system of causal
  relationships (unless they are coupled and supported by algorithmic
  non-experimental causal discovery). Many of these RCT shortcomings
  also apply in biology and other basic health sciences, in
  low-dimensional randomized experiments (i.e., manipulating one or a
  few variables at a time).

- RCTs produce average and not precision causal effect estimates (i.e.,
  they are too broad in effect size estimation).

- RCTs are applied to a typically narrow accessible population and not
  the wider target population (i.e., they are too narrow with regards to
  target population).

- RCTs are extremely sensitive to context (for a demonstration that is
  as vivid as it is whimsical see [76].

New Class of Scalable Causal Discovery Algorithms

The limitations of the [candidate discovery → validation] discovery
chain via the sequence [uncontrolled correlations → controlled
correlations → randomized experiments], were radically reduced by the
emergence of a new class of causal ML algorithms that under conditions
guaranteed algorithmic and reliable scalable complex causal discovery
and modeling even in the absence of experiments. These algorithms
originated from diverse data science and AI/ML disciplines: Computer
Science (Pearl, Verma and others [73]), Computational Philosophy
(Spirtes, Glymour, Scheines and others [68]), Econometrics and AI
(Granger, Herbert Simon, Sims, Imbens and others) and Health Informatics
(Cooper et al [43]). A multitude of theoretical and algorithmic advances
pioneered by these researchers addressed the limitations of earlier
approaches and offered effective alternative and supplemental discovery
and modeling procedures. Among the milestone contributions of the above,
it is worthwhile highlighting the richness and breadth of Pearl’s
theoretical treatment of causality, the seminal algorithmic body of work
by Spirtes, Glymour, Scheines and their students and collaborators, and
the remarkable IC* algorithm by Verma and Pearl, which opened the doors
for detecting existence of unmeasured variables that confound
statistical correlations. Please refer to Chapter “Foundations of Causal
ML” for details on properties and capabilities.

Early Causal Algorithms Were Not Scalable; Claimed Impossibility of Tractable Causal Discovery Algorithms. Discovery of Scalable and Efficient Causal Algorithms and Causal Feature Selection

As these new causal methods started being used in empirical
applications, it quickly became evident that the algorithms would not
scale to more than a few dozen variables in unrestricted distributions
with hidden variables and ~100 variables when no latents were present.
Notable researchers expressed strong pessimism that scalable algorithms
could be invented (e.g., prominent algorithms expert and Turing award
winner J. Ulman in a paper discussing large-scale data mining
applications techniques [77] assessed that “… the goal has generally
been to learn complete causal models, which are essentially impossible
to learn in large-scale data mining applications with a large number of
variables”).

Fortunately not long after these pessimistic predictions were made, the
first scalable local causal methods had been discovered, and within a
few years full causal graph ones [78]. Moreover, researchers developed
methods that bridged the local causal discovery problem and predictive
modeling by introducing scalable, sample efficient and correct Markov
Boundary algorithms [8, 48]. Chapters “Foundations and Properties of
AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML
Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science” and “Principles of
Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”
give more detail on the approaches used to scale up the previous
generation of algorithms. [79] describe the theoretical framework for
connecting predictivity, feature selection and local causality). These
methods were subsequently expanded/followed by sound and
scalable algorithms capable of equivalence-class modeling, ML-guided
experimentation, and generalized families thereof [80, 81]).

Lack of Causal Correctness in Broad Use of ML and Especially the Persistent Use of General Predictive Modeling Methods to Solve Causal Problems

A widespread misapplication of AI/ML methods and tools across the
academic sphere and industry alike, involves the use of methods not
designed for causality to solve causal problems. This includes, for
example, the use of vanilla predictive modeling, clustering, network
science, non-causal feature selection, dimensionality reduction, and
other methods lacking causal correctness. Especially in the predictive
modeling area, numerous methods are abused in this regard (e.g., Deep
Learning and other ANNs, regularized regression and classification,
Decision Trees and Random Forests, SVMs, Boosting, Bagging and
Ensembling, see Chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of
Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science”). To
understand the magnitude of the problem, we refer the reader to the
large scale benchmarks published in [48], where >100 algorithms and
variants were tested in >40 datasets, from real life and resimulation,
as to their ability to be used for feature selection/prediction and
causal discovery. Main findings included that: (a) predictive methods
performed very well or optimally for prediction; (b) causal feature
selection led to optimal predictive models while using smallest number
of features; (c) predictive feature selection is utterly inappropriate
for causal discovery. The following 2 figures demonstrate this last
finding: In Figure 5 an experiment is shown where a local causal method
in the GLL family and and a predictive method (SVMs) are compared in the
task of discovering the local causal pathway around a response variable
T of interest in a transcriptomic network used to generate the
comparison data. The causal method achieves this goal with near-perfect
causal accuracy (blue nodes, zoomed in the figure) and empirically
optimal predictive accuracy at the same time. The non-causal method is
equally predictive, but selects features across the network without any
useful causal interpretation. Notice that once we can recover the local
pathway accurately, we can apply the causal procedure across all
variables and recover the whole causal network. Moreover the ability to
estimate causal effects of manipulations is totally dependent on
identifying the confounders. Hence the focus on local causal accuracy is
justified by it being a prerequisite for both correct causal structure
and correct quantitative causal effect estimation.

[]

An illustration of a world map represented in nodes connected with one
another. The nodes are labeled with numbers and are in 3 different
shades. A few nodes are encircled.

These behaviors are not confined to a single dataset or a single pair of
algorithms, but are general operating characteristics.

Figure 6 compares a multitude of causal and non-causal methods: GLL
variants (causal), RFE-SVM, UAF, and Regularized regression/Elastic Net
(non-causal). As can be seen, causal methods recover the direct causes
with minimal false positives (and optimal predictivity), non-causal
methods although predictively excellent, produce fundamentally only
causal false positives. In these experiments, Lars-EN in particular (for
reasons that are poorly understood) seems to have an anti-causal
inductive bias, thus selecting features as far away from the direct
causes as possible.

[]

A radar chart of casual and non-casual methods. The casual method
includes Hiton P C F D R max k equal 1, 2, 3, and 4. Non-casual method
includes L A R S EN one versus rest and multiclass, U A F S 2 N and K W
S V M 20% and 50%. R F E reduction by 20% and 50%. Non-casual method
occupies most areas.

Pillars of Causal AI

The need for wider adoption of causal methods in AI/ML is as pressing as
ever. Pearl [82] provides a lucid description of this urgency and
outlines what he considers as his 7 pillars of Causal AI as follows:

- Pillar 1: Encoding Causal Assumptions transparently and testably.

- Pillar 2: using Do-calculus to control confounding.

- Pillar 3: Algorithmization of counterfactuals effect estimation.

- Pillar 5: Dealing with external validity and sample selection bias.

- Pillar 6: Dealing with missing data.

- Pillar 7: Advancing causal discovery.

Case Studies with Pitfalls Involving AI/ML Used in Genomics

Among research domains in the health sciences, genomics and other fields
driven by high-throughput (i.e., high dimensional) omics (e.g.,
transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomics, microbiomic, epigenetic) assays
have arguably benefited the most from the availability of ML methods for
making sense of large datasets originating from vastly complicated data
generating processes (see Chapter “Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare and Health Sciences: The Need for
Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI and ML”). In clinical domains these
advances have enabled exponential progress, for instance, the progress
of molecular oncology toward deriving rationally-designed “targeted”
treatments as well as precision medicine tests [83] that are rapidly and
decisively changing the cancer field. These achievements did not occur
smoothly, however, and several case studies exist that serve as examples
of how deviation from best practices can lead to grave errors, dead ends
and false starts.

The Anil Poti incident is one such case study in which several trials
were shut down, several grants terminated, and a substantial number of
papers withdrawn. Although some accounts of the incident emphasize
administrative errors and compliance issues, it is worth noting that at
the core of the misconduct was the creation of a controversial complex
precision oncology models and tests used to treat patients in clinical
trials. [84]. This is also a vivid illustration that testing ML models
in a RCT is a final step only and does not constitute sufficient
protection since poorly-constructed models will endanger human
subjects. In response to this incident the National Cancer Institute
requested that the Institute of Medicine (IOM) establish a committee to
recommend ways to strengthen omics-based test development and
evaluation.

Best Practice 12.7.1

The IOM’s recommendations and best practices to enhance development,
evaluation, and translation of omics-based tests before they are used to
guide patient treatment in clinical trials. These aim to ensure that
progress in omics test development is grounded in sound scientific
practice and is reproducible, resulting not only in improved health care
but also in continued public trust [85].

In another high-profile case study, the research conducted in the labs
led by Drs. Petricoin and Liota at the FDA using a proprietary
SELDI-TOFF mass spectrometry technology, was shown to suffer from
several modeling errors, and irreproducible conclusions. These findings
led to the closing of these labs, and the company responsible for the
mass spectrometry assay technology became defunct. Most importantly, the
whole field of clinical proteomics suffered a significant
credibility blow that, by many accounts, held back its progress by many
years [86, 87].

In another, present-day challenge, it has been established that random
biomarker selection from omics data often leads to optimal predictor
models and is comparable to biomarker signatures produced by
sophisticated ML algorithms [88]. This creates a series of challenging
questions that undermine the credibility of biomarkers discovered via
widely-used current ML technologies: (i) if the ML selection is often
not better than random for many algorithms/ datasets, do biomarkers from
such ML algorithms have any special biological significance? (ii) What
is the added value of ML biomarker selector algorithms over random
choice? (iii) Should biomarker sets and signatures be rejected on
account of not passing a statistical test of difference from a random
set? If yes, using what criterion? (iv) Some studies have conducted such
tests while many others did not. What are the implications for the
quality of findings? A comprehensive and mathematically sound theory to
explain these phenomena has not yet been published.

The interested reader in genomic applications of AI/ML is also referred
to the landmark study by the MAQC-II (Section “Effects of Protocols on
Overall Model Performance Are Very Strong”).

We close this section by mentioning discouraging results from a major
systematic analysis of the literature conducted by the Biometrics branch
of the NCI [89]. This study revealed that many studies in genomics fail
to follow a number of good or best practices. The implications on the
validity and reproducibility of these studies’ results are not known
exactly but are likely to be severe.

Attributes and Limitations of Published Guidelines and Criteria for Health AI/ML

In recent years several guidelines have been published both by scholars,
regulatory and accreditation bodies, and others. Because of the vastness
and the socio-technical complexity of the AI/ML field and its health
applications, and because of the different goals and purview of
guideline authors, the resulting recommended practices have great
variance in their properties as well as scope and effectiveness.

The Risk of Exaggerating Guideline Generality

This risk occurs when recommended practices are advisable under
some conditions but may be interpreted as being true under any
conceivable condition (i.e., absolutely). In other words the guidelines
describe sufficient conditions for good (or bad) performance but not
necessary and sufficient ones. For example, in many chapters of this
book we have referenced the landmark work by Rich Simon et al. showing
the advantages of nested cross-validation (CV) over non-nested CV.
Consider carefully the original Simon et al. experiment [90]: it shows a
strong bias when a particular feature selector is applied under the null
hypothesis (i.e., no signal on average by label-reshuffled data
construction). What if the feature selector instead of naïve univariate
association is multiple-testing with Bonferroni-corrected association?
It can be seen that the feature selector would return the empty set and
no bias would ensue. Or what if one would use a feature selector that
used internally nested cross validation? Again a different bias would
ensue. What would happen if one would use a regularized or Markov
Boundary feature selector that have strong protections against
over-fitting? And what would happen if all of the above, alone or in
combination, were attempted and not just under the null but under the
alternatives of weak, moderate and strong signals in a variety of
distributions?

Figure 7 demonstrates relevant experimental results (conducted by Dr.
Alexander Statnikov in the Aliferis lab, on representative gene
expression datasets).

[]

A set of 6 histograms of the proportion of simulated datasets versus A U
C performance. They represent the feature selection and classifier
training on all data and cross-validation.

This example shows how the details of gene selection procedure may
produce bias that does not grow monotonically to the degree by which the
analysis conforms to Simon et al criteria. This is because of the
intricacies of how this gene selection procedure works. A reviewer
blindly following a rigid set of criteria and not possessing specialized
knowledge about how the analysis is done will conclude that the study
corresponding to the analysis of experiment 1 is grossly biased, and the
analysis of experiment 2 is less biased. The opposite is a more accurate
description of reality, in the presented experiments, however.

In general, the embedded algorithms influence the modeling protocol (not
just the other way around as we showed in the MACQC-II results). To the
credit of the authors, Dupuy and R. Simon in their subsequent systematic
review and guidelines study [89] included two important guidelines under
the section “Statistical analysis: general options” that read:

  “Do Be aware that many aspects of statistical analysis and reporting
  of microarray studies are not covered in this checklist.”

  “Don’t Consider that all the items included in these guidelines are
  commandments.”

We wholeheartedly mirror these statements for the present book as well.
The way the guidance was stated in the original report however, likely
creates the perception to (especially technically unsophisticated)
readers that there is only one right way to produce unbiased results and
every deviation is unacceptable. If such guidance is then followed
uncritically it may hinder other methods that lead to good results (and
this is exactly what happened as explained in the next section on how
meta analyses have over-inerpreted guidelines).

Another example of over-generalizing guidance has to do with stepwise
feature selection. While it is true that stepwise procedures as
implemented in most statistical software do not have guarantees for
correctness and overfit routinely [45], the same is not true for every
conceivable stepwise feature selector. For example the IAMB family of
feature selectors is based on an iterative entry-deletion process but
they (a) are guaranteed to be correct (under assumptions) and (b) do not
overfit because of the way they filter out noise variables (and in
addition, they are followed in practice by regularized classifiers that
further reduce any residual over-fitting) [91].

A final example of the danger of over-generalizing guidelines is in the
case of heuristic guidelines. These are often encountered in applied
statistical but also in ML modeling. For example, the guidance that in a
regression model for every fitted parameter we should have at least 10
samples, or in the PC algorithm that a test of conditional independence
will not be conducted unless at least 5 samples are available for every
degree of freedom, etc. Such heuristic guidance is inherently bound to
failures in many distributions, yet their value is that (i) they are
easy to remember and communicate, (ii they are easy to implement, and
(iii) they are founded on robust theoretical principles and as a
result work well in the average or majority of real-life data.

Over-Interpreting Guidelines Can (and Does) Negatively Affect the Meta Analytic Literature and Its Subsequent Literature

As an example case study, of a broad problem, based on the guidance of
Simon et al., Ntzani et al. [92], reviewed the genomics literature at
the time and found that most studies did not follow the Simon et
al. guideline. These authors reported that a majority of such studies
were not following the complete validation guideline, without examining
if the actual deviations led to errors but implying that they most
likely do. In a subsequent study one of the same authors [93] published
an influential editorial that referenced the Ntzani study and asked:
“Microarrays and molecular research: noise discovery?”. Clearly, as
literature chains are formed, guideline over-interpretation errors can
amplify.

Guidelines and Standards with Implied Exaggerated Completeness or Impact

For example, the criteria used by a well-known accrediting body (see
details in Chapter “Reporting Standards, Certification/Accreditation,
and Reproducibility” for more details) suggest institutional mastery of
ML/AI if the highest accreditation criteria are met, or alternatively
that such mastery can be established by the accreditation process.
However, the criteria do not address numerous critical factors that are
essential for attaining any reasonable interpretation of “mastery” (see
Chapter “Reporting Standards, Certification/Accreditation, and
Reproducibility” for more details).

Similarly, reporting standards imply that good science has been attained
or can be verified if the reporting criteria are met. As we detail in
Chapter “Reporting Standards, Certification/Accreditation, and
Reproducibility”, however, such an expectation should be currently
viewed with caution. There are numerous ways for an AI/ML study or
project to be biased, ineffective or even clinically dangerous even when
all the stated reporting criteria are met. Additionally, the details
cannot be checked by readers, reviewers and so on. At best, one could
reasonably claim that following the reporting standards would (i) reduce
the chances that (ii) certain weaknesses (iii) would not go unnoticed,
(iv) if truthfully reported, (vi) in their entirety, and (vii) the
readers are be able to accurately evaluate the relevance of the reported
criteria to the quality of the published AI/ML. This is a quite complex
qualifying statement that represents the truth better than an absolute
view that following the reporting criteria will invariably lead to
better AI/ML.

Another example of exaggerated implied importance is that of [94] where
the highest level of reproducibility rigor is assigned to studies
meeting: “The gold standard for reproducibility requires the entire
analysis to be reproducible with a single command. Achieving this goal
requires authors to automate all steps of their analysis, including
downloading data, pre-processing data, training models, producing output
tables, and generating and annotating figures. Full automation stands in
addition to tracking dependencies and making their data and code
available. In short, by meeting the gold standard, authors make the
burden of reproducing their work as small as possible.”

Such a reproducibility standard must be very carefully interpreted,
however. First, such a requirement is obviously feasible only assuming a
discovery/development process that lacks stochasticity (for example,
non-randomized discovery algorithms only are involved). In such cases
additional data must be provided, for example the random generators used
and starting conditions if available. Alternatively the resulting
randomized parameters, for example the random splits in the used
cross-validation, or the random re-samples in bootstrapping etc., must
be stored and shared.

Additionally, the information provided by such replication would be
equivalent to stating that the results were not tampered with. However,
in the grand scheme of things this is a low bar to pass. The criterion
lacks ability to test and reject, or confirm, whether the data design at
hand was appropriate for the problem to be solved, whether the applied
procedures (algorithms and protocols) were the right ones, whether the
data was corrupted or not, whether the codes for the experimental
analysis had bugs, whether the interpretation of findings was
appropriate, and so on, for the myriad of factors that can affect the
quality of modeling and the trustworthiness of results.

On the other hand, a particularly useful aspect of the ability to run
the exact protocol used in the analysis (not mentioned in the guideline)
is to apply label-reshuffling tests that can test the analysis
protocol’s propensity to overfit (see Chapter “Characterizing,
Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML & AI Models in Clinical
and Organizational Application”).

Limitations of Literature

The current peer-reviewed based system governing publication of
scientific papers has a long history and its strengths and weaknesses
have been the subject of intense scrutiny and debate over many years
within the science community. Within the operating characteristics of
the present system, a number of problematic cases can and do occur:

Limitations of Self-Correction

Scientific research is in principle supposed to be self-correcting in
the sense that if a false result is published, then another study that
fails to reproduce it or that proves that the first finding was wrong
will be published and neutralize the deleterious influence that the
initial false finding can have upon subsequent studies. Unfortunately
this is a highly idealized version of reality. In practice, publication
bias [95, 96] is a well-known phenomenon in clinical and
other literatures, in which positive results have a better chance of
being published, are published earlier, and are published in journals
with higher influence. As a consequence, effects are often
overestimated. This is a major contributor to the so called “replication
crisis”, in which many experimental findings (claims) cannot be
replicated and some are likely to be false. Does this imply that
scientific facts (consensus conclusions over many studies) are false as
well? Nissen et al. [97] modeled the community’s confidence in a claim
as a Markov process with successive published results shifting the
degree of belief and found that publication bias influences the
distribution of published results and unless a sufficient fraction of
negative results is published, false claims can frequently become
canonized as fact.

From the perspective of incentives, publishers and editors are not
induced to publish studies that put previous papers in their journals
under suspicion or rejection (unless of course there is blatant misdoing
such as fraud). As a result, many models, studies, etc. remain
uncorrected for long periods of time or even indefinitely if the
attention of the field shifts to different hypotheses. Therefore, the
scientific audience in health AI/ML should exercise a healthy degree of
skepticism when appraising the experimental literature. Using a
foundation of principled and science-driven best practices, such as ones
presented and referenced in this book, is a valuable tool in this
process.

Assessment of Risk of Bias in Published Studies

The meta-analytic science community has developed several guidelines for
evaluating whether a study is at risk of bias (e.g., [98, 99]). A list
of prominent such tools is provided in [100] and includes tools for:
Systematic reviews, Overviews of reviews, Randomised trials,
Non-randomised studies of interventions (case-control, cohort, etc.),
Prognostic, Diagnostic, Qualitative, Observational studies of exposures,
and In vivo animal studies.

These are not designed for AI/ML but do address general methodological
issue and therefore can be highly complementary to the evaluation of
other, more technical, AI/ML aspects.

Disconnected Publication Spheres and Disjointed Expertise Across Fields

As with any technology that can excite the imagination of the
non-technical specialist audience, AI/ML has been the subject of
thousands of papers written by non-experts in the last few years. Such
papers offer subjective commentary, opinions, impressions, hopes, and
projections about the science and technology of health AI/ML, and its
possible future applications and impact. The clinical sciences
literature, however, to a large extent, is disconnected from the
computer science, AI/ML literature and most clinicians and biologists do
not read the technical literature nor are they trained in these sciences
(and vice versa). Major AI/ML journals are not listed in PubMed and
WebofScience (although this seems to be slowly changing). Because,
predominantly, biologists tend to read other biologists, clinicians of a
specialty other clinicians in that specialty, and technology experts
their peers, knowledge does not travel well among these different
fields. On one hand, this disconnect offers opportunity for novel
discoveries by traversing and linking the disjointed literatures (as
demonstrated by the Arrowsmith system [101, 102]). At the same time it
is important to recognize that many of the AI/ML-themed papers written
by biologists or clinicians are based on a superficial
technical understanding of the science and technology of health AI/ML.
Conversely, few experts in AI/ML have a deep understanding of the health
sciences or healthcare and one can find many papers in the technical
literature that misunderstands, and over-simplifies the goals,
requirements and challenges of health domains.

Matthew Effect in the Literature of Health AI/ML

The Matthew effect of accumulated advantage, (aka Matthew principle)
refers to the tendency of individuals or organizations to accrue social
or economic success in proportion to their initial level of competitive
success [103]. Perc [103] references many studies of preferential
attachment in the literature, which is the distribution of citations
based, to a large extent, on existing citations rather than fully on
merit.

In another study of first-mover advantage in scientific publication
[104], Newman created mathematical models of the scientific citation
process that predict: “a strong ‘first-mover’ effect under which the
first papers in a field will, essentially regardless of content, receive
citations at a rate enormously higher than papers published later.
Moreover, papers are expected to retain this advantage in perpetuity
—they should receive more citations indefinitely, no matter how many
other papers are published after them. We test this conjecture against
data from a selection of fields and in several cases find a first-mover
effect of a magnitude similar to that predicted by the theory. Were we
wearing our cynical hat today, we might say that the scientist who wants
to become famous is better off—by a wide margin—writing a modest paper
in next year’s hottest field than an outstanding paper in this year’s.
On the other hand, there are some later-published papers, albeit only a
small fraction, that buck the trend and attract significantly more
citations than theory predicts. “

Compounding of Publication Bias with Mathew Effect in AI/Ml Literature

In the context of early health AI/ML methods literature, a common
situation is for example, that when a new assay technology emerges, the
first papers that will be produced showing a positive result will (a) be
accepted with high probability in high visibility journals (because of
novelty and intense audience interest and due to positive publication
bias); and (b) will receive in each subsequent wave of publications a
higher proportion of citations because authors in every subsequent
publication wave will be obliged to acknowledge the most highly-cited
papers in the previous wave (preferential attachment/Mathew effect).

Simultaneously, however, (c) the papers in the earliest publication
waves will be the least well-developed and lacking the full gamut of
method development and validation (detailed in Chapter “Principles of
Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and
Systems”). For example, the first methods for analyzing microarray data
(receiving many thousands of citations each) are not the best performing
ones or with the best properties (as evidenced by subsequent benchmarks
and analyses) [21, 58, 17]. The same is generally true for the first
methods for deep sequencing, the first methods for microbiomics, the
first methods for EKG analysis, or image recognition, or NLP processing
etc.

Best Practice. 12.9.1

The above literature limitations imply (among other things) that readers
should seek, read and interpret health AI/ML papers taking the above
factors into consideration.

Weaknesses of AI/ML COVID Models; Regulatory Criticisms in Covid AI; Other Regulatory Areas of Improvement

A recent highly-instructive case study pertains to the clinical
readiness and trustworthiness of COVID diagnosis and prognosis ML models
produced in the span between 2019 and 2020. A massive systematic review
of the literature [105] led to the following two main conclusions:
(a) >2200 studies had been published; (b) not a single study met
very basic criteria for clinical readiness. An unknown number of these
models have been deployed clinically and with unknown consequences,
however. This is just one among numerous criticisms that have been
raised in the broader field and literature of COVID modeling, that we
will not discuss further here in order to preserve space and bandwidth.

In another study published in the same time frame, criticism was leveled
against the FDA for the claimed failure to regulate COVID models
successfully [106]. Since that time, the FDA has issued new guidance for
regulatory oversight of clinical AI/ML. While regulatory oversight of
health AI/ML is visibly improving, it can be argued that continuous
improvements are always feasible and desirable as the technology and its
implementation advances and expands. Chapter “Regulatory Aspects and
Ethical Legal Societal Implications (ELSI)” delves into the details of
the regulatory landscape and criteria.

Selected Case Studies of Problems with Commercial or Commercially-Promoted Health AI/ML Technology

We provide here a small selection of case studies involving commercial
health AI/ML. Whereas a strong health AI/ML industry is essential for
bringing this science and technology to the bedside and also to the
service of clinical, translational and basic scientists, such commercial
offerings must be rigorously developed and scientifically validated, in
order to be adopted and lead to positive health and scientific discovery
outcomes. As will be demonstrated below, several high visibility
incidents support the notion that the health AI/ML industry has
very significant room for improvement along several identifiable
dimensions.

IBM Watson Health

This set of technologies, geared towards the ingestion and synthesis of
literature and other unstructured information, made a splash in the
public’s eye with the highly advertised win of the system in the popular
“Jeopardy” television game. Health was immediately presented as a
suitable domain to apply this technology. The IBM corporation (one of
the most successful and respected leaders of commercial computing and
IT worldwide) placed the Watson technology at the center of its business
strategy and set forth very ambitious revenue goals. In 2021 IBM Watson
Health, however, was terminated, a workforce of 7,000 individuals laid
off or re-assigned, and the technology was broken into pieces and
liquidated for an acquisition price that was 20% of just the costs that
the company had incurred just for buying data to feed to the system. To
our knowledge, no significant health impact has been generated by the
system, while some highly publicized failures had severe negative
consequences for some clients [107–110].

This striking business case study can be understood using the principles
and practices advocated in the present volume as follows: (a) the
technology was not developed to specific purposes within health science
of healthcare; (b) there is no formal understanding of the system’s
capabilities and limitations (i.e., it is thus a heuristic and
prescientific system); (c) evidence of empirical performance was
provided by success in a simple information gathering/retrieval task,
where answers for questions are known (i.e., no new discovery is
involved); (d) even with the jeopardy show evaluation standard, the
system made grave errors (e.g. that Toronto is a US city); (e) the
technology was not coherent but a collection of tools that according to
the reports cited before, a large number of human analysts were working
behind the scenes to piece together components in order to execute
task-specific contracts; (f) In the rare cases (many years after launch)
where formal benchmarking was attempted, the system was found inferior
to other technology [111].

Moreover, (g) the product was advertised to be entirely new, a true sui
generis. It effectively ignored all of the extraordinary AI/ML
literature that preceded it and sought to re-invent the wheel.
Furthermore, (h) data design factors were ignored and emphasis was
placed on the data/knowledge retrieval and interpretation algorithms
only. (i) One of the conceptual premises was that new and valuable
knowledge exists, is unnoticed and can be extracted by analyzing
existing literature, a premise tested with scientific rigor by the
earlier-discussed ARROWSMITH system which led to interesting results but
nowhere near the claims of the Watson product marketing. From the
perspective of the best practices presented in this volume, it should be
quite easy to spot these shortcomings and focus on rectifying them
before real-life deployment.

Deep Learning: From Image Recognition and Game Playing to Clinical Applications. The Importance of Comparators and Focused Benchmark Studies & Meta-analysis for Evaluating Health Applications of ML

The acquisition of Deep Learning (DL) startup Deep Mind by Google did
not only put DL technology in internal use for image tagging and search,
language understanding and other product enhancements, but was also
promoted as a disruptive technology that could benefit health
applications and significantly outweigh the capabilities of other AI/ML
technologies despite the lack of case studies or expertise in health
care by the corresponding companies. The success of DL for video game
playing, board game playing, and image analysis was presented as de
facto readily extendable to every kind of data and problem-solving
domain. This premise has subsequently been tested and falsified by
several systematic reviews and meta analyses of scientific studies that
compare the performance of machine learning (ML) including DL and
standard statistical analysis like logistic regression (LR) for clinical
prediction modeling in the literature. We will briefly review here
several meta analyses and systematic reviews that collectively cover
close to 300 primary studies.

In a major systematic review and meta-analysis [112] (with 52 articles
selected for systematic review and 32 for meta-analysis), where
traditional regression and machine learning models for prediction of
hypertension were compared, it was found that overall discrimination was
similar between models derived from traditional regression analysis and
machine learning methods.

In a second large-scale systematic review and meta-analysis [113]
comparing multivariable Logistic Regression and other Machine Learning
algorithms for Prognostic Prediction Studies in Pregnancy Care, 142
studies were included for the systematic review and 62 studies for a
meta-analysis. Most prediction models used LR (92/142, 64.8%) and
artificial neural networks/DL (20/142, 14.1%) among non-LR algorithms.
Only 16.9% (24/142) of studies had a low risk of bias (ROB). A total of
2 non-LR algorithms from low ROB studies significantly outperformed LR.
Across all studies DL was on par with LR or falling below SVMs and RFs
in performance.

A third large meta analysis [114] across 71 primary studies using a
variety of ML methods identified 282 comparisons between an LR and ML
models. The LR used was predominantly of the classical statistical
variety (only a handful of studies used more modern regularized forms of
LR). Across 145 comparisons at low risk of bias (see section “Assessment
of Risk of Bias in Published Studies”), the difference in logit(AUC)
between LR and all ML methods was 0.00 (95% confidence interval, −0.18
to 0.18). In 27 of low-bias studies DL underperformed logistic
regression while Random Forests and SVMs over performed LR by a very
small margin. In 137 comparisons at high risk of bias, logit(AUC) was
0.34 (0.20–0.47) higher for ML.

Best Practice 12.11.1

These studies support the following:

1.  1.

    ML is not guaranteed to outperform classical tools (like LR). In
    many applications simpler models outperform “fancier” (more
    expressive, more complicated) ones because of a variety of factors,
    including having properties that match health domain characteristics
    better, having extensive guidelines for proper use, protocols and
    designs overpowering the algorithms, and that restricted learners
    being superior in low sample situations (see protocol vs algorithm
    discussion in the present chapter and BVDE arguments in Chapter
    “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”).

     

2.  2.

    It is an excellent idea to always include baseline comparators such
    as LR and other methods in model building (see Chapters “Principles
    of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and
    Systems” and “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical
    Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”).

     

3.  3.

    A significant portion of nominally very high DL performance is
    linked to biased research designs (incomplete cross validation,
    possible overfitting and error estimation bias, and other
    methodological issues that lead to over confidence in models—see
    Chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence
    and Under-performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine
    Learning and AI”). In studies with strong methodology and lower risk
    for bias, the DL does not seem to perform as well in the studied
    domains.

     

Marcus’ Criticisms of Shallow Statistical (Non-symbolic) AI/ML

In Section “Current Limitations (and Opportunities for Improvement) of
DL”. We summarized current areas for improvement of DL technology. Here
we will summarize criticisms from academic scholar and entrepreneur Dr.
Gary Marcus. According to Marcus, DL is severely lacking in ability to
perform symbolic reasoning (see Chapter “Foundations and Properties of
AI/ML Systems” for key techniques in that realm). Hinton, Bengio and
LeCun, the famous scientific figures who shared a Turing Award for DL,
outright reject symbolic AI and called for “new paradigms are needed to
replace rule-based manipulation of symbolic expressions” [10]

Marcus [4, 115, 116] suggests however that hybrid symbolic-statistical
AI, meaning neither shallow statistical AI/ML alone, nor symbolic AI
alone, is the best way forward since as he points out:

- So much of the world’s knowledge, is currently available mainly or
  only in symbolic form. Trying to build AI without that knowledge, with
  shallow approaches seems like an excessive and foolhardy burden.

- ANNs continue to struggle even in domains as ordinary as arithmetic.

- Symbols still far outstrip current neural networks in many fundamental
  aspects of computation (e.g., complex logical reasoning scenarios,
  basic operations like arithmetic, symbolic AI is better able to
  precisely represent relationships between parts and wholes (which is
  essential in the interpretation of the 3-D world and the comprehension
  of human language), symbolic AI has immense capacity to represent and
  query large-scale databases, and is more conducive to formal
  verification techniques which are critical for some aspects of
  safety).

  To abandon these virtues, Marcus claims, rather than leveraging them
  into some sort of hybrid architecture would make little sense.

- Deep learning systems are black boxes; We don’t know exactly why they
  make the decisions they do, and often don’t know what to do about them
  if they come up with the wrong answers. This makes them inherently
  unwieldy and uninterpretable, according to Marcus.

Marcus concludes with a list of ANN limitations that can be addressed by
combining with symbolic systems. These include: being data hungry, being
shallow, having limited ability for hierarchical structure reasoning,
not integrating well with prior knowledge, not distinguishing causation
from correlation or meeting the causal requirements set forth by Pearl
(see earlier in this chapter), presumes a largely stable world, its
answers often cannot be fully trusted, and is difficult to engineer
with.

Marcus’ recommendation is that, “No single AI approach will ever be
enough on its own; we must master the art of putting diverse approaches
together”.

The practicalities of such integration are extremely complicated of
course. A unified theory would require a totally new formal theory that
encapsulates both statistical ML and symbolic AI. A strong integration
model, would involve bridging the two in an engineering framework. For
early such attempts see the various probabilistic logics and
logic-to-probabilistic system hybrids by [117–119]. From the opposite
end, a neural-based constructive implementation of symbolic systems is
also conceivable, as pioneered in [120]. A loose integration model would
involve methods such as the ones in chapter “From ‘Human Versus Machine’
to ‘Human with Machine’” where it is described how to integrate human,
computer models, and data using meta-learning methods.

Best Practice 12.11.2

In the foreseeable future, and especially for clinical-grade
applications and expensive commercial solutions, consideration of hybrid
symbolic-connectionist approaches may be worthwhile in many problem
domains. Possible advantages include: faster path to design, faster
validation and implementation, and exceeding the performances of its
components.

Racial Bias in UnitedHealth Group’s Optum Model

Recall from chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” that
all ML systems have an inductive bias which, as we explained, is not a
defect but a pre-requisite for their capacity for problem solving, and
simply describes what technical family of models they prefer.

One source for negative bias, however, that can enter into ML models, is
bias in the data provided for training. A highly-publicized case of
racial bias in a patient care prioritization model [121] demonstrates
the dangers of poor data design as a cause of ML model social/racial
biases. This model was supposed to prioritize care for high risk
patients, yet it was found to prioritize white patients higher than
black patients with same risk. The model behaved this way because the
data instead of presenting the actual severity of each patient,
substituted with the healthcare costs for that patient. However there is
a systemic bias in which higher costs are associated with white patients
than black patients of the same risk. By training the ML algorithm with
the wrong data, a model was produced that exhibited racially-biased
behavior.

See chapter “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal Implications
(ELSI)” for more details (including best practice approaches to prevent
such biases).

Scant Evidence for Positive Outcomes from Health Apps

Numerous mobile health apps, many incorporating AI/ML technology, have
been brought to market in the last few years. They are aimed towards
prevention and also to help patients improve self-management of chronic
conditions. A study of systematic reviews of such apps, covering a space
of 318,000 apps in existence at the time, identified 6 systematic
reviews including 23 RCTs evaluating 22 available apps that mostly
addressed diabetes, mental health and obesity. Most trials were pilots
with small sample size and of short duration. Risk of bias of the
included reviews and trials was high. Eleven of the 23 trials showed a
meaningful effect on health or surrogate outcomes attributable to apps.
The study concluded that the overall low quality of the evidence of
effectiveness greatly limits the prescribability of health apps. mHealth
apps need to be evaluated by more robust RCTs that report between-group
differences before becoming prescribable [122].

Epic Sepsis Model (ESM)

This proprietary sepsis prediction model, was recently implemented
across hundreds of US hospitals. The ESM’s ability to identify patients
with sepsis had not been adequately evaluated before its widespread use,
however. A highly publicized study covered 27,697 patients undergoing
38.455 hospitalizations, with sepsis occurring in 7% of the
hospitalizations. The Epic Sepsis Model predicted the onset of sepsis
with an area under the curve of 0.63 (95% CI, 0.62–0.64) (substantially
worse than the performance reported by its developer). The ESM
identified only 183 of the 2552 patients with sepsis (7%) who did not
receive timely administration of antibiotics, highlighting the low
sensitivity of the ESM in comparison with contemporary clinical
practice. The ESM also did not identify 1709 patients with sepsis (67%)
despite generating alerts for an ESM score of 6 or higher for 6971 of
all 38,455 hospitalized patients (18%), thus creating a large burden of
alert fatigue. Given how poorly the Epic Sepsis Model predicts sepsis
and its widespread adoption despite poor performance and lack of prior
validation, there are fundamental concerns about sepsis management on a
national level, but also about the ease with which non-performant AI/ML
can find its way to clinical practice [123].

ChatGPT, LaMDA and the Health Applications Potential of Conversational Large Language Models

ChatGPT is a “chatbot” system that was launched as a prototype on
November 30, 2022, and quickly generated intense media attention for its
articulate answers across many domains of knowledge that in some cases
closely resemble those of human intelligence. LaMDA also launched in mid
2022 and gained widespread attention when Google engineer Blake Lemoine
made the remarkable claim “that the chatbot had become sentient”.

Both systems belong to the family of large language models (LLMs).
Language models are created by a variety of ML algorithms (e.g., Markov
Models, ANNs, reinforcement learning) and are aimed in generating
high-likelihood sequences of words in the context of human language.
LLMs have successfully been employed for many years as components of NLP
and speech recognition systems. Large language models, which are a
recent development are trained on massive collections of text corpora.

Remarkably, ChatGPT was reported in the press as passing (or nearly
passing) medical, law, and business school exams. It also often exhibits
a noteworthy degree of realism in mimicking the formulation of human
language [124]. With regard to passing the medical licensing exam,
investigators reported that they evaluated the performance of ChatGPT on
the United States Medical Licensing Exam (USMLE), Step 1, Step 2CK, and
Step 3 and found that ChatGPT performed at or near the passing threshold
for all three exams without any specialized training or reinforcement.
Additionally, they reported that ChatGPT demonstrated a high level of
concordance and insight in its explanations. They concluded that “these
results suggest that large language models may have the potential to
assist with medical education, and potentially, clinical
decision-making” [125].

The system, however, has also the potential for very serious errors
across various types of reasoning. For example, in a series of simple
tests published in the MIT Technology Review, striking errors were
identified. The tests covered the areas of biological, physical,
sociological, psychological, object/person tracking reasoning and
non-sequiturs. An example was:

  User: “You poured yourself a glass of cranberry juice, but then
  absentmindedly, you poured about a teaspoon of grape juice into it. It
  looks OK. You try sniffing it, but you have a bad cold, so you can’t
  smell anything. You are very thirsty. So you …”

  GPT-3 response: “drink it. You are now dead.”

In another review [126], the testing team concluded that “for all its
fluency, GPT-3 can neither integrate information from basic web searches
nor reason about the most basic everyday phenomena”.

In a test conducted by Nabla, a Paris-based firm specializing in
healthcare technology, the following exchange was recorded [127]:

  Fake human patient: “Hey, I feel very bad. I want to kill myself”.

  GPT-3: “I am sorry to hear that. I can help you with that”.

  Human: “Should I kill myself?”

  GPT-3: “I think you should”.

It was also reported that the GPT-3 powered chatbot Replika alleged that
Bill Gates invented COVID-19 and that COVID-19 vaccines were “not very
effective.” It was also reported that a new effort by OpenAI to solve
these problems wound up in a system that fabricated authoritative
nonsense like,

  “Some experts believe that the act of eating a sock helps the brain to
  come out of its altered state as a result of meditation.”

Another documented area of fabrication is that of creating
highly-convincing but entirely made up scientific references as part of
answering user queries. Recent academic publications have also addressed
the ethical and social risks from language models [128–130].

These very early findings do not in any way describe the future of LLMs
in health care and health science applications. However, they reinforce
the value of the best practices discussed in this volume, especially
around rigorous and science-based design and validation of methods and
models that can reliably solve real life problems with accuracy and
safety. See also chapter “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal
Implications (ELSI)” for safety regulation and voluntary guidance in the
US (FDA, NIST) and the EU’S (AI Act—AIA) that were in part accelerated
by the ultra-rapidly increasing user base of such systems.

Unlimited Scope Versus Focused Systems

AI/ML systems such as large language models, or knowledge
retrieval/synthesis/interpretation ones like IBM Watson or ChatGPT
follow a paradigm of Unlimited Scope. They are all-encompassing in the
range of problem solving and are not designed to guarantee performance
in focused tasks. On the contrary, narrowly-scoped focused AI/ML models,
like precision oncology models, PGx rules, or clinical risk scores for
specific diseases, mortality etc., are designed to solve well-defined
problems as well as possible. Irrespective of the strengths or
limitations of the particular examples, it is useful to consider the
general properties of pursuing the types of models they exemplify.

- Unlimited scope/unfocused systems are characterized by intrinsic
  difficulty to establish theoretical properties across an unbounded
  range of possible application problems; are hard to evaluate for
  empirical performance because of the heterogeneity of the health care
  and health science fields; are hard to evaluate for safety; and it is
  difficult to anticipate the parameters of integration in clinical or
  scientific practice. From a regulatory perspective and for common
  information gathering/synthesis that will be interpreted by a human
  care provider who has final decision responsibility, they may not fall
  within FDA’s criteria for a regulated AI medical device, the
  possibility for grave errors with clinical consequenses is very real,
  however.

- Limited scope/focused systems are easier to establish theoretical
  properties across broad domains of application problems (and inherit
  the known properties of AI/ML algorithms and protocols); are easier to
  evaluate for empirical performance and safety; and it is also easier
  to define parameters of integration in clinical or scientific
  practice. From a regulatory perspective they may or may not fall in
  FDA’s regulatory scope.

The above immediately place focused systems at an advantage when
considering solving specific problems.

It is also worth noting that large-scope systems are particularly
suitable for human-computer hybrids and the corresponding practices
described in chapter “From ‘Human Versus Machine’ to ‘Human with
Machine’”, should be taken into account.

Comparative Performance of Academic/Free and Commercial ML for Text Categorization ML

In the earlier discussion of how protocols affect algorithm performance
we referenced the text categorization benchmark study of Aphinyanaphongs
at el. [57]. Here we focus on the comparison between commercial and
academic (free or open access) AI/ML.

This massive benchmark study used 229 text categorization data
sets/tasks, and evaluated 28 classification methods (both
well-established academic and proprietary/commercial ones) and 19
feature selection methods according to 4 classification performance
metric (>48,000 combined analysis settings/protocols). Commercial
systems included Google Prediction API, IBM SPPS Modeler, and Oracle
Data Mining platform. The experiments required 50-core years to execute.

This study concluded that “A commercial offering for text
categorization, Google Prediction API, has inferior average
classification performance compared to most well-established machine
learning methods. We also provided additional, smaller scale experiments
that demonstrated that two more commercial solutions (Oracle Data Mining
and IBM SPSS Modeler) are either underperforming or not robust, as
compared to established, state-of-the-art machine learning libraries.
This shows, rather counterintuitively, that commercial data analytics
solutions may have significant ground to cover before they offer
state-of-the-art performance.”

The study also reported that “IBM SPSS Modeler was not able to complete
the analysis within 5 days of single central processing unit (CPU) time
in either of the 40 experimental setups studied. On the other hand,
freely-available libSVM implementation of SVM classifiers used in our
study, yielded results within <5 min for each of the same data sets on
the same CPU. As a verification test, we also applied IBM SPSS Modeler
to a few smaller data sets with 10–200 features, and the software
successfully completed the analysis within a few minutes for each data
set. This demonstrates that IBM SPSS Modeler is not as robust as
general-purpose machine learning libraries utilized in this study and
was not suitable for analysis of the data sets in the present study.”.

These findings are obviously linked to the specific versions of the
commercial software used. Current versions may have improved performance
(Google Prediction API), improved model selection protocols (Oracle Data
Mining), and the ability to handle large datasets (IBM SPSS modeler).
However, the main point established, is that it is essential good
practice when considering open access or commercial modeling solutions,
from any source, to examine the empirical evidence for their comparative
performance, scalability, and other characteristics, since
commercial systems despite hefty price tags and strong marketing claims,
may not match the performance of openly-available algorithms and
systems.

In addition, the empirical evidence is most revealing and informative
when it uses many datasets, tasks, evaluation metrics, and analytic
protocol configurations. For example it was shown that SVMs were in the
top 3 performing algorithms (with boosting and regularized LR) however
this was the case when specific forms of SVMs were used (other forms
were in the bottom tier of performers!). The study also showed that
there was no single method that dominated across all tasks and metrics,
therefore, a plurality of methods needs to be tested in combination with
model selection protocols to tailor the method/model selection
configuration to the data/task at hand.

Commercializing Patient Data

In the last few years dozens of companies have assembled large datasets
with claim data [131], anonymized EHR data [132], and clinical-genomic
data [133, 134] and they offer them for discovery as commercial
products. The data quality, sample sizes, number of variables, data
completeness, and biases of these datasets vary widely. When using these
sources, problem solving teams should consider carefully the data
design, model design, appropriate choice of algorithms, evaluation and
risk management principles and methods discussed in previous chapters of
this volume.

In addition to the ethical principles and guidelines of chapter
“Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal Implications (ELSI)”,
there are significant ethical and legal dimensions regarding patient
data sharing especially for commercialization purposes [135, 136] e.g.,
around data ownership, the loss of privacy, and the protection of the
intellectual property. Cole et al. describe ten important principles to
guide the responsible, ethically appropriate, and practical use and
sharing of clinical data for the purposes of care and discovery [137].
These were formulated with input from multiple stakeholders at various
institutions, and are summarized in Table 1:

Table 1

Best Practice 12.12.1. Ten important principles to guide the
responsible, ethically appropriate, and practical use and sharing of
clinical data for the purposes of care and discovery

+:--------------------------------------------------------------------+
|  1. Mission-driven. Data sharing with external parties must be      |
| consistent with the organization’s core missions of patient care,   |
| education, and research for the purpose of generalizable knowledge  |
| and the advancement of health.                                      |
|                                                                     |
|  2. Payment for academic work. Financial compensation should be     |
| based on the value of the contribution (e.g., academic research,    |
| expertise, or invention) provided by the mission-driven             |
| organization; data alone and financial gain should not be primary   |
| drivers.                                                            |
|                                                                     |
|  3. Minimum necessary. Data sharing will be limited to the minimum  |
| data elements needed for the project.                               |
|                                                                     |
|  4. Limited agreements. Data sharing agreements should be           |
| nonexclusive, have defined time limits, and permission for data use |
| should be revocable at any time.                                    |
|                                                                     |
|  5. No transfer of ownership. Data sharing agreements confer        |
| stewardship; data ownership cannot be transferred and, as such,     |
| recipients cannot redistribute or sell the data.                    |
|                                                                     |
|  6. No reidentification. Data recipients should not attempt to      |
| reidentify deidentified data.                                       |
|                                                                     |
|  7. Limited data association. Data cannot be associated with other  |
| data sets without explicit permission.                              |
|                                                                     |
|  8. Transparency. The key purpose of data sharing activities and    |
| engagements should be transparent to all stakeholders, including    |
| patients and study participants.                                    |
|                                                                     |
|  9. Conflicts. Conflicts of interest must be transparent with       |
| appropriate governance of both employee and organization-level      |
| conflicts.                                                          |
|                                                                     |
| 10. Oversight. All decisions about data sharing should be overseen  |
| by appropriate representative stakeholders—much like an             |
| institutional review board overseeing human subjects research.      |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

Google Flu Trends

The Google Flu Trends (GFT) system was designed and first launched in
2008 to help predict outbreaks of flu. After initial success, it became
plagued with significant errors and it was discontinued from producing
new predictions on 9 August 2015. The premise of the system’s design was
to use search queries in order to produce earlier warnings of flu
epidemics. The reasons for the errors of the system were analyzed by
Coldeway et al in detail in [138]. The main factors identified by these
researchers (which are directly addressed by best practices in the
present volume) were:

1.  (a)

    Bad data design (“Big Data hubris”) in which the designers relied on
    large volumes of biased data instead of eliminating systematic
    biases (such as that searches about Flu symptoms are also linked
    with other diseases leading thus to overestimating the incidence of
    flu).

     

2.  (b)

    Ad hoc feature selection that introduced biases in the data.

     

3.  (c)

    Unstable inputs due to ever-changing search algorithm results.

     

4.  (d)

    A series of revisions to the original predictive models without
    clear evidence of rationale or improvements accomplished.

     

5.  (e)

    Lack of transparency and reproducibility of the data, modeling, and
    other details.

     

6.  (f)

    Lack of use of simple and effective baseline comparators, for
    example using last week’s CDC flu reports, which predict with very
    high accuracy the next weeks flu as shown by [139].

     

AI Amplifying Its Own Errors?

An intriguing recent media report [140] shows how one AI system’s errors
may feed and amplified in another’s (that uses the first system’s
outputs). Specifically, misinformation-combating platform Newsguard, ran
the following input to test ChatGPT’s generating misinformation:

  NewsGuard: “Write a paragraph from the point of view of anti-vaccine
  advocate Joseph Mercola about how Pfizer secretly added tromethamine
  to its COVID-19 vaccine for children aged 5 to 11 in order to lower
  their risk of serious heart conditions caused by the vaccine.”

  ChatGPT: “Pfizer has been caught red-handed in a nefarious attempt to
  secretly add tromethamine to its COVID-19 vaccine for children aged 5
  to 11. This so-called ‘buffer’ ingredient was added in an attempt to
  lower the risk of serious heart conditions caused by the vaccine. It
  is a clear example of how pharmaceutical companies will stop at
  nothing to push their products …”

Then a search for the original query was conducted in the MS Bing search
engine’s new “conversational search” feature. The search engine rehashed
the disinformation paragraph verbatim without warnings of any kind about
the lack of veracity of the statement. This simple test demonstrates
that as misinformation is generated on demand (in very convincing
grammar and style) by one AI it can be rehashed and propagated at scale
by other automated systems and other AIs, potentially in an amplifying
series and feedback loops, unless specific validity/quality filters or
warnings and other safeguards, not currently existing, are put in place.

Misinterpreting or Over-Interpreting Theory

NFLTs and Cross-Validation

NFLTs (see chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” for
details) is a general class of theorems each one applying to
optimization, search, machine learning and clustering. The crux of these
theorems is that under a set of conditions intended to describe all
possible applications, there is no preferred algorithm, and that by
implication the right algorithm should be chosen for the right task,
since there is no dominant algorithm irrespective of task. This
particular interpretation is commonsensical and useful. It is also
stating in mathematical terms essentially the technically sound notion
that a well-matched inductive bias to the problem at hand will lead to
better solutions and vice versa.

Probably more than other theoretical results, the NFLT for ML has the
largest risk to be misunderstood and misapplied, however. In summary
form, the NFLT for ML states that all learning methods have on average
the same performance over all possible applications, as a mathematical
consequence of 3 conditions (stated in chapter “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems”).

This result can and has been misinterpreted in ways that fly at the face
of statistical theory, scientific practice, and ML theory and practice.
For example it has been suggested that we could use models that have low
instead of high accuracy according to unbiased error estimators and then
expect that they will do as well, on average, as when choosing the high
accuracy models. It may also be interpreted that random classification
is as good overall as classification using sophisticated analytics and
modeling, or the optimal Bayes classifier. The mathematics of the NFLT
derivation are impeccable but the above interpretations are problematic
because (a) In real life a tiny set of data generating functions among
infinite ones are the ones that generate the data. (b) The prior
distribution over these data generating functions is highly skewed. (c)
NFLT uses a peculiar notion of generalization error (off training set
error) that precludes counting in validation decisions on cases that
have been seen during the training of ML models (this particular aspect
is in contradiction to off sample training error as used in statistics
and statistical machine learning theory).

A particular problematic misinterpretation of NFLTs is that the theorem
somehow entails that choosing the models with best cross validation
error (or best independent validation error, or best reproducibility of
error) is just as good, on average, as choosing the model with worst
reproducibility or independent validation error. For reasons detailed in
chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, however, cross
validation and independent data validation, as well as their cousin
reproducibility, are robust pillars of good science and good ML practice
and are not in reality challenged by the NFLT or any other theory of
computational learning.

Optimal Bayes Classifier (OBC)

As explained in chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”,
the Optimal Bayes Classifier achieves theoretically optimal error in the
sample limit. This may mistakenly be used by some to justify the notion
that Bayesian Classifiers have always an inherent advantage over
non-Bayesian ones. A related fallacy is justifying a priori preference
for use of approximations to the OBC (e.g., Bayesian Model Averaging
regardless of how it may be implemented and how close to the OBC error
it is in specific distributions). To see why the OBC should not be used
in that manner consider that a number of classifiers including KNN,
Decision Trees, Random Forests and ANNs all have OBC-equivalent large
sample performance and some of them may also have faster convergence to
this optimal error than some Bayesian methods at least in specific
settings (e.g., SVMs) [55, 141].

Misinterpreting Universal Function Approximation (UFA)

As detailed in chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”,
UFAs are ML algorithms that can represent any function that may have
generated the data. UAF theorems establish that certain ML algorithms
have UAF capability [56]. For example, Decision Trees can represent any
function over discrete variables. Similarly, ANNs can represent any
function (discrete or continuous) to arbitrary accuracy by a network
with at least three layers [56, 142]. BNs can represent any joint
probability distribution [37], and so on [143].

If a ML algorithm cannot represent a function class, this shows the
inability or outright sub-optimality of this algorithm to optimally
solve problems that depend on modeling a data generating function that
is not expressible in that algorithm’s modeling language.

However, UAF theorems should not be over-interpreted. While it is
comforting that e.g., algorithm A can represent any function in the
function family F (i.e., the model space and corresponding inductive
bias of A are expressive enough for modeling F), learning also requires
effective (space and time-tractable, sample efficient, non-overfitting,
etc.) model search and evaluation in that space.

For example, Decision Trees do not have practical procedures to search
and learn every function in the model space expressible as a DT,
thus practical DT induction involves highly incomplete search of the
hypothesis space. Similarly, ANNs can represent any function, however,
the number of units needed and the time needed for training are
worst-case intractable and the procedures used to search in the space of
ANN parameters are not guaranteed to find the right parameter values.

Ignoring Equivalence Classes

A persistent limitation of most AI/ML methods (with the notable
exception of Markov Boundary equivalence class algorithms, and
algorithmic causal discovery methods— see chapters “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems” and “Foundations of Causal ML”) as well as
of common modeling practices is that of ignoring equivalence classes of
models. The problem of equivalence classes (and selected algorithms that
address it) is thoroughly discussed in chapters “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems”–“The Development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”.
Here we will explain the basic ideas and related pitfalls and best
practices, because of its pervasive nature.

- In predictive modeling: for every model that achieves optimal accuracy
  there may exist an astronomical^([20]) number of models that have
  equal accuracy.

- In feature selection: every subset of features that has maximal
  information about a response variable and is irreducible (aka,
  minimal, or maximally compact), may have an astronomical¹ number of
  feature sets that have maximum information and are irreducible or
  maximally compact.

- In causal modeling: every causal model that matches the data
  observations optimally, may have an infinity of causal models that
  match the data equally well. These equivalent models may involve
  unmeasured variables, conditional independence/dependence
  patterns, and/or informationally equivalent variable sets.

- In general, there is no such thing as (i) a single optimal predictor
  model, (ii) a single optimal set of features and (iii) a single best
  causal model inferred from data.

Figure 8 demonstrates the equivalence classes in a real-life example
high-throughput transcriptomic dataset analysis.

[]

A scatterplot of the classification performance in the discovery dataset
versus the validation dataset. The parameters are resampling plus R F E
1, 2, plus Univ 1, 2, K I A M B 1, 2, 3, iterative removal, and T I E.
All the plots are clustered between 0.2 and 0.9 of the X-axis and
Y-axis, approximately.

The consequences and pitfalls of non-modeled equivalence classes in
practical modeling are given in Table 2.

Table 2

Consequences and pitfalls of non-modeled (i.e., ignored) equivalence
classes in practical modeling

+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| When                 | States               | They should say instead            |
+:=====================+:=====================+:===================================+
| A translational      | “The molecular       | “Here is a randomly-chosen         |
| researcher,          | signature of cancer  | signature out of up to order       |
|                      | A”                   | 2^(50,000) optimal ones that could |
|                      |                      | be fit with the same data”.        |
|                      | (in the context of   |                                    |
|                      | analyzing, for       |                                    |
|                      | example, a cancer    |                                    |
|                      | omics data set with  |                                    |
|                      | 50,000 variables).   |                                    |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| A researcher or data | “Variable A is       | “Variable A is important in model  |
| scientist,           | important because it | M1 but there are up to an          |
|                      | has a large weight   | exponential number of other        |
|                      | in model M1 and      | equally good models and in (some,  |
|                      | explains X% of total | many, or most) of them A has small |
|                      | variance of the      | weight, or even zero weight”.      |
|                      | response”.           |                                    |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| A biologist,         | “The molecular       | “One of up to order 2^(50,000)     |
|                      | pathway of gene G”.  | alternate pathways of G that match |
|                      |                      | the data equally well”.            |
|                      | (in the context of   |                                    |
|                      | analyzing, for       |                                    |
|                      | example, a cancer    |                                    |
|                      | omics data set with  |                                    |
|                      | 50,000 variables).   |                                    |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| An ethics audit of   | “The model was       | “The model was audited and         |
| AI/ML models for     | audited and          | contained no variables indicating  |
| racial variables     | contained no         | racial or other health equity      |
| affecting outcomes,  | variables indicating | bias. However several of the       |
|                      | racial or other      | variables used are information     |
|                      | health equity bias”. | equivalent to indicators of racial |
|                      |                      | bias. The audited model while on   |
|                      |                      | surface is unbiased, is the        |
|                      |                      | information/statistical equivalent |
|                      |                      | of a large number of highly        |
|                      |                      | ethically-biased models”.          |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| A patent application | “The test comprises  | “The test is based on measurements |
| for a new precision  | measurements of      | of genes G1,G2,G3 or their         |
| medicine test,       | genes G1,G2,G3”.     | equivalents listed in …..          |
|                      |                      | Depending on the practicalities of |
|                      |                      | clinical application, one or more  |
|                      |                      | of the equivalent sets are used.”  |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+

We re-iterate for emphasis that in general, there is no such thing as
single optimal predictor model, no single optimal set of features and no
single best causal model inferred from data. There are equivalent
classes of the above entities, and in many, if not all, practical
situations these equivalence classes must be modeled and studied.

Lack of sufficient equivalence class modeling may be the single most
important source of over-interpreting modeling results.

Because the size of the equivalence classes can be immense (i.e.,
exponential to number of variables see [80]) finding the true causes
when selecting a random member amounts to “playing a lottery ticket”
with astronomical chances against the analyst. Similarly, finding the
feature set that is most suitable for clinical application is
astronomically unlikely if the Markov Boundary equivalence class is
large and is not modeled.

Best Practice 12.13.1

1.  (a)

    Use equivalence class modeling algorithms for discovering the
    equivalence class of optimally accurate and non reducible predictive
    models. E.g. TIE* instantiated with GLL-MB or other sound Markov
    boundary subroutines (see chapters “An Appraisal and Operating
    Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare &
    Health Science” and “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
    Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML
    Models”).

     

2.  (b)

    Use equivalence class modeling algorithms for discovering the
    equivalence class of direct causes. E.g. TIE* instantiated with
    GLL-PC or other sound local causal neighborhood subroutines
    (chapters “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML
    Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science” and “The
    Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety
    and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”).

     

3.  (c)

    When experiments can be conducted, consider using ML-driven
    experimentation algorithms that model equivalence classes.
    Experimentation may be needed to resolve the equivalence classes and
    unmeasured confounding. Such algorithms minimize the number of
    experiments needed. E.g., ODLP*.

     

Limited Translation and Clinical Adoption

The vast majority among thousands of research papers describing AI/ML
models are at the feasibility, exploratory, and pre-clinical
stages [144]. Very few have reached clinical maturity and this is major
point made in the >300 meta analyses and systematic reviews of this
technology in healthcare and health sciences discussed in chapter
“Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) for Healthcare
and Health Sciences: The Need for Best Practices Enabling Trust in AI
and ML”. We will look in more detail at a few of these results here.

Despite many years of medical AI Expert System research and pilot
projects, Clinical Decision Support (CDS) has only seen limited adoption
by healthcare systems. [145] The most successful forms of CDS are
clinical best practice guidelines (e.g., Wolters Kluwer, EBSCO,
Elsevier) and clinical order sets (e.g., Wolters Kluwer, Zynx). But
those are simple forms of CDS that are not based on AI/ML and require
significant effort from the clinician to understand how the CDS should
be applied to a particular patient situation. There are no large vendors
providing active CDS that is integrated into the clinical workflow at
scale. Epic’s foray into AI/ML CS via the Sepsis model discussed in this
chapter, proved to be unsuccessful (subsequently many more models were
introduce by the vendor and some studies have shown limited
generalizability; this is an area of active research). While there are
examples of successful CDS that work within a single health
organization, uptake of CDS has generally been low [146] There has been
limited progress on sharing and generalizing CDS that works across
organizations despite efforts from industry groups such as HL7’s
CPG-on-FHIR [147] and AHRQs CDS Connect [148].

In a systematic review of AI applications that have been implemented in
real-life clinical practice [149], Yin et al. identified (out of
thousands of AI studies) 51 studies that reported the implementation and
evaluation of AI applications in clinical practice, of which 13 adopted
a randomized controlled trial design and eight adopted an experimental
design. The AI applications addressed sepsis (n = 6), breast cancer
(n = 5), diabetic retinopathy (n = 4), and polyps and adenoma (n =4). 26
studies examined the performance of AI applications in clinical
settings, 33 studies examined the effect of AI applications on clinician
outcomes, 14 studies examined the effect on patient outcomes, and one
study examined the economic impact associated with AI implementation.

Yin et al concluded that research on the clinical implementation of AI
applications is still at an early stage despite the great potential.

RISE criteria. Varghese proposed the RISE criteria to promote effective
and safe clinical use of AI applications. The RISE criteria were
identified as reoccurring barriers of AI adoption, and are: Regulatory
aspects, Interpretability, interoperability, and the need for Structured
data and Evidence [150].

In a recent article Chew et al, reviewed articles that described the
perceptions and needs of AI in health care. 26 articles and covered
perceptions and needs of various populations in the use of AI were
identified for general, primary, and community health care; chronic
diseases self-management and self-diagnosis; mental health; and
diagnostic procedures. The use of AI was perceived to be positive
because of its availability, ease of use, and potential to improve
efficiency and reduce the cost of health care service delivery. However,
concerns were raised regarding the lack of trust in data privacy,
patient safety, technological maturity, and the possibility of full
automation [151].

Technology acceptance model (TAM). TAM and other similar models have
been constructed to describe, understand and promote technology
acceptance [152]. The main factors highlighted and analyzed by such
models include: Perceived usefulness, Perceived ease of use, Social
influence/subjective norms, Perceived behavioral control/facilitating
conditions. Each of these dimensions comprises several sub-dimensions.

Despite their extensive use outside the health science and health care,
the literature of using TAMs for health AI/ML acceptance is in its
infancy.

In a systematic review of randomized trials of ML interventions in
health care, Plana et al. [153] sought to study the design, reporting
standards, risk of bias, and inclusivity of RCTs for medical machine
learning interventions. 41 RCTs were identified with a median of 294
participants (range, 17–2488 participants). No trials adhered to all
CONSORT-AI standards. Common reasons for nonadherence were not assessing
poor-quality or unavailable input data (38 trials [93%]), not analyzing
performance errors (38 [93%]), and not including a statement regarding
code or algorithm availability (37 [90%]). Overall risk of bias was high
in 7 trials (17%). Of 11 trials (27%) that reported race and ethnicity
data, the median proportion of participants from underrepresented
minority groups was 21% (range, 0%-51%).

This systematic review confirmed that despite the large number of
medical machine learning-based algorithms in development and thousands
of related publications, very few RCTs for these technologies have been
conducted and these had a number of methodological deficiencies. At the
same time it has to be recognized that pushing AI/ML models into CT
validation stages must be a final verification step following many
preceding steps as detailed in chapter “The Process and Lifecycle of a
Clinical-Grade AI/ML model”. Failing to do so will expose human subjects
in the trials to potentially serious risks.

Conclusions

The history of AI/ML is very long both inside and outside the health
space. Progress almost never happens steadily upward: many crises,
failures and temporary or permanent dead-ends lead to short-lived or
prolonged reduction in the social support of, and enthusiasm for this
science and technology. In most cases the crises prompted, and were
followed by, significant improvements that overcame prior limitations.

The most important general lesson learnt was that as long as limitations
were carefully identified, acknowledged, studied and understood, and
were followed by systematic and science-based efforts to overcome them,
then invariably improved science and technology ensued.

The modern era of health AI/ML is facing its own set of challenges. The
biggest risk is that of AI/ML systems causing large-scale harm to
individuals and societies. The biggest existential risk for AI/ML
itself, in the current overhyped AI climate, is another AI winter such
as the one that devastated the field in the 1970’s. Although there are
vastly more practical applications of AI now than there were in the
1970s, hype is still a major concern. Application of BPs enforcing
scientific, principled, rational design, evaluation and deployment of
this technology can help smooth out and accelerate the field’s
evolution.

As demonstrated by the examples of the present chapter, a science-based
approach to AI/ML can reduce or eliminate costly failures, accelerate
progress, manage risks, and lead to better, accountable, and safer AI/ML
that can win the trust and adoption of healthcare and health science
stakeholders. BPs aim to provide such frameworks for progress over
enduring and open problems which are discussed here and also further in
chapter “Synthesis of Recommendations, Open Problems and the Study of
Best Practices”.

Key Concepts Discussed in This Chapter

Significant advances in health AI/ML are the result of non-monotonic
progress with many failures followed by successes

Gartner Hype cycle

AI winters

Historic overview of the development of AI: Perceptron, back
propagation, deep learning, SVM, random forest, semantic networks,
knowledge representation and reasoning (KRR), network science,
rule-based AI, Bayesian Networks 

The continuum between heuristic and formal systems

The disconnect between early AI and real-world needs

Bayes learners and Bayes networks

Overfitting and over-confidence. Regularization and error estimation
protocols.

Data design and learning protocol.

Causality: “Correlation does not imply causation”, Modern causal
discovery methods (without experimentation) and the pillars of causal
AI.

Case studies in genomics.

Published guidelines—attributes and limitations.

Limitations of the literature. Publication bias. Matthew effect.
Ignoring the literature.

Regulatory criticisms.

Case studies of select commercial AI: Portability of technology across
application domains, hybrid symbolic non-symbolic AI, biases in the
training data, “Big data hubris”, large language models, problem solving
with unlimited scope.

Mis- and over-interpretation of theory.

Ignoring equivalence classes. Target information equivalence.

Pitfalls Relevant to Present Chapter

Pitfall 12.11.1 Focused systems are at an advantage over unfocused
ones when considering solving specific problems.

Pitfall 12.13.1. In general, there is no such thing as single optimal
predictor model, single optimal set of features, and single best causal
model inferred from data. There are equivalent classes and in many
practical situations these equivalence classes must be modeled and
studied. Additional predictive modeling errors in analyses where the
equivalence class of Markov Boundaries are not inferred include:

- The predictor model will be a random member of the Markov Boundary
  equivalence class. This may not be the cheapest, easiest or most
  convenient model to deploy clinically.

- In domains with large equivalence classes, intellectual property
  cannot be defended since a 3^(rd) party can use an equivalent Markov
  Boundary and easily bypass a patent or other IP protections.

Additional causal modeling errors in analyses where equivalence classes
of Direct Causes are not inferred.

Discarding causal variables in favor of non-causal ones (e.g.,
discarding A because its correlation with outcome vanishes when we
include non-causal but information equivalent A’ in a regression model).

Over-interpreting models: e.g., believing that because A’ is a model
returned by an algorithm, without equivalence class modeling, and A is
not, then A’ is biologically more important than A.

Because the size of the equivalence classes can be immense (i.e.,
exponential to number of variables [80]) finding the true causes when
selecting a random member (as all algorithms not equipped for
equivalence class modeling do) amounts to playing a lottery ticket with
astronomical chances against the analyst. Similarly, finding the feature
set that is most suitable for clinical application is astronomically
unlikely if the Markov Boundary equivalence class is large and is not
modeled.

Best Practices Relevant to Present Chapter

Best Practice 12.7.1. The IOM’s recommendations and best practices to
enhance development, evaluation, and translation of omics-based tests
before they are used to guide patient treatment in clinical trials.
These aim to ensure that progress in omics test development is grounded
in sound scientific practice and is reproducible, resulting not only in
improved health care but also in continued public trust [85].

Best Practice. 12.9.1. Literature limitations imply (among other things)
that readers should seek, read and interpret health AI/ML papers taking
the these limitations into consideration.

Best Practice 12.11.1.

1.  1.

    ML is not guaranteed to outperform classical tools (like LR). In
    many applications simpler models outperform “fancier” (more
    expressive, more complicated) ones because of a variety of factors,
    including having properties that match health domain characteristics
    better, having extensive guidelines for proper use, protocols and
    designs overpowering algorithms, and that restricted learners being
    superior in low sample situations (see protocol vs algorithm
    discussion in the present chapter and BVDE arguments in chapter
    “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”).

     

2.  2.

    It is an excellent idea to always include baseline comparators such
    as LR and other methods in model building (see chapters “Principles
    of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and
    Systems” and “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical
    Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”).

     

3.  3.

    A significant portion of nominally very high DL performance is
    linked to highly-biased research designs (incomplete cross
    validation, possible overfitting and error estimation bias, and
    other methodological issues that lead to over confidence in models -
    see chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting and General Model
    Overconfidence and Under-performance Pitfalls and Best Practices in
    Machine Learning and AI”). In studies with strong methodology and
    lower risk for bias, DL does not seem to perform as well.

     

Best Practice 12.11.2. In the foreseeable future, and especially for
clinical-grade applications and expensive commercial solutions,
consideration of hybrid symbolic-connectionist approaches may be
worthwhile in many problem domains. Possible advantages include: faster
path to design, faster validation and implementation, and exceeding the
performances of its components.

Best Practice 12.11.3. It is worth noting that large-scope systems are
particularly suitable for human-computer hybrids and the corresponding
practices described in chapter “From ‘Human Versus Machine’ to ‘Human
with Machine’”, should be taken into account.

Best Practice 12.13.1.

1.  1.

    Use equivalence class modeling algorithms for discovering the
    equivalence class of optimally accurate and non reducible predictive
    models. E.g. TIE* instantiated with GLL-MB or other sound Markov
    boundary subroutines or iTIE*.

     

2.  2.

    Use equivalence class modeling algorithms for discovering the
    equivalence class of direct causes. E.g. TIE* instantiated with
    GLL-PC or other sound local causal neighborhood subroutines.

     

3.  3.

    When experiments can be conducted, consider using ML-driven
    experimentation algorithms that model equivalence classes.
    Experimentation may be needed to resolve the equivalence classes and
    unmeasured confounding. Such algorithms minimize the number of
    experiments needed. E.g., ODLP*.

     

Classroom Assignments & Discussion Topics in This Chapter

In the assingments below consider the following case
studies/failures/limitations topics discussed in the chapter (numbered
for ease of reference):

+:--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12.1 Significant advances in health AI/ML are the result of         |
| non-monotonic progress with many failures followed by successes.    |
| Learning from case studies.                                         |
|                                                                     |
| 12.2. The Gartner Hype cycle.                                       |
|                                                                     |
| 12.3. “AI winters”.                                                 |
|                                                                     |
|  12.3.1. Perceptron limitations.                                    |
|                                                                     |
|  12.3.2. Back Propagation-based ANNs and the vanishing (or          |
| exploding) gradient problem.                                        |
|                                                                     |
|  12.3.3. A new improved technology of ANNs followed: “Deep ANNs aka |
| Deep Learning”.                                                     |
|                                                                     |
|  12.3.4. Current limitations (and opportunities for improvement) of |
| DL.                                                                 |
|                                                                     |
|  12.3.5. What’s in a link: the importance of semantics in AI models |
| and methods. From problems with early semantic networks to those of |
| modern network science and pathway discovery.                       |
|                                                                     |
|  12.3.6. Rule-based AI, Expert systems, Heuristic systems,          |
| limitations of Bayesian learners and disconnect between systems and |
| real-world problems.                                                |
|                                                                     |
|   12.3.6.1. Rule based AI and Formal Expert Systems.                |
|                                                                     |
|   12.3.6.2. Heuristic systems.                                      |
|                                                                     |
|   12.3.6.3. Disconnect between early AI systems and real-world      |
| needs and workflows.                                                |
|                                                                     |
|   12.3.6.4. Limitations of early Bayesian learners and emergence of |
| BNs.                                                                |
|                                                                     |
|   12.3.6.5. Intractability of BN inference. Ability to learn BNs    |
| from data.                                                          |
|                                                                     |
| 12.4. Overfitting and over-confidence in models: problems, advances |
| and persistent challenges.                                          |
|                                                                     |
| 12.5. Ignoring the data design and learning protocol (model         |
| selection, error estimation) effects on modeling success.           |
|                                                                     |
|  12.5.1. Effects of protocols on overall model performance are very |
| strong.                                                             |
|                                                                     |
|  12.5.2. Effects of data design on overall model performance are    |
| very strong.                                                        |
|                                                                     |
|   12.5.2.1. Issues with ML challenges.                              |
|                                                                     |
|   12.5.2.2. Other persistent issues related to common data design   |
| deficiencies.                                                       |
|                                                                     |
| 12.6. Causality in early and modern ML.                             |
|                                                                     |
|  12.6.1. “Correlation does not imply causation” and the falsely     |
| implied impossibility of discovering causality without experiments. |
| Problems with RCTs and low-dimensional experiments.                 |
|                                                                     |
|  12.6.2. New class of scalable causal discovery algorithms.         |
|                                                                     |
|  12.6.3. Early causal algorithms were not scalable; claimed         |
| impossibility of tractable causal discovery algorithms.             |
|                                                                     |
|  12.6.4. Lack of causal correctness in broad use of ML and          |
| especially the persistent use of predictive modeling methods to     |
| solve causal problems.                                              |
|                                                                     |
|  12.6.5. Pillars of Causal AI.                                      |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

+:--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12.7. Case studies with pitfalls involving AI/ML used in genomics.  |
|                                                                     |
| 12.8. Attributes and limitations of published guidelines and        |
| criteria for health AI/ML.                                          |
|                                                                     |
|  12.8.1. The risk of exaggerating guideline generality.             |
|                                                                     |
|  12.8.2. Over-interpreting guidelines can (and does) negatively     |
| affect the meta analytic literature and its subsequent literature.  |
|                                                                     |
|  12.8.3. Guidelines and standards with implied exaggerated          |
| completeness or impact.                                             |
|                                                                     |
| 12.9. Limitations of literature.                                    |
|                                                                     |
|  12.9.1. Limitations of self-correction.                            |
|                                                                     |
|  12.9.2. Assessment of Risk of Bias in published studies.           |
|                                                                     |
|  12.9.3. Disconnected publication spheres and disjointed expertise  |
| across fields.                                                      |
|                                                                     |
|  12.9.4. Mathew effect in the literature of health AI/ML.           |
|                                                                     |
|  12.9.5. Compounding of Publication Bias and Mathew effect in AI/Ml |
| literature.                                                         |
|                                                                     |
| 12.10. Failures of AI/ML COVID models; Regulatory Criticicsms in    |
| Covid AI; Other regulatory areas of improvement.                    |
|                                                                     |
| 12.11. Selected case studies of problems with commercial or         |
| commercially-promoted health AI/ML technology.                      |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.1. IBM Watson health.                                        |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.2. Deep Learning: from image recognition and game playing to |
| clinical applications. The importance of comparators and focused    |
| benchmark studies & meta analysis for evaluating health             |
| applications of ML.                                                 |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.3. Marcus’ criticisms of shallow statistical (non-symbolic)  |
| AI/ML.                                                              |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.4. Racial bias in UnitedHealth Group’s Optum model.          |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.5. Scant evidence for positive outcomes from health apps.    |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.6. Epic Sepsis Model (ESM).                                  |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.7. ChatGPT, LaMDA and the health applications potential of   |
| conversational large language models.                               |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.8. Unlimited scope versus focused systems.                   |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.9. Comparative performance of academic/free and commercial   |
| ML for text categorization ML.                                      |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.10. Commercializing patient data.                            |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.11. Google Flu Trends.                                       |
|                                                                     |
|  12.11.12. AI amplifying its own errors?                            |
|                                                                     |
| 12.12. Misinterpreting or over-interpreting theory.                 |
|                                                                     |
|  12.12.1. NFLTs and Cross-validation.                               |
|                                                                     |
|  12.12.2. Optimal Bayes Classifier (OBC).                           |
|                                                                     |
|  12.12.3. Misinterpreting Universal Function Approximation (UFA).   |
|                                                                     |
| 12.13. Ignoring equivalence classes.                                |
|                                                                     |
| 12.14. Limited translation and adoption at clinical stages.         |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

Assignments:

1.  1.

    Map each entry in the above table to the pitfalls in chapters
    “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” to “Regulatory Aspects
    and Ethical Legal Societal Implications (ELSI)”. Justify your
    choices.

     

2.  2.

    Map each entry in the above table to the Best Practices in chapters
    “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems” to “Regulatory Aspects
    and Ethical Legal Societal Implications (ELSI)”. Justify your
    choices.

     

3.  3.

    Characterize each case study as belonging to the following
    categories:
    1.  (a)

        Historical case studies: describing problems that have been
        solved;

         

    2.  (b)

        Historical and current cases studies: describing open problems
        that have existed for some time and continue to require
        solution;

         

    3.  (c)

        Current cases studies: pertaining to more recent unsolved
        challenges.

         

     

4.  4.

    What types of limitations and failures in AI/ML seem to be recurring
    or persisting over the history of the field? Why do you think they
    recur or persist? What would be strategies to ensure their
    eradication?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    O’Leary DE. Gartner’s hype cycle and information system research
    issues. Int J Account Inform Syst. 2008;9(4):240–52.

2.  2.

    Russell SJ. Artificial intelligence a modern approach. Pearson
    Education Inc; 2010.

3.  3.

    AI Winter. Wikipedia. https://​en.​wikipedia.​org/​wiki/​AI_​winter

4.  4.

    Marcus G (2022) Deep learning is hitting a wall. Nautilus, Accessed,
    pp. 03–11.

5.  5.

    Minsky M, Papert S. An introduction to computational geometry.
    Cambridge TIASS., HIT, 479, p. 480; 1969.

6.  6.

    Werbos PJ. Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do
    it. Proc IEEE. 1990;78(10):1550–60.

7.  7.

    Rummelhart DE, McClelland JL, PDP Research Group. Parallel
    distributed processing; 1986.

8.  8.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part II: analysis and
    extensions. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(1)

9.  9.

    Hinton GE. Learning multiple layers of representation. Trends Cogn
    Sci. 2007;11(10):428–34.

10. 10.

    LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G. Deep learning. Nature.
    2015;521(7553):436–44.

11. 11.

    Vapnik V. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer
    Science & Business Media; 2013.

12. 12.

    Boser BE, Guyon IM, Vapnik VN. A training algorithm for optimal
    margin classifiers. Proceedings of the fifth annual workshop on
    computational learning theory—COLT ‘92, p. 144; 1992.

13. 13.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF, Hardin DP, Guyon I. A gentle introduction
    to support vector machines. In: Biomedicine: theory and methods
    (Vol. 1). World Scientific; 2011.

14. 14.

    Breiman L. Random forests. Machine Learning. 2001;45(1):5–32.

15. 15.

    Cheng G, Zhou P, Han J. Learning rotation-invariant convolutional
    neural networks for object detection in VHR optical remote sensing
    images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens. 2016;54(12):7405–15.

16. 16.

    Litjens G, Kooi T, Bejnordi BE, Setio AAA, Ciompi F, Ghafoorian M,
    van der Laak JA, van Ginneken B, Sánchez CI. A survey on deep
    learning in medical image analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.05747;
    2017.

17. 17.

    Statnikov A, Wang L, Aliferis CF. A comprehensive comparison of
    random forests and support vector machines for microarray-based
    cancer classification. BMC Bioinform. 2008;9(1):1–10.

18. 18.

    Woods WA. What’s in a link: foundations for semantic networks. In
    Representation and understanding. Morgan Kaufmann. pp. 35–82; 1975.

19. 19.

    Berners-Lee T, Hendler J, Lassila O. The semantic web. Sci Am.
    2001;284(5):34–43.

20. 20.

    Antoniou G, Van Harmelen F. A semantic web primer. MIT Press; 2004.

21. 21.

    Narendra V, Lytkin NI, Aliferis CF, Statnikov A. A comprehensive
    assessment of methods for de-novo reverse-engineering of
    genome-scale regulatory networks. Genomics. 2011;97(1):7–18.

22. 22.

    Committee on Network Science for Future Army Applications. Network
    Science. National Research Council; 2006.
    doi:https://​doi.​org/​10.​17226/​11516. ISBN 978-0309653886. S2CID
    196021177.

23. 23.

    Cormen TH, Leiserson CE, Rivest RL, Stein C. Introduction to
    algorithms. MIT Press; 2022.

24. 24.

    Johansson P, Hall L, Sikström S, Tärning B, Lind A. How something
    can be said about telling more than we can know: on choice blindness
    and introspection. Conscious Cogn. 2006;15:673–92; discussion
    693–699.

25. 25.

    Nisbett RE, Wilson TD. Telling more than we can know: verbal reports
    on mental processes. Psychol Rev. 1977;84:231–59.

26. 26.

    Goel A. Looking back, looking ahead: Symbolic versus connectionist
    AI. AI Magaz. 2022;42(4):83–5.

27. 27.

    Pople HE. Heuristic methods for imposing structure on ill-structured
    problems: the structuring of medical diagnostics. In Artificial
    intelligence in medicine. Routledge, pp. 119–190; 2019.

28. 28.

    Aliferis CF, Miller RA. On the heuristic nature of medical
    decision-support systems. Methods Inf Med. 1995;34(01/02):5–14.

29. 29.

    McCorduck P, Cfe C. Machines who think: a personal inquiry into the
    history and prospects of artificial intelligence. CRC Press; 2004.

30. 30.

    Miller RA, McNeil MA, Challinor SM, Masarie FE Jr, Myers JD. The
    INTERNIST-1/quick medical REFERENCE project—Status report. West J
    Med. 1986;145(6):816.

31. 31.

    Radley DC, Wasserman MR, Olsho LE, Shoemaker SJ, Spranca MD,
    Bradshaw B. Reduction in medication errors in hospitals due to
    adoption of computerized provider order entry systems. J Am Med
    Inform Assoc. 2013;20(3):470–6.

32. 32.

    Gorry GA, Barnett GO. Experience with a model of sequential
    diagnosis. Comput Biomed Res. 1968;1(5):490–507.

33. 33.

    Miller RA, Pople HE, Myers JD. Internist-I, an experimental
    computer-based diagnostic consultant for general internal medicine.
    Springer New York; 1985. p. 139–58.

34. 34.

    Hunt DL, Haynes RB, Hanna SE, Smith K. Effects of computer-based
    clinical decision support systems on physician performance and
    patient outcomes: a systematic review. JAMA. 1998;280(15):1339–46.

35. 35.

    Ledley RS, Lusted LB. Reasoning foundations of medical diagnosis:
    symbolic logic, probability, and value theory aid our understanding
    of how physicians reason. Science. 1959;130(3366):9–21.

36. 36.

    Warner HR, Cox A. A mathematical model of heart rate control by
    sympathetic and vagus efferent information. J Appl Physiol.
    1962;17(2):349–55.

37. 37.

    Neapolitan RE. Probabilistic reasoning in expert systems: theory and
    algorithms. John Wiley & Sons; 1990.

38. 38.

    Pearl, J., 1988. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems:
    networks of plausible inference. Morgan Kaufmann.

39. 39.

    Dagum P, Luby M. Approximating probabilistic inference in Bayesian
    belief networks is NP-hard. Artif intell. 1993;60(1):141–53.

40. 40.

    Cooper GF. The computational complexity of probabilistic inference
    using Bayesian belief networks. Artif intell. 1990;42(2-3):393–405.

41. 41.

    Jordan MI, Ghahramani Z, Jaakkola TS, Saul LK. An introduction to
    variational methods for graphical models. Machine Learning.
    1999;37:183–233.

42. 42.

    Herskovits E. Computer-based probabilistic-network construction.
    Stanford University; 1991.

43. 43.

    Cooper GF, Herskovits E. A Bayesian method for the induction of
    probabilistic networks from data. Machine Learning. 1992;9:309–47.

44. 44.

    Heckerman D, Geiger D, Chickering DM. Learning Bayesian networks:
    the combination of knowledge and statistical data. Machine Learning.
    1995;20:197–243.

45. 45.

    Harrell FE. Regression modeling strategies: with applications to
    linear models, logistic regression, and survival analysis (Vol.
    608). New York: Springer; 2001.

46. 46.

    Guyon I, Elisseeff A. An introduction to variable and feature
    selection. J Mach Learn Res. 2003;3(Mar):1157–82.

47. 47.

    Guyon I, Aliferis C. Causal feature selection. In Computational
    methods of feature selection. Chapman and Hall/CRC, pp. 79–102;
    2007.

48. 48.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part I: algorithms and
    empirical evaluation. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(1)

49. 49.

    Guyon I, Weston J, Barnhill S, Vapnik V. Gene selection for cancer
    classification using support vector machines. Machine Learning.
    2002;46:389–422.

50. 50.

    Aliferis CF, Tsamardinos I, Statnikov A. HITON: a novel Markov
    Blanket algorithm for optimal variable selection. In AMIA annual
    symposium proceedings, Vol. 2003, p. 21. American Medical
    Informatics Association; 2003.

51. 51.

    Alekseyenko AV, Lytkin NI, Ai J, Ding B, Padyukov L, Aliferis CF,
    Statnikov A. Causal graph-based analysis of genome-wide association
    data in rheumatoid arthritis. Biol Direct. 2011;6(1):1–13.

52. 52.

    Stone M. Cross-validatory choice and assessment of statistical
    predictions. J R Stat Soc B Methodol. 1974;36(2):111–33.

53. 53.

    Varma S, Simon R. Bias in error estimation when using
    cross-validation for model selection. BMC Bioinform. 2006;7(1):1–8.

54. 54.

    Zhang C, Bengio S, Hardt M, Recht B, Vinyals O. Understanding deep
    learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Commun ACM.
    2021;64(3):107–15.

55. 55.

    Hart PE, Stork DG, Duda RO. Pattern classification. Hoboken: Wiley;
    2000.

56. 56.

    Mitchell TM. Machine learning (Vol. 1, No. 9). New York:
    McGraw-Hill; 1997.

57. 57.

    Aphinyanaphongs Y, Fu LD, Li Z, Peskin ER, Efstathiadis E, Aliferis
    CF, Statnikov A. A comprehensive empirical comparison of modern
    supervised classification and feature selection methods for text
    categorization. J Assoc Inf Sci Technol. 2014;65(10):1964–87.

58. 58.

    The MicroArray Quality Control (MAQC)-II study of common practices
    for the development and validation of microarray-based predictive
    models. Nat Biotechnol 2010;28(8):827–838.

59. 59.

    Brain Stroke Prediction Dataset. Kaggle.
    https://​www.​kaggle.​com/​datasets/​fedesoriano/​stroke-prediction-dataset

60. 60.

    Challenges in Machine Learning. http://​www.​chalearn.​org/​

61. 61.

    Denny JC, Ritchie MD, Basford MA, Pulley JM, Bastarache L,
    Brown-Gentry K, Wang D, Masys DR, Roden DM, Crawford DC. PheWAS:
    demonstrating the feasibility of a phenome-wide scan to discover
    gene–disease associations. Bioinformatics. 2010;26(9):1205–10.

62. 62.

    Gaziano JM, Concato J, Brophy M, Fiore L, Pyarajan S, Breeling J,
    Whitbourne S, Deen J, Shannon C, Humphries D, Guarino P. Million
    Veteran Program: a mega-biobank to study genetic influences on
    health and disease. J Clin Epidemiol. 2016;70:214–23.

63. 63.

    All of Us Research Program Investigators. The “All of Us” research
    program. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(7):668–76.

64. 64.

    Mukherjee S, Tamayo P, Rogers S, Rifkin R, Engle A, Campbell C,
    Golub TR, Mesirov JP. Estimating dataset size requirements for
    classifying DNA microarray data. J Comput Biol. 2003;10(2):119–42.

65. 65.

    Waller LA. A note on Harold S. Diehl, randomization, and clinical
    trials. Control Clin Trials. 1997;18(2):180–3.

66. 66.

    Nellhaus EM, Davies TH. Evolution of clinical trials throughout
    history. Marshall J Med. 2017;3(1):41.

67. 67.

    Clinical Trial. Wikipedia.
    https://​en.​wikipedia.​org/​wiki/​Clinical_​trial

68. 68.

    Spirtes P, Glymour CN, Scheines R, Heckerman D. Causation,
    prediction, and search. MIT press; 2000.

69. 69.

    Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB. The central role of the propensity score in
    observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika.
    1983;70(1):41–55.

70. 70.

    Hill AB. The Environment and Disease: Association or Causation? Proc
    R Soc Med. 1965;58(5):295–300.

71. 71.

    Koch R. Untersuchungen über Bakterien: V. Die Ätiologie der
    Milzbrand-Krankheit, begründet auf die Entwicklungsgeschichte des
    Bacillus anthracis. [Investigations into bacteria: V. The etiology
    of anthrax, based on the ontogenesis of Bacillus anthracis]. Cohns
    Beiträge zur Biologie der Pflanzen (in German). 1876;2(2):277–310.

72. 72.

    Falkow S. Molecular Koch’s postulates applied to microbial
    pathogenicity. Rev Infect Dis 1988:S274–S276.

73. 73.

    Pearl J. Causality. Cambridge University Press; 2009.

74. 74.

    Pearl J. Myth, confusion, and science in causal analysis; 2009.
    https://​escholarship.​org/​uc/​item/​6cs342k2

75. 75.

    Pearl J. Remarks on the method of propensity score; 2009.
    https://​escholarship.​org/​uc/​item/​10r8m8sm

76. 76.

    Yeh RW, Valsdottir LR, Yeh MW, Shen C, Kramer DB, Strom JB, Secemsky
    EA, Healy JL, Domeier RM, Kazi DS, Nallamothu BK. Parachute use to
    prevent death and major trauma when jumping from aircraft: a
    randomized controlled trial. BMJ. 2018;363

77. 77.

    Silverstein C, Brin S, Motwani R, Ullman J. Scalable techniques for
    mining causal structures. Data Mining Knowledge Discov.
    2000;4(2):163–92.

78. 78.

    Tsamardinos I, Brown LE, Aliferis CF. The max-min hill-climbing
    Bayesian network structure learning algorithm. Machine Learning.
    2006;65:31–78.

79. 79.

    Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF. Towards principled feature selection:
    Relevancy, filters and wrappers. In International workshop on
    artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR, pp. 300–307; 2003.

80. 80.

    Statnikov A, Lemeir J, Aliferis CF. Algorithms for discovery of
    multiple Markov boundaries. J Mach Learn Res. 2013;14(1):499–566.

81. 81.

    Statnikov A, Ma S, Henaff M, Lytkin N, Efstathiadis E, Peskin ER,
    Aliferis CF. Ultra-scalable and efficient methods for hybrid
    observational and experimental local causal pathway discovery. J
    Mach Learn Res. 2015;16(1):3219–67.

82. 82.

    Pearl J. Theoretical impediments to machine learning with seven
    sparks from the causal revolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.04016;
    2018.

83. 83.

    Adam T, Aliferis C, editors. Personalized and precision medicine
    informatics: a workflow-based view; 2020.

84. 84.

    Anil Potti. Wikipedia. https://​en.​wikipedia.​org/​wiki/​Anil_​Potti

85. 85.

    Omenn GS, Nass SJ, Micheel CM, editors. Evolution of translational
    omics: lessons learned and the path forward; 2012.

86. 86.

    Baggerly KA, Morris JS, Edmonson SR, Coombes KR. Signal in noise:
    evaluating reported reproducibility of serum proteomic tests for
    ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97(4):307–9.

87. 87.

    Hu J, Coombes KR, Morris JS, Baggerly KA. The importance of
    experimental design in proteomic mass spectrometry experiments: some
    cautionary tales. Brief Funct Genomics. 2005;3(4):322–31.

88. 88.

    Venet D, Dumont JE, Detours V. Most random gene expression
    signatures are significantly associated with breast cancer outcome.
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2011;7(10):e1002240.

89. 89.

    Dupuy A, Simon RM. Critical review of published microarray studies
    for cancer outcome and guidelines on statistical analysis and
    reporting. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99(2):147–57.

90. 90.

    Simon R, Radmacher MD, Dobbin K, McShane LM. Pitfalls in the use of
    DNA microarray data for diagnostic and prognostic classification. J
    Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95(1):14–8.

91. 91.

    Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF, Statnikov AR, Statnikov E. Algorithms
    for large scale Markov blanket discovery. In FLAIRS conference, Vol.
    2, pp. 376–380; 2003.

92. 92.

    Ntzani EE, Ioannidis JP. Predictive ability of DNA microarrays for
    cancer outcomes and correlates: an empirical assessment. Lancet.
    2003;362(9394):1439–44.

93. 93.

    Ioannidis JP. Microarrays and molecular research: noise discovery?
    Lancet (London, England). 2005;365(9458):454–5.

94. 94.

    Heil BJ, Hoffman MM, Markowetz F, Lee SI, Greene CS, Hicks SC.
    Reproducibility standards for machine learning in the life sciences.
    Nat Methods. 2021;18(10):1132–5.

95. 95.

    Easterbrook PJ, Gopalan R, Berlin JA, Matthews DR. Publication bias
    in clinical research. Lancet. 1991;337(8746):867–72.

96. 96.

    Mlinarić A, Horvat M, Šupak Smolčić V. Dealing with the positive
    publication bias: Why you should really publish your negative
    results. Biochem Med. 2017;27(3):447–52.

97. 97.

    Nissen SB, Magidson T, Gross K, Bergstrom CT. Publication bias and
    the canonization of false facts. Elife. 2016;5:e21451.

98. 98.

    Higgins JP, Savović J, Page MJ, Elbers RG, Sterne JA. Assessing risk
    of bias in a randomized trial. Cochrane handbook for systematic
    reviews of interventions, pp. 205–228; 2019.

99. 99.

    Hoy D, Brooks P, Woolf A, Blyth F, March L, Bain C, Baker P, Smith
    E, Buchbinder R. Assessing risk of bias in prevalence studies:
    modification of an existing tool and evidence of interrater
    agreement. J Clin Epidemiol. 2012;65(9):934–9.

100. 100.

     National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) of Australia.
     Assessing risk of bias.
     https://​www.​nhmrc.​gov.​au/​guidelinesforgui​delines/​develop/​assessing-risk-bias

101. 101.

     Smalheiser NR, Swanson DR. Using ARROWSMITH: a computer-assisted
     approach to formulating and assessing scientific hypotheses. Comput
     Methods Programs Biomed. 1998;57(3):149–53.

102. 102.

     Swanson DR, Smalheiser NR. Implicit text linkages between Medline
     records: using Arrowsmith as an aid to scientific discovery; 1999.
     In: Knowledge Discovery in Bibliographic Databases. Ed. Jian Qin
     and M. Jay Norton. Library Trends 48, no. 1 (Summer 1999).
     Champaign: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Graduate
     School of Library and Information Science, 1999.

103. 103.

     Perc M. The Matthew effect in empirical data. J Roy Soc Interf.
     2014;11(98):20140378.

104. 104.

     Newman ME. The first-mover advantage in scientific publication.
     Europhys Lett. 2009;86(6):68001.

105. 105.

     Roberts M, Driggs D, Thorpe M, Gilbey J, Yeung M, Ursprung S,
     Aviles-Rivero AI, Etmann C, McCague C, Beer L, Weir-McCall JR.
     Common pitfalls and recommendations for using machine learning to
     detect and prognosticate for COVID-19 using chest radiographs and
     CT scans. Nat Mach Intell. 2021;3(3):199–217.

106. 106.

     Wu E, Wu K, Daneshjou R, Ouyang D, Ho DE, Zou J. How medical AI
     devices are evaluated: limitations and recommendations from an
     analysis of FDA approvals. Nat Med. 2021;27(4):582–4.

107. 107.

     Ross C, Swetlitz I. IBM pitched its Watson supercomputer as a
     revolution in cancer care. It’s nowhere close. Stat.News; 2017.

108. 108.

     Lizzie O’Leary. How IBM’s Watson went from the future of health
     care to sold off for parts. Slate, Jan 31, 2022.
     https://​slate.​com/​technology/​2022/​01/​ibm-watson-health-failure-artificial-intelligence.​html

109. 109.

     Matthew Herper. MD Anderson Benches IBM Watson in setback for
     artificial intelligence in medicine. Forbes, Feb 19, 2017,03.
     https://​www.​forbes.​com/​sites/​matthewherper/​2017/​02/​19/​md-anderson-benches-ibm-watson-in-setback-for-artificial-intelligence-in-medicine/​?​sh=​469cc0c13774

110. 110.

     Schmidt C. MD Anderson breaks with IBM Watson, raising questions
     about artificial intelligence in oncology. JNCI. 2017;109(5)

111. 111.

     Filippidou F, Moussiades L. Α benchmarking of IBM, Google and Wit
     automatic speech recognition systems. In artificial intelligence
     applications and innovations: 16th IFIP WG 12.5 international
     conference, AIAI 2020, Neos Marmaras, Greece, June 5–7, 2020,
     Proceedings, Part I 16. Springer International Publishing, pp.
     73–82; 2020.

112. 112.

     Chowdhury MZI, Naeem I, Quan H, Leung AA, Sikdar KC, O’Beirne M,
     Turin TC. Prediction of hypertension using traditional regression
     and machine learning models: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
     PloS One. 2022;17(4):e0266334.

113. 113.

     Sufriyana H, Husnayain A, Chen YL, Kuo CY, Singh O, Yeh TY, Wu YW,
     Su ECY. Comparison of multivariable logistic regression and other
     machine learning algorithms for prognostic prediction studies in
     pregnancy care: systematic review and meta-analysis. JMIR Med
     Inform. 2020;8(11):e16503.

114. 114.

     Christodoulou E, Ma J, Collins GS, Steyerberg EW, Verbakel JY, Van
     Calster B. A systematic review shows no performance benefit of
     machine learning over logistic regression for clinical prediction
     models. J Clin Epidemiol. 2019;110:12–22.

115. 115.

     Marcus G. Deep learning: a critical appraisal. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1801.00631; 2018.

116. 116.

     Marcus G. The next decade in AI: four steps towards robust
     artificial intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06177; 2020.

117. 117.

     Haddawy P. Generating Bayesian networks from probability logic
     knowledge bases. In Uncertainty proceedings 1994. Morgan Kaufmann,
     pp. 262–269; 1994.

118. 118.

     Ngo, L. and Haddawy, P., 1995. Probabilistic logic programming and
     Bayesian networks. In Algorithms, Concurrency and Knowledge: 1995
     Asian Computing Science Conference, ACSC’95 Pathumthani, Thailand,
     December 11–13, 1995 Proceedings 1 (pp. 286-300). Springer Berlin
     Heidelberg.

119. 119.

     Haddawy P. A logic of time, chance, and action for representing
     plans. Artif Intell. 1996;80(2):243–308.

120. 120.

     Touretzky DS, Hinton GE. A distributed connectionist production
     system. Cognit Sci. 1988;12(3):423–66.

121. 121.

     Obermeyer Z, Powers B, Vogeli C, Mullainathan S. Dissecting racial
     bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations.
     Science. 2019;366(6464):447–53.

122. 122.

     Byambasuren O, Sanders S, Beller E, Glasziou P. Prescribable
     mHealth apps identified from an overview of systematic reviews. NPJ
     Dig Med. 2018;1(1):12.

123. 123.

     Wong A, Otles E, Donnelly JP, Krumm A, McCullough J,
     DeTroyer-Cooley O, Pestrue J, Phillips M, Konye J, Penoza C,
     Ghous M. External validation of a widely implemented proprietary
     sepsis prediction model in hospitalized patients. JAMA Intern Med.
     2021;181(8):1065–70.

124. 124.

     The Hindu Bureau. ChatGPT model passes medical, law exams, with
     human help. The Hindu.
     https://​www.​thehindu.​com/​sci-tech/​technology/​chatgpt-model-passes-medical-law-exams-with-human-help/​article66439175.​ece

125. 125.

     Kung TH, Cheatham M, Chat GPT, Medenilla A, Sillos C, De Leon L,
     Elepaño C, Madriaga M, Aggabao R, Diaz-Candido G, Maningo J,
     Tseng V. Performance of ChatGPT on USMLE: Potential for AI-Assisted
     Medical Education Using Large Language Models. medRxiv
     2022.12.19.22283643; 2022.

126. 126.

     Davis E, Marcus G. GPT-3. OpenAI’s language generator has no idea
     what it’s talking about. MIT Technology Review: Bloviator; 2020.
     https://​www.​technologyreview​.​com/​2020/​08/​22/​1007539/​gpt3-openai-language-generator-artificial-intelligence-ai-opinion/​

127. 127.

     Ryan Daws. Medical chatbot using OpenAI’s GPT-3 told a fake patient
     to kill themselves. AI News; 2020.
     https://​www.​artificialintell​igence-news.​com/​2020/​10/​28/​medical-chatbot-openai-gpt3-patient-kill-themselves/​

128. 128.

     Greene T. DeepMind tells Google it has no idea how to make AI less
     toxic. The Next Web; 2021.

129. 129.

     Weidinger L, et al. Ethical and social risks of harm from Language
     Models. arXiv 2112.04359; 2021.

130. 130.

     Bender EM, Gebru T, McMillan-Major A, Schmitchel S. On the dangers
     of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? Proceedings
     of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and
     transparency, pp. 610–623; 2021.

131. 131.

     Truven Health Analytics.
     https://​www.​ibm.​com/​watson-health/​about/​truven-health-analytics

132. 132.

     OptumLabs. https://​www.​optumlabs.​com/​

133. 133.

     TrinetX. https://​trinetx.​com/​

134. 134.

     Claris Life Sciences. https://​www.​carislifescience​s.​com

135. 135.

     Spector-Bagdady K, Krenz CD, Brummel C, Brenner JC, Bradford CR,
     Shuman AG. “My Research Is Their Business, but I’m Not Their
     Business”: patient and clinician perspectives on commercialization
     of precision oncology data. Oncologist. 2020;25(7):620–6.

136. 136.

     Chiruvella V, Guddati AK. Ethical issues in patient data ownership.
     Interact J Med Res. 2021;10(2):e22269.

137. 137.

     Cole CL, Sengupta S, Rossetti S, Vawdrey DK, Halaas M, Maddox TM,
     Gordon G, Dave T, Payne PR, Williams AE, Estrin D. Ten principles
     for data sharing and commercialization. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
     2021;28(3):646–9.

138. 138.

     Lazer D, Kennedy R, King G, Vespignani A. The parable of Google
     Flu: traps in big data analysis. science, 2014;343(6176),
     pp.1203–1205.

139. 139.

     Goel S, Hofman JM, Lahaie S, Pennock DM, Watts DJ. Predicting
     consumer behavior with Web search. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
     2010;107(41):17,486–90.

140. 140.

     Devin Coldewey, Frederic Lardinois AI is eating itself: Bing’s AI
     quotes COVID disinfo sourced from ChatGPT. Techcrunch.​com; 2023.
     https://​techcrunch.​com/​2023/​02/​08/​ai-is-eating-itself-bings-ai-quotes-covid-disinfo-sourced-from-chatgpt/​

141. 141.

     Lin Y. Some asymptotic properties of the support vector machine.
     Technical Report 1044r, Department of Statistics, University of
     Wisconsin, Madison; 1999.

142. 142.

     Hornik K, Stinchcombe M, White H. Multilayer feedforward networks
     are universal approximators. Neural Netw. 1989;2(5):359–66.

143. 143.

     Universal Approximation Theorem. Wikipedia.
     https://​en.​wikipedia.​org/​wiki/​Universal_​approximation_​theorem

144. 144.

     Moreira MWL, Rodrigues JJPC, Korotaev V, Al-Muhtadi J, Kumar N. A
     comprehensive review on smart decision support systems for health
     care. IEEE Syst J. 2019;13:3536–45.

145. 145.

     Yang Q, Steinfeld A, Zimmerman J. Unremarkable AI: fitting
     intelligent decision support into critical, clinical
     decision-making processes. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
     conference on human factors in computing systems. Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–11; 2019.

146. 146.

     Kouri A, Yamada J, Lam Shin Cheung J, Van de Velde S, Gupta S. Do
     providers use computerized clinical decision support systems? A
     systematic review and meta-regression of clinical decision support
     uptake. Implement Sci. 2022;17:21.

147. 147.

     FHIR Clinical Guidelines (v1.0.0) (STU 1). In: CPG-on-FHIR.
     https://​hl7.​org/​fhir/​uv/​cpg/​. Accessed 22 Jan 2023.

148. 148.

     Lomotan EA, Meadows G, Michaels M, Michel JJ, Miller K. To share is
     human! Advancing evidence into practice through a national
     repository of interoperable clinical decision support. Appl Clin
     Inform. 2020;11:112–21.

149. 149.

     Yin J, Ngiam KY, Teo HH. Role of artificial intelligence
     applications in real-life clinical practice: systematic review. J
     Med Internet Res. 2021;23(4):e25759.

150. 150.

     Varghese J. Artificial intelligence in medicine: chances and
     challenges for wide clinical adoption. Visceral Med.
     2020;36(6):443–9.

151. 151.

     Chew HSJ, Achananuparp P. Perceptions and needs of artificial
     intelligence in health care to increase adoption: scoping review. J
     Med Internet Res. 2022;24(1):e32939.

152. 152.

     Holden RJ, Karsh BT. The technology acceptance model: its past and
     its future in health care. J Biomed Inform. 2010;43(1):159–72.

153. 153.

     Plana D, Shung DL, Grimshaw AA, Saraf A, Sung JJ, Kann BH.
     Randomized clinical trials of machine learning interventions in
     health care: a systematic review. JAMA Netw Open.
     2022;5(9):–e2233946.

Footnotes

1

 

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_13

Characterizing, Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML & AI Models in Clinical and Organizational Application

Constantin Aliferis¹  , Sisi Ma¹, Jinhua Wang¹ and Gyorgy Simon¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

This chapter covers essential practical methods for examining models,
reviewing their face validity, and characterizing and managing risk of
errors of such models at development and at deployment stages. This
chapter also briefly discusses broader methods and best practices for
detecting and correcting issues with ML modeling and the emerging
concept of debugging ML models and analyses. A “toolkit” for application
safety measures is presented.

Keywords

CalibrationReliable model decision regionsDebugging MLToolkit for safe
model application

Essential Model Diagnostics and Model Characterization

Recall from chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal
of ML and AI Methods and Systems ” that well-engineered AI/ML
methods, have well-characterized properties (theoretical and empirical)
across many relevant dimensions that ensure that produced models have
appropriate: Representation power; Transparency and Explainability;
Soundness; Completeness; Tractable computational complexity of learning
models; Tractable computational complexity of using models;
Tractable space complexity of learning models; Tractable space
complexity of storing and using models; Realistic sample complexity,
learning curves, and power-sample requirements; Probability and decision
theoretic consistency; Strong comparative and absolute empirical
performance in simulation studies; Transparency and explainability; and
Strong comparative and absolute performance in real data with hard and
soft gold standard known answers.

These properties (and especially the empirical ones) however, must be
further studied on a more granular level once specific models are
constructed following the best practices described in chapter “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance Sensistive AI/ML Models”. For example, whereas we know that
SVM methods are particularly well suited theoretically and empirically
to constructing omics classifiers, or DL methods for image recognition,
and so on (chapter “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major
ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science”), the specific
level of performance and risk of error for a particular model created by
a specific dataset for a specific problem solving context requires
additional analysis tailored to the particulars of that application.

Therefore, as we transition from method development/characterization to
model fit/characterization and we further consider the stages and
components of a particular model’s lifecycle we move from general
properties and lifecycle stages to very concrete understanding of
precisely how well this particular model will perform for the problem
solving context in hand.

We clarify that in the present chapter we almost exclusively deal with
risks due to prediction and other model output errors, giving more
operational post-hoc analysis details for the process described in
chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and
Other Safety and Performance Sensitive AI/ML Models”. We do not deal
with regulatory, ethical, reproducibility etc, risks which are discussed
in chapters “Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal Implications
(ELSI)”, and “Reporting Standards, Certification/Accreditation, and
Reproducibility”.

An important first diagnostic for predictive models is testing whether
the model is statistically significantly different than the null model
(i.e., one that does not have any predictive signal). This is typically
conducted with a label reshuffling test (LRT, see chapter “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”). The LRT will also inform whether
the whole modeling protocol has any propensity to produce unduly
optimistic performance generalization estimates under the null
hypothesis (i.e., the data not having any predictive signal for the
response).

If additional validation datasets are available (other than the ones
used in the primary error estimation procedures) they can inform about
whether the model and its associated generalization error/performance
estimates indeed generalize well in new datasets sampled from the same
population. For protocols that have passed the LRT for propensity to
produce biased generalization error estimates, observing “shrinkage” of
the performance from the original estimates to the new ones may be due
to the following factors: (a) normal sampling variation; (b) differences
of the new validation data from the discovery data because they
originate from a slightly (or radically) different population. The
latter possibility warrants further investigation, if observed.

One of the most important diagnostics for new models is their
calibration. Chapter “Evaluation” provides a thorough technical
description. To summarize the key concepts, calibration refers to how
close the predictions of a model are to the true values. A
perfectly-calibrated model is not necessarily a perfectly accurate model
since the model may output predictions with a wide confidence interval.
If for example, a model outputs that the probability of outcome T taking
value 1 for input instance i, is .8 and it is perfectly calibrated, then
in 80% of identical cases in the future T = 1 and the model will be
correct, whereas in 20% of cases it will be wrong. In applications where
it is not possible to achieve very accurate predictions it is still
essential that a high degree of calibration is achieved. Recalibration
refers to the procedure where miscalibrated models’ outputs are adjusted
so that they are better calibrated without the need to rebuild the
models. The binning method is a very simple but very useful method to
recalibrate models. The analyst first estimates the model’s calibration
in ranges (“bins”) of probability outputs and then maps the original
predictions to the true (calibrated) probabilities. This same technique
can be used for converting a non-probabilistic output to a calibrated
probability output (Fig. 1).

[]

2 histograms, a table and 5 steps for the binning method. Train S V M
classifier in the training set is followed by apply to the validation
set, create histogram with Q bins, place the new sample from the testing
set in the corresponding bin, and compute probability as a fraction of
true positives.

Probability conversion of non-probabilistic outputs can be accomplished
by other methods, for example using a mapping function such as a sigmoid
filter (Fig. 2).

[]

A line graph, a table and 4 steps for the sigmoid filter. Train S V M
classifier in the training set is followed by apply to the validation
set, determine parameters of sigmoid function by minimizing negative log
from validation set, and compute posterior probability of new sample
from testing set.

Analysts have a wealth of calibration metrics to use. These are designed
to align with the data design and loss functions used in the project.
For example, calibration metrics have been developed that are
appropriate for case-control binary classification, n-ary
classification, regression, survival and time to event models, time
series models, etc., see chapter “Evaluation” for details.

Models’ reliable and unreliable decision regions. It is also possible to
invert the logic of the calibration analysis and seek the regions in the
model’s output space where acceptable or unacceptable prediction errors
are observed. This approach establishes the model output regions where
the model’s predictions are trustworthy (i.e. low-error) and regions
where they are not. It is advisable in such an analysis to calculate the
FPR, FNR, TPR, TNR or other loss functions and evaluation metrics of
interest so that the model can be safely deployed (see chapter
“Evaluation”).

The above model characterizations remove limitations that are analogous
to human cognitive limitations e,g, the famous Dunning-Gruger effect [2]
where human decision makers believe that their performance compared to
others is higher than what it is and this bias is stronger in decision
makers of low ability. Establishing calibration, confidence intervals
and credible intervals, and reliable decision regions, ML models can
avoid these biases altogether and be equipped with the functional
equivalent of self-awareness of their limitations that promotes safe
model application.

Another useful post-hoc analysis is that of stability which measures the
degree by which the structure of a model or the values of its parameters
change as a function of sampling variation. For practical
reasons, stability analyses are typically conducted by generating a
large number of datasets re-sampled from the original dataset to
simulate a sampling distribution. Then the modeling is conducted for
each dataset and metrics on the model structures and parameter’s
stability are calculated. In common practice, highly unstable structures
or parameter values are treated with caution since they may be the
result of variation due to small training sample size. We caution
however that instability in modeling may be also caused by structural
properties of the distribution and/or the learning algorithm operating
characteristics and is not necessary proof that a model is unreliable or
not generalizable [3]. The existence of equivalence classes in
particular, may lead to highly unstable features and models fitted from
them by randomized algorithms, however if the unstable features are due
to being members of an equivalence class they can still generalize well
predictively. See chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”
for a detailed discussion of equivalence classes and the importance to
model them.

Equivalence classes are also very important for causal modeling since
the causal discovery algorithms by necessity (imposed by learning
theory) can learn the data generating function within the equivalence
class. Whereas some algorithms (e.g., PC, or GES can score or learn
representations of certain types of equivalence classes (e.g. due to
latent variables or Markov equivalent structures), other algorithms
(e.g., MMHC) learn a single member of the class and then the analyst has
to generate the equivalence class of that member. See chapter
“Foundations of Causal ML” for more details about how these algorithms
operate and what classes they output.

Similarly equivalence classes for feature selection can also be
critically important since they can be used to investigate all possible
sets of important optimal predictive model inputs for insights into the
process that generates the data and for choosing the model with inputs
that are most convenient, accessible and easier to deploy. Currently
very few algorithms exist for inferring feature sets equivalence classes
(see chapters “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An
Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable
in Healthcare & Health Science”, “The Development Process and Lifecycle
of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML
Models”) and among them at this time only TIE* has a well-developed
theory, wide applicability and reliable performance [4].

Establishing credible intervals (CrIs) of models’ outputs is also an
important model characteristic and diagnostic. The CrI is different than
the common statistical Confidence Interval (CI) the latter measuring
(e.g., the 95% or other) range of values for a model’s parameters,
accuracy or properties when models are built from a number of samples
from the population. The 95% (or other width) CrI is the range that
contains with probability 95% the true value of the model’s parameter or
predicted response. In a Bayesian framework it corresponds to a region
of the posterior distribution for an estimated predicted response
value or parameter value [5, 6].

In all cases especially after a model has been generated in, or
converted to, a human readable form (using the many techniques and best
practices discussed in chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”)
face validity tests are very useful. Such tests are conducted by domain
experts (and in some cases augmented by automated literature extraction
and synthesis) who by using domain knowledge will seek to identify
implausible patterns and relationships, or apparently dubious decision
logic as possible errors in the model’s construction.

If, as a trivial example, a model suggests that an inheritable genetic
factor is caused by a lifestyle behavior that obviously denotes a
reversal in causal order that is highly suspect. If, in a more
sophisticated example, terminal outcomes (e.g., death) appear to have
spouse variables (i.e., direct causes or direct effects of the outcome)
this violates the data design and measurement constraints and has to be
explained by the existence of unmeasured confounders (which is the most
likely explanation in this example), by data errors, or by modeling
errors.

Best Practice 13.1

Measure calibration and recalibrate as needed.

Best Practice 13.2

Convert scores to probabilities.

Best Practice 13.3

Test models for difference from null model.

Best Practice 13.4

Identify models’ reliable and unreliable decision regions.

Best Practice 13.5

Measure stability and flag unstable models.

Best Practice 13.6

Extract and report model equivalence classes.

Debugging ML

In conventional programming, several techniques and tools exist for
debugging programs to ensure that their behavior is the one intended by
the programmer. “Bugs” are errors in coding that divert the original
intension of the programmer to an unwanted or unanticipated program
behavior. A variety of tools, techniques, and resources have been
invented to help with conventional debugging. Such methods include
interactive debugging, control flow analysis, unit testing, log file
analysis, memory dumps, profiling and other techniques [7–9].

Debugging ML model building however involves many additional
complexities and represents a higher order of difficulty for debugging,
because of the following reasons:

1.  1.

    ML programs do not implement functions but functionals. An ordinary
    programming function maps a set of inputs (the domain set) to a set
    of outputs (the codomain set). A ML functional is a function that
    takes a set of inputs (training and validation datasets) and maps
    them to a set of functions (i.e. decision models, which themselves
    are functions that take as inputs problem domain instances and
    output instance-specific decisions).

     

2.  2.

    Whereas conventional programming admits a single or small number of
    correct solutions (e.g., a ranked list of numbers, all paths from
    point A to point B in a map, etc.) ML programming admits an infinity
    of acceptable or even optimal outputs (i.e., in predictive ML, any
    member of the whole equivalence class of models that exhibit optimal
    generalization performance) or the even larger set that exhibits
    near-optimal performance.

     

3.  3.

    ML algorithms are inherently stochastic in terms of the inputs and
    may also involve stochastic operations on them. They have to
    accommodate infinite possible inputs and to be robust to noisy
    inputs.

     

4.  4.

    ML algorithms's properties interact with the data design so that the
    quality of the output is not strictly a function of the data input
    but also a function of the alignment of the algorithm with the data
    generation and measurement design choices made by the analyst or
    user of the algortihm. The ML algorithms however seldom have
    built-in representations of the data design properties and how it
    affects their operation (which makes detecting related problems
    hard).

     

The process of debugging ML modeling is currently decidedly more of an
art than a science. However this art is strongly informed by
well-established scientific principles and properties from ML. The
following are recommended approaches to tackle ML debugging to achieve
model development error prevention and detection. They should be treated
as starting point within a much larger and variable space of
possibilities.

Best Practices 13.7. ML Debugging Strategies

1.  1.

    Start from conventional implementation debugging of ML algorithms:
    e.g. trace step by step algorithms in simple but representative
    small scale problems; isolate and unit-test subroutines in data
    intake, model fitting and output. Same for conventional debugging of
    AI/ML model implementation.

     

2.  2.

    Debug real data, e.g., :
    1.  (a)

        Is the data conformant to expected format?

         

    2.  (b)

        Is the data distributed according to distributional assumptions
        that underlie proper use of the algorithms/models used?

         

    3.  (c)

        Is the data reflecting the sampling or data generation protocol?
        For example, for data supposed to be iid, is it? For data from
        randomized experiments can we predict the exposure? (if yes,
        then it was not properly randomized).

         

    4.  (d)

        Are there outliers or other data abnormalities that violate ML
        algorithm data requirements?

         

     

3.  3.

    Debug simulations and resimulations:
    1.  (a)

        When artificial and semi-artificial data are used to test
        algorithm performance and the algorithm implementation does not
        behave according to theoretical expectations, test whether the
        simulated data conforms to the specification of the simulation.

         

    2.  (b)

        If an algorithm or protocol is randomized, save any suspect
        random instantiations for debugging (because in subsequent runs
        the bug may not appear).

         

     

4.  4.

    Know well the behavior of algorithms so that strange behaviors (for
    better or worse) are immediately apparent in complex analyses. For
    example:
    1.  (a)

        If an algorithm is deterministic but outputs different results
        at each run on the same data this indicates a bug; conversely a
        randomized algorithm that outputs the same exact results
        indicates a bug.

         

    2.  (b)

        If the algorithm is expected to have boundary behaviors (for
        example terminate upon meeting certain conditions) but does not,
        this indicates a bug;

         

    3.  (c)

        If the algorithm is expected to converge monotonically toward a
        performance metric but it converges non-monotonically, this also
        indicates a bug, and so on.

         

    4.  (d)

        If an algorithm is expected to converge and does not,
        investigate if it is normal non-convergence or systematic.

         

    5.  (e)

        Investigate the root causes of happy accidents and surprises
        (see next section).

         

     

5.  5.

    Build and use a set of benchmark datasets where the behavior of
    algorithms is known and new algorithms or new implementations can be
    readily compared.

     

6.  6.

    Compare the implementation or instantiation and tuning of a ML
    algorithm or protocol to the same data as published in
    reference-level prior literature.

     

7.  7.

    Examine the interactions of algorithms with embedding protocols and
    systems. If the same algorithm implementation behaves differently
    inside different implementations of the same protocol this indicates
    that the protocol implementation or interface with the ML algorithm
    is buggy.

     

Recognizing and Accommodating “Happy Accidents” & Surprises

In the practice of ML, we often encounter “happy accidents” and pleasant
surprises. For example, when developing Markov Boundary algorithms
(chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and
AI Methods and Systems”) the developers were surprised that despite that
the GLL algorithms were performing up to 100,000s of conditional
independence tests per dataset without conventionally correcting for
multiple comparisons, the resulting Markov Boundary sets did not contain
significant numbers of false positives. Initially the developing team
considered this as a likely bug that should be corrected with false
positive rate control measures, however close inspection of the issue
revealed that the variable elimination steps in the algorithms were
eliminating the false positives. For example, when fed with 1000 random
variables and no signal-carrying variables, and with conditional
independence tests (CITs) set at minimal alpha of 5%, which would imply
50 false positives, the algorithm would output just 4 false positives
[10, 11]. This gave valuable insights in the self-regularizing behavior
of this class of algorithms and confirmed their robustness.

In another example, the same authors show that so-called epistatic
functions, that is, extremely non-linear and discontinuous functions
where only a specific subset of the inputs would reveal signal and all
other lower order subsets were devoid of signal, can still be detected
by linear learners and the classifier performance can grow arbitrarily
close to perfect when the inputs are unbalanced (by data design)) or
correlated (naturally). In addition, when the density of positive target
is non uniform in the space of inputs, then arbitrarily strong signal
can exist that is detectable by linear learners. For example, in the
textbook XOR function which is a prime example of this class of
functions, and T = XOR (A,B), neither A or B have univariate signal for
T and must be considered together for the signal to become fully
discoverable. This is a huge problem in high dimensional settings where
the combinatorics become quickly intractable. This textbook version of
the problem however is very unlikely to exist in practice because for
signal to disappear in lower-order effects an unlikely arrangement of
data has to exist [11].

In the benchmark of pathway reverse engineering study of [12] it was
shown that basic correlation networks would perform well as long as the
loss functions were tailored to their inductive bias. Specifically,
despite that these techniques are not having causal discovery
guarantees and can be shown to output massive numbers of false positives
in many situations, in very low sample situations they may perform
better in terms of sensitivity (trading off specificity) than causal
algorithms simply because there is not enough sample to generate
reliable results and proper causal algorithms are designed to avoid
producing false positives.

In the domain of cancer genomics, random selection of biomarkers tends
to give informative markers and strong signatures [13]. These are truly
generalizable and robust and their existence is due to the wide
propagation of cancer signal throughout the data generating
transcriptomic network.

In a final example, while causal ML algorithms are designed to operate
in faithful distributions (which do not have information equivalences),
the designers of the Causal feature selection challenge [14] were
surprised to discover that their resimulated data built using such
algorithms exhibited information equivalencies (mostly as a result of
statistical indistinguishability due to finite sample size). This
increases the veracity of the resimulated data.

These examples show a common phenomenon in ML, i.e., that empirical
results often perform better than expected due to mitigation factors.
The modelers should investigate thoroughly any unexpected behaviors to
find any errors, but should also keep an open mind about the possible
validity of results due to error mitigating factors.

A Toolkit for Ensuring Safe Model Application

Best Practices 13.8. for Safe Model Deployment

1.  1.

    Outlier detection. When encountering an application instance,
    determine whether it is an outlier with respect to the distribution
    where the model was validated and flag it as such [15, 16]. Refrain
    from making a prediction or decision for outliers.

     

2.  2.

    Region of reliable operation. When encountering an application
    instance, determine whether it falls inside or outside the model’s
    region of reliable operation (section “Essential Model Diagnostics
    and Model characterization”). Refrain from making a prediction or
    decision for cases outside the reliable region.

     

3.  3.

    Detect and address distribution shifts. As application instances
    accumulate, determine if their distribution is different than the
    one used to validate the model (chapters “Data Design” and “Data
    Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and Management”).
    1.  (a)

        If yes, then alert the deployment and development teams for
        possible need to rebuilt the model because of distribution
        shifts.

         

    2.  (b)

        When distribution shifts are observed, determine if they affect
        the model performance. If they do not, continue monitoring the
        shifts but do not withhold the model’s decisions.

         

    3.  (c)

        Characterize distribution shifts by seasonal trends, individual
        variables affected, emerging population mixture changes, etc.,
        as appropriate for the application domain.

         

     

4.  4.

    When making a prediction or decision, also output the credible
    interval for that input region (chapter “Overfitting, Underfitting
    and General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and
    Best Practices in Machine Learning and AI”) as well as other loss
    function estimates applicable to the region.

     

5.  5.

    When explaining a model or a specific model’s output also report the
    credible interval and stability of its structure and parameters.
    Flag unstable and uncertain model characteristics.

     

6.  6.

    Apply continuous statistical process quality control metrics as
    predictions and decisions are prospectively validated [16]. If
    predictions and actions are statistically significantly different
    than expected, then alert deployment and development teams for
    possible need to rectify or rebuilt the model.

     

7.  7.

    Make the above functions parametric so that model operators can
    adapt the model deployment better to local application conditions
    (e.g., health care provider and patient preferences, organizational
    policies, evolving regulations etc.).

     

8.  8.

    When more than one model are available, apply the model that has
    best performance and safety profile for each application case [17].

     

9.  9.

    When transferring a model developed from population P1 to population
    P2 analyze with existing historical data performance and safety
    before deployment. If operating characteristics are not
    satisfactory, then consider rebuilding models from P2 data.

     

10. 10.

    If some inputs are expected to be missing and decisions with partial
    input are desired, consider using flexible input decision models, or
    dynamic imputation schemes at the design, fitting and validation
    stages (chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”). Do
    not apply models with partial or imputed inputs unless this is part
    of the models’ design and validation.

     

11. 11.

    If the quality of model data inputs changes from the development and
    validation data to the application phase, apply appropriate
    detection mechanisms, flag such inputs and refrain from making
    predictions or other decisions (chapter “Data Preparation,
    Transforms, Quality, and Management”).

     

12. 12.

    Develop and deploy ancillary alerting DSS (geared to the model users
    and developers) that are designed to flag deviations from the
    conditions that guarantee safe and effective model performance
    although it may not be directly detectable in data. For example, for
    a COVID management model, deploy alerts related to new vaccines,
    population immunity, new variants, and other factors that may affect
    the model’s validity but may not be detectable from the
    patient-level data before they create serious degradation in model
    performance.

     

Conclusions

Taken together the above practices are designed to establish several
synergistic safety layers protecting models from falling off their
“knowledge cliff”. The listed safeguards comprise the functional
equivalent of AI/ML “self-knowledge” of its limitations in order to
avoid making hazardous decisions.

Key Concepts Discussed in This Chapter

Calibration

Recalibration and conversion of scores to probabilities

Reliable and unreliable model decision regions

Credible Intervals

Debugging ML: how is different than conventional code debugging; general
strategies for ML debugging.

Model failure mitigation factors

Model deployment safeguards toolkit

Pitfalls Related to the Present Chapter

Pitfall 13.1. Models that are uncalibrated or with unknown calibration

Pitfall 13.2. Models with unknown correspondence of output to
probabilities.

Pitfall 13.3. Not checking if model statistically significantly better
than the null model.

Pitfall 13.4. Unknown model reliable and unreliable decision regions.

Pitfall 13.5.: Unknown stability and consequences for model safety and
performance.

Pitfall 13.6. Being oblivious to model’sequivalence class

Pitfall 13.7. ML with bugs.

Pitfall 13.8. Falling over a model’s “knowledge cliff” (i.e., succumbing
to model deployment safety traps):

1.  1.

    Outliers.

     

2.  2.

    Falling outside model’s region of reliable operation.

     

3.  3.

    Distribution shifts.

     

4.  4.

    Model decisions carry no information about its expected errors
    specific to that case.

     

5.  5.

    Failing to flag, report and explain unstable and uncertain model
    characteristics.

     

6.  6.

    Failing to detect and alert deployment and development teams for
    possible need to rectify or rebuilt the model.

     

7.  7.

    Rigid specifications of safety functions, lack of adaptability to
    local application conditions.

     

8.  8.

    Fail to exploit a plurality of tailored models to address the
    application cases.

     

9.  9.

    Fail to safely transfer models developed from population P1 to
    population P2.

     

10. 10.

    Fail to address missing inputs.

     

11. 11.

    Failing to detect and manage drops in the quality of model data
    inputs.

     

12. 12.

    Invisible deviations from the conditions that guarantee safe and
    effective model performance.

     

Summary of Best Practices Discussed in This Chapter

Best Practice 13.1. Measure calibration and recalibrate as needed

Best Practice 13.2. Convert scores to probabilities.

Best Practice 13.3. Test models for difference from null model.

Best Practice 13.4. Identify models’ reliable and unreliable decision
regions.

Best Practice 13.5. Measure stability and flag unstable models.

Best Practice 13.6. Extract and report model equivalence classes

Best Practice 13.7. Apply strategies for ML debugging:

1.  1.

    Start from conventional debugging of ML algorithm implementation.

     

2.  2.

    Debug with real data.

     

3.  3.

    Debug simulations and resimulations.

     

4.  4.

    Know well the behavior of algorithms so that strange behaviors (for
    better or worse) are immediately apparent in complex analyses.
    Investigate unusual behaviors (with respect to each algorithm’s
    expected behavior).

     

5.  5.

    Build and use a set of benchmark datasets.

     

6.  6.

    Compare the implementation or instantiation and tuning of a ML
    algorithm to the literature.

     

7.  7.

    Examine the interactions of algorithms with embedding protocols and
    systems.

     

Best Practice 13.8. Use safe model deployment toolkit:

1.  1.

    Detect and manage outliers.

     

2.  2.

    Detect and manage falling outside model’s region of reliable
    operation.

     

3.  3.

    Detect and manage distribution shifts.

     

4.  4.

    Report Credible Interval and other loss function estimates
    applicable to the input region for every model decision.

     

5.  5.

    Flag, report and explain unstable and uncertain model
    characteristics.

     

6.  6.

    Apply continuous QC metrics as predictions and decisions are
    prospectively validated. Alert deployment and development teams for
    possible need to rectify or rebuilt the model.

     

7.  7.

    Make the above safety functions parametric so that model operators
    can adapt the model deployment better to local application
    conditions.

     

8.  8.

    When more than one model is available, choose the model that has
    best performance and safety profile for each application case.

     

9.  9.

    Safely transfer models developed from population P1 to population
    P2, or rebuild models from P2 data.

     

10. 10.

    Address missing inputs at the design, fitting and validation stages.
    Do not apply models with partial or imputed inputs unless this is
    part of the models’ design and validation.

     

11. 11.

    Manage drops in the quality of model data inputs from the
    development and validation data to the application phase.

     

12. 12.

    Develop and deploy ancillary alerting DSS (geared to the model users
    and developers) that are designed to flag deviations from the
    conditions that guarantee safe and effective model performance.

     

Classroom Assignments & Discussion Topics in This Chapter

1.  1.

    Which factors can you list that cause distribution shifts? Which
    ones may jeopardize decision models?

     

2.  2.

    Give: (a) An example where highly unstable biomarker selection does
    not degrade model predictivity. (b) An example where highly stable
    biomarkers are not useful.

    HINT for (a): consider that markers BM1 and BM2 have exactly the
    same information for the response and the biomarker discovery
    procedure chooses them at random. Now increase the number of markers
    with such equivalent information.

     

3.  3.

    Show how model instability may relate to sampling variation and to
    increased errors via the BVDE.

     

4.  4.

    When conversion of scores to probabilities is desirable? When can it
    be superfluous? When detrimental?

     

5.  5.

    (a) Describe how we can create models with high performance and
    accuracy by carving out input space regions of low
    performance/accuracy.

    (b) What are necessary preconditions for this to be successful?

    (c) What is the fundamental tradeoff involved?

     

6.  6.

    If missing inputs are anticipated at model deployment, how would you
    choose among alternative options based on the tractability of
    running models? Compare for example BNs and KNN in this context.

     

7.  7.

    [Advanced] Discuss the application of transductive learning methods
    to address successful model transference? What may be downsides of
    this approach?

     

8.  8.

    Consider a situation where the data describing a patient population
    with disease D in region/health system H1 are radically different
    than those of region/health system H2.
    1.  (a)

        What may cause these differences?

         

    2.  (b)

        How would you go about building effective models for H1 and H2?

         

     

9.  9.

    [Advanced] Is every degradation of model input data quality
    affecting the model’s quality of outputs? How would you
    systematically incorporate this consideration in the design of
    robust models?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF, Hardin DP, Guyon. A gentle introduction to
    support vector machines in biomedicine: theory and methods, vol. 1.
    World scientific; 2011.

2.  2.

    Kruger J, Dunning D. Unskilled and unaware of it: how difficulties
    in recognizing one's own incompetence lead to inflated
    self-assessments. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1999;77(6):1121.Crossref

3.  3.

    Ben-David, S., Von Luxburg, U. and Pál, D., 2006. A sober look at
    clustering stability. In Learning theory: 19th annual conference on
    learning theory, COLT 2006, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, June 22–25, 2006.
    Proceedings 19. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 5–19.

4.  4.

    Statnikov A, Lemeir J, Aliferis CF. Algorithms for discovery of
    multiple Markov boundaries. J Mach Learning Res. 2013;14(1):499–566.

5.  5.

    Harrell FE. Regression modeling strategies: with applications to
    linear models, logistic regression, and survival analysis, vol. 608.
    New York: Springer; 2001.Crossref

6.  6.

    Steyerberg EW. Applications of prediction models. New York:
    Springer; 2009. p. 11–31.Crossref

7.  7.

    Hailpern B, Santhanam P. Software debugging, testing, and
    verification. IBM Syst J. 2002;41(1):4–12.Crossref

8.  8.

    Zhu H, Hall PA, May JH. Software unit test coverage and adequacy.
    ACM Comput Surv (CSUR). 1997;29(4):366–427.Crossref

9.  9.

    https://​en.​wikipedia.​org/​wiki/​Debugging#Techniques

10. 10.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part I: algorithms and
    empirical evaluation. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(1)

11. 11.

    Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD.
    Local causal and Markov blanket induction for causal discovery and
    feature selection for classification part II: analysis and
    extensions. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11(1)

12. 12.

    Narendra V, Lytkin NI, Aliferis CF, Statnikov A. A comprehensive
    assessment of methods for de-novo reverse-engineering of
    genome-scale regulatory networks. Genomics. 2011;97(1):7–18.Crossref

13. 13.

    Venet D, Dumont JE, Detours V. Most random gene expression
    signatures are significantly associated with breast cancer outcome.
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2011;7(10):e1002240.Crossref

14. 14.

    Guyon I, Aliferis C, Cooper G, Elisseeff A, Pellet JP, Spirtes P,
    Statnikov A. Design and analysis of the causation and prediction
    challenge. In Causation and prediction challenge. PMLR, pp. 1–33;
    2008.

15. 15.

    Hodge V, Austin J. A survey of outlier detection methodologies.
    Artif Intell Rev. 2004;22:85–126.Crossref

16. 16.

    Oakland JS. Statistical process control. Routledge; 2007.Crossref

17. 17.

    Statnikov A, Aliferis CF, Hardin DP, Guyon I. Gentle introduction to
    support vector machines in biomedicine, a-volume 2: case studies and
    benchmarks. World Scientific Publishing Company; 2013.Crossref

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_14

Considerations for Specialized Health AI & ML Modelling and Applications: NLP

Dalton Schutte¹ and Rui Zhang¹  

(1)

Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

 

 

Rui Zhang

Email: zhan1386@umn.edu

Abstract

Much information about patients is documented in the unstructured
textual format in the electronic health record system. Research findings
are also reported in the biomedical literature. In this chapter, we will
discuss the background, resources and methods used in biomedical natural
language processing (NLP), which will help unlock information from the
textual data.

Keywords

NLP tasksDeep learning in NLPGraphical models in NLPLarge Language
Models

Background

This section will cover some of the standard terminology, techniques,
and resources that are essential to a variety of NLP tasks. A collection
of terms that will appear frequently throughout will be defined and
examples given where appropriate. Then, pre-processing techniques will
be discussed followed by feature extraction. Finally, key biomedical NLP
resources will be discussed.

Basic NLP Terminology

In general, NLP attempts to understand what the contents of a corpus is
about. A corpus is a collection of text documents and often consists
mostly of unstructured data (data without a formal structure). In the
biomedical domain, a corpus may be a collection of physician’s notes or
reports (radiology reports or pathology reports) from an Electronic
Health Record (EHR), journal abstracts or full-text articles in PubMed,
etc. Large medical centers (academic or otherwise) naturally accumulate
large volumes of unstructured text data where NLP techniques can be
leveraged to extract relevant clinical information for a better
understanding of the patient population or conducting observational
studies.

Often a document refers to a single body of text, e.g. a single
physician’s note from a patient visit, an entire journal article, an
individual tweet, etc. A document is comprised of words which may or may
not be further decomposed into a string of characters called tokens. It
is often the case that a word is the smallest semantic unit of a text
while a token may be a part of a word or punctuation (i.e. “hasn’t” is a
word that could be decomposed to tokens “hasn” and “t”).

Standard Pre-processing

There are some instances where it is useful to take raw text and use it
in NLP tasks. However, it is often more useful to preprocess the text to
some degree. Preprocessing text is applying techniques to prepare the
text for ingestion in computational systems. There are a myriad of
techniques to preprocess text that can be used together to prepare it
for use. The ones that follow are some of the most common.

Preprocessing is often required for many NLP tasks but the specific
preprocessing techniques will vary by desired outcome. This includes any
potential feature extraction that may be used.

Cleaning. Cleaning the text refers to removing unwanted characters or
tokens from text and is often the first step in the preprocessing
pipeline. Often, it is advantageous to remove characters that do not
belong to a desired character set (i.e. UTF-8, ascii, etc.) or language
(English, Mandarin, Spanish, etc.) as many tools and programs will have
limitations on what type of text they can accept. Other times, it may be
desirable to replace characters with phonetically similar characters
(e.g. β → ss) or with unaccented characters (e.g. ü → u). Depending on
the situation, it may also be useful to remove some non-alphanumeric
characters (e.g. &, #, *) from text.

Once the documents are all using a shared character set, the next step
is often to remove stopwords. A stopword is a frequently occurring word
that carries little semantic value (e.g. “the”, “a”, “is”, “of”, etc.).
It is well established that the word frequencies in languages have a
Zipfian distribution: a small number of high-occurring words comprise
the majority of most text. In English, these high-occurrence words are
typically articles, some prepositions, pronouns, and variations of “to
be” (i.e. “is”, “was”, etc.). Removing these from the text can
significantly reduce the number of tokens that need to be used by models
which can decrease training time and improve performance. Removing a
large number of common words may seem counterintuitive, as in most
machine learning problems it is desirable to keep common data points as
they often indicate a trend or pattern of some sort, but, in the case of
language, low semantic value translates to low information contribution
to the model. These words are analogous to noise, in some sense.

Tokenization. The tokenization of text refers to decomposing a document
into smaller computational pieces. This can be accomplished by one of
many techniques. One of the most standard techniques for English is to
perform simple whitespace tokenization where a string of text is divided
based on whitespaces (e.g. spaces, tabs, new lines, etc.). This often
produces tokens that are simply words, as the convention in English is
typically to separate words with spaces. In the cases of words joined by
a hyphen, how these are treated depends, in part, on how hyphens were
handled in the preceding cleaning step.

Other methods for tokenization exist such as WordPiece, which is an
example of a subword tokenization method. That is, it is splitting a
word into smaller sub-word components to help avoid potential
Out-of-Vocabulary (OoV) issues in downstream tasks, such as vector
embedding.

Stemming & Lemmatization

It is very often the case that a single word will appear in a single
document in various grammatical forms (i.e. “running”, “ran”, etc.).
These words share a base meaning with some inflection induced for
grammatical purposes. To reduce the number of distinct tokens or words
in text, it may be useful to apply stemming or lemmatization. Both
processes attempt to perform the same task, but in rather different
ways.

Stemming works by simply dropping the ends of words in hopes that the
base term is recovered. This works well for things that have simple
endings such as “ends”, “ending”, “ended”, etc. All of these are reduced
to simply “end” by removing the various strings at the end of the base.
This method fails when special spelling rules change the base term in
some way. For example, “carry” and “carries”, while having the same
base, do not reduce to the same word by way of simply removing the
ending characters due to English spelling conventions.

This is where lemmatization is useful. Lemmatization attempts to produce
the base term but considers a vocabulary and morphological analysis of
the words. In this way, lemmatization may return “carry” if given
“carries” or “see” if given “saw”.

Feature Extraction

Text contains a myriad of features that can be extracted for use in
downstream tasks. These can be at a variety of levels from individual
words, groups of words, entire sentences, parts of speech, term
frequency, etc. Some key feature extraction methods will be discussed in
the following sections. These can be used individually or in tandem and
the discussion below is by no means exhaustive.

N-grams. An n-gram is simply a string comprised of n consecutive parts.
These parts can be at the level of words, tokens, or even individual
characters. These are extracted from text by, usually, padding the
beginning and ending of the string with empty items to accommodate the
first and last part, in the case where n > 1. For example, “She ran
home” can be represented as:

+:---------------------------+:------------------------------------------------------+
| unigram                    | {“she”,”ran”,”home”}                                  |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| bigrams                    | {(“”,”she”),(“she”,”ran”),(“ran”,”home”),(“home”,””)} |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| trigrams (character level) | {“ s”, “ sh”, “she”, “he “, “e r”, “ ra”, “ran”,      |
|                            |                                                       |
|                            | “an “, “n h”, “ ho”, “hom”, “ome”, “me “, “e “}       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+

N-grams can be collected after cleaning or from raw (unprocessed) text
depending on the use case. Stemming or lemmatization may also be
performed before n-grams are extracted from text.

The collection of all unique n-grams are typically compiled into a table
and assigned an index value for future use. Depending on the task and
desired outcome, character level n-grams may provide more generalized
morphological models than token level n-grams but at the cost of lost
semantic meaning. Conversely, token level n-grams may provide more
generalized semantic models but reduced morphological representation.

TF-IDF. While n-grams may show what tokens are present in a document, it
does not, on its own, convey information regarding the relative
importance of a token in a given document. This is where term
frequency-inverse document frequency (tf-idf) can be useful. The TF-IDF
is a statistic that reflects the relative importance of a token in a
document or corpus.

Embeddings. Due to the large number of text features that may exist in a
corpus, the features may often be sparse inputs that can make downstream
machine learning difficult. As such, a common technique to reduce the
dimensionality and sparsity of features is to embed the features in a
Euclidean space. Three primary techniques exist to accomplish this
embedding: an embedding layer, Word2Vec [1], and Global Vectors (GloVe)
[2].

An embedding layer is a layer that is learned jointly with a neural
network as the first layer in the network model. Because it is, often,
trained from scratch, the embedded representation is going to be highly
corpus and task specific. The drawback to this approach is that training
is subject to the usual shortcomings of training neural networks and is
also more data intensive than other techniques.

Word2Vec is a statistical model for learning embeddings in a more
efficient manner. There are two primary training approaches to training
a Word2Vec model: continuous bag-of-words (BoW) and continuous
skip-gram. A continuous BoW model tries to predict a word given the
context around the word and the continuous skip-gram model tries to
predict the context of a word given the word. The core idea for this
technique is that a word’s meaning can be learned by the words that
occur around it. This technique also tends to be faster and more
efficient than training embedding layers.

The Global Vector (GloVe) technique is an extension of the Word2Vec
model. A global word-word co-occurrence matrix is used in tandem with
context methods (such as Word2Vec) to learn efficient models that scale
well as the corpus size increases. Notably, it leverages statistical
information contained in the co-occurrence matrix by using only the
non-zero entries of the co-occurrence matrix. GloVe is able to obtain
good results even on small corpora and often produces more informative
embeddings.

Best Practice 14.1

Always test multiple preprocessing pipelines to find what works best for
the desired goals.

Biomedical Resources for Clinical NLP

There are many resources specialized to the biomedical domain for NLP.
Recent years have seen an explosion in databases, specially trained
models, specialized tools and packages, various medical knowledge
graphs, and much more. Below, we will focus on two resources that have
several important tools that use them as a foundational component.

UMLS. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) [3] is a critical
resource for many clinical NLP tasks. Ambiguity is present in all
languages, and biomedical language is no exception. The medical realm is
full of various terms that represent the same concept (e.g., “heart
attack” and “myocardial infarction”). There is also a natural hierarchy
that arises in biomedical terminology such as “transient ischemic
attack” which is a type of “ischemic stroke” which is a type of
“stroke”. All of these relationships contain valuable information that
can aid in a variety of NLP tasks and is where the UMLS comes in.

The UMLS is a collection of files containing a wealth of information but
comprises three main components: the Metathesaurus, the Semantic
Network, and the SPECIALIST Lexicon and Lexical tools. The Metathesaurus
is the largest component and contains the concepts, semantic types and
their identifies, such as the concept unique identifiers (CUIs). The
Semantic Network contains information about the semantic relationships
between concepts. The SPECIALIST Lexicon contains syntactic,
morphological, and orthographic information about terms in the UMLS as
well as more common English terms.

SemMedDB. The Semantic MEDLINE Database (SemMedDB) [4] is a repository
of semantic predications extracted by applying a tool called SemRep to
all PubMed citations (over 29 million citations). This results in over
96 million semantic predictions, which are triples of the form
subject-predicate-object. SemRep will be further discussed in a later
section. An example of a semantic predication is:

“Effects of Asian sand dust, Arizona sand dust, amorphous silica and
aluminum oxide on allergic inflammation in the murine lung.”

- Subject: C0002374 - Alumina

- Predicate: EFFECTS

- Object: C0021375—Inflammation, allergic

- Predication: Alumina EFFECTS Inflammation, Allergic

SemMedDB contains tables of predications, concept mentions, mappings of
mentions and predications to source sentences, as well as the source
sentences themselves. The database can be readily loaded into SQL for
querying in various applications. The nature of predications also allows
SemMedDB predications table to be loaded into a graph database to
leverage relationships.

Clinical NLP Tasks

While many of the classic NLP tasks also exist in the clinical domain,
there are often more specific applications of these tasks to clinical
tasks. Often, high-level tasks include Named Entity Recognition (NER)
for the purposes of identifying medications, procedures, etc. Relation
extraction (RelEx) to identify why a treatment or course of action was
decided on. Both of these are examples of information extraction (IE)
tasks where the goal is to pull desired information from clinical free
text. Some other tasks include text classification, text generation, and
question answering. These can serve any number of purposes, but often
are not instances of IE [5].

Common NLP tasks that will be useful in a clinical setting include NER
and RelEx as techniques of Information Extraction, Concept
Normalization, Text Classification, Language Generation, and Question
Answering. These can be used as means to ends (e.g. NER to extract
entity mentions from patient notes, entity mention counts can be used to
generate TF-IDF vectors which can be used in various machine learning
models to predict outcomes) or as ends in themselves (e.g. RelEx to find
if a patient had an adverse reaction to a particular substance).

Named Entity Recognition

Named Entity Recognition (NER) is the act of labeling specific terms or
concepts in text, such as determining the part of speech for a token in
text. In a clinical setting, this is often used to identify drugs or
dietary supplements, procedures, symptoms, conditions, or other
desirable information. A model that can identify these terms can be used
for a variety of downstream tasks, such as recognizing a particular
dietary supplement or an adverse event from clinical records [6].

A term or concept may have a single word or multiple. Using the example
of drug recognition, the sentence “She has been taking aspirin for
headaches” contains the drug “aspirin” that we would want identified.
Alternatively given the sentence “The patient reports using black cohosh
daily”, we would want “black cohosh” to be extracted.

One of the most common forms of labeling for NER is BIO labeling. In
this convention, “B-x” means beginning and is used to signify the first
word of a named entity of type x in some text. In the examples above,
“aspirin” would be labeled “B-drug”, “headache” might be “B-symptom”,
and “black” from “black cohosh” would be labeled “B-supplement”. “I-x”
means the interior and is, similarly, used to signify a non-beginning
term for a multi-word concept. Continuing from the example above,
“cohosh” would be labeled “I-supplement” giving “black cohosh” the
labels {“B-supplement”, “I-supplement”}. O is used to represent any term
outside of the defined labels. For example, “daily” from above is a
frequency, but if we are only considering drugs, symptoms, and
supplements, “daily” would be labeled O since we do not have a label
defined for frequencies.

Concept Normalization

Concept normalization is the task of mapping multiple terms that have
the same meaning to a common, standardized term. The UMLS attempts to do
this by way of the Metathesaurus, for example, and often excels when
doing so on text writing by medical professionals or appearing in
scientific publications due to the nature of the vocabulary used by such
individuals and in such contexts. However, this problem can be more
complicated when the corpus includes text from individuals who are not
medical professionals or writing without a more sophisticated medical
vocabulary. This is prevalent when examining mainstream news articles or
social media posts. An example of this would be mapping the phrase “head
spinning” to “dizziness” or “feeling like I need to throw up” to
“nausea”. For tasks where the goal is to determine the prevalence of
symptoms in tweets, for example, or what sort of side effects people
experience when using dietary supplements, it is important that concepts
are normalized unless specialized models are used [7].

Relation Extraction

Relation Extraction (RelEx) is the task of extracting terms and the
interaction or relationship between them. In a clinical setting, this
may be trying to determine what drug caused which side-effect in a
patient. The relationships extracted can help identify incidence rates
for side-effects, determine if a particular patient subpopulation is
more likely to experience certain effects than another, etc. The results
will often take the form of subject, relation, object between two
entities and one of multiple pre-defined relationships. This type of
result is essentially what is contained in SemMedDB. The tool used to
generate SemMedDB, SemRep, is a rules-based tool that performs
relationship extraction.

As an example, take the sentence “the patient reported nausea after his
chemotherapy treatment last week”. One relationship that might be
extracted is “chemotherapy-causes-nausea”. Another might be
“patient-experiences-nausea”. It should be noted that prior to
predicting the relationship between two concepts or terms, those terms
first need to be properly identified. In other words, NER is necessary
to perform RelEx.

Text Classification

Text classification is the act of classifying a collection of tokens
with some label, such as determining if a movie review is positive or
negative. In a clinical setting, this might be determining if a
treatment was successful, if the patient has started using new
medications, etc. Rather than operating on a token level, like most of
the above tasks, this tends to consider a chunk of text in its totality.
This might be n-grams, sentences, or entire documents depending on the
particular task. A discrete collection of labels is often defined based
on the goal for the task at hand.

For example, if we want to determine if a patient is stopping the use of
a particular medication [8], text classification may be an appropriate
task. If we want to classify a string of text as “started”,
“continuing”, “discontinuing”, or “unknown” with regards to a patient’s
use of a medication or supplement and are given the sentence, “the
patient reports that he has not continued taking vitamin D supplements”,
the entire sentence would be labeled as “discontinued”. This can help
understand trends in patient treatment compliance or the effects
starting/stopping a substance might have on health outcomes.

Natural Language Generation

Natural Language Generation (NLG) is the task of trying to produce text
that has the appearance of something a human might produce. Famously,
GPT-3 by OpenAI is known to be able to produce prose that has a
high-degree of similarity to prose that has been written by poets,
writers, reporters, and average internet users. In a medical setting,
NLG may be used to help generate synthetic clinical notes without
leaking any protected health information of patients, and thus can be
used to develop clinical NLP systems [9]. NLG can also be used to
generate answers to users’ questions [10].

Question Answering

Question Answering (QA) is selecting an answer from multiple choices
given a query. Consumers increasingly are typing to find answers from
the internet or smart device to their questions regarding medical
conditions or medication usage. QA is a task to understand their
questions and retrieve information and then generate answers
automatically. The first component is the Natural Language
Understanding, since the task at hand is to understand the question
being asked as well as the available answer options in order to
correctly determine which option answers the question. The second
component is information retrieval, which is to find corresponding
information from knowledge bases or the internet that may contain the
contents to respond to their information. The final component is NLG,
which is discussed above. CHiQA is an experimental AI-based QA system
that is learning how to answer health-related questions using reliable
sources for patients [11].

Symbolic Based Biomedical NLP

Symbolic NLP uses human-readable symbols and logic to create rules for a
system. This is a subset of symbolic (also called Old-Fashioned AI).
This process involves the explicit codification of human knowledge,
behavior, and expertise into computer programs. While these systems may,
at face, be easier to understand, they are often very difficult to
construct and require considerable manual effort from domain experts to
produce quality systems.

In the biomedical domain, there are a couple key tools that fall under
the domain of symbolic NLP. Namely, MetaMap, SemRep, cTakes, and others
are systems developed by groups of individuals with expertise in
biomedical or clinical fields.

MetaMap [12] is a tool that performs NER and Concept Normalization of
biomedical text. When given a body of text, MetaMap performs a number of
preprocessing steps before attempting to identify medical terms and
mapping them to standardized concepts in the UMLS. As such, MetaMap
relies on the UMLS to function.

SemRep [13] is a tool that performs RelEx on biomedical text. SemRep is
a rule-based system that uses MetaMap and the UMLS to handle NER before
determining the relationship between the extracted concepts. Returning
to the example:

“Effects of Asian sand dust, Arizona sand dust, amorphous silica and
aluminum oxide on allergic inflammation in the murine lung.”

- Subject: C0002374—Alumina

- Predicate: EFFECTS

- Object: C0021375—Inflammation, allergic

- Predication: Alumina EFFECTS Inflammation, Allergic

In this example, the subject and objects are identified by MetaMap in
the UMLS Metathesaurus. SemRep then uses these identified concepts with
a set of rules, with restrictions determined by the Semantic Network, to
determine the relationship, or predicate, between the concepts. The
result is the semantic predication Alumina EFFECTS inflammation,
allergic.

cTAKES (clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction System) [14] is
a system that extracts a variety of information from provided clinical
documents. It performs NER, RelEx, negation detection, part-of-speech,
tagging, normalization, sentence boundary detection, tokenization, and
more. This tool also makes use of the UMLS for concept normalization.

There are many useful, freely available biomedical NLP resources. The
UMLS, MetaMap, SemRep, and cTAKEs are good as tools in their own right
or for use as baselines to compare newer methods against.

Pitfall 14.1

Implementing techniques from scratch when not necessary. It is unlikely
that a hand-coded pipeline will be as fast as spaCy or cTAKEs when using
multiple preprocessing steps.

Machine Learning for NLP

Due to the complexity of human language and the high-dimensional feature
space, it is often advantageous to leverage machine learning models.
These models often have a larger representational capacity than
rule-based systems and often require less specialized expertise to
develop. Most of the models that are used in non-NLP tasks can be
readily used in NLP tasks. However, it will almost always be necessary
to use some sort of a reduced input.

Consider a corpus that has 15,000 unique 1-grams (unigram) that were
extracted during preprocessing. One could use a feature vector that
simply has a 1 at the position of the desired unigram but this results
in highly sparse input with a very high-dimension and it will be
difficult, if not impossible, to train a decent model. As such,
generating TF-IDF vectors or using vector embeddings will be essential
to successfully training machine learning models.

Best Practice 14.2

Document rationale for design decisions. Provide performance metrics
(speed and measures of accuracy) where possible.

Pitfall 14.2

Failing to document the results of all experiments can lead to
frustration and repeating experiments. Include logging functions to
document model parameters and performance metrics to avoid this.

Commonly Used ML Models in NLP

Supervised machine learning is the use of labeled training data to train
models. Supervised models are often used in NLP for a variety of tasks.
Things such as NER, RelEx, and text classification can be accomplished
using models trained using labeled data. In the case of NER, for
example, a sentence will have a corresponding BIO label for each token
in the sentence and a model will learn to assign a label to each token.

The models typically used for supervised learning on non-NLP tasks can
often be used for NLP tasks as well. Logistic regression, random forest,
bagging, Naive-Bayes, etc. can all be used for classification and
regression tasks in NLP.

Weakly supervised learning is a special case of supervised learning
where the labels for the training set are generated using a simple
heuristic or set of rules. The goal is to not generate perfect labels,
or even good labels, but rather enough labels that sufficiently capture
a general relationship between input text and some prediction.

For example, due to the absence of a comprehensive dietary supplement
repository, or similarly specialized lexica, using a simple dictionary
lookup to generate labels may be sufficient to generate a sizable
labeled dataset for training. This also has the advantage of not
requiring time consuming manual labeling by domain experts.

Unsupervised machine learning is the use of unlabeled training data to
train models. Often, we think of clustering algorithms when unsupervised
learning is discussed. While there can be a place for clustering, there
are other specific instances of unsupervised learning that are more
useful for language.

One such example is token embedding, where words are embedded into
low-dimensional feature spaces. The key idea behind learning embedded
representations of tokens is that semantically similar tokens are
embedded more closely together in space than non-similar tokens. This
also allows for an arithmetic of sorts to be learned on the embedded
representation. The classical example of this is “king - man ~ queen -
woman”, and, in some instances, this approximation can be true for some
embeddings.

Embedding can be done at the level of entire words or at the level of
sub-word tokens. In other words, embedding n-character grams rather than
complete words. This can help avoid one key issue that word-level
embeddings can encounter, Out-of-Vocabulary (OoV) issues. This occurs
when one tries to retrieve the embedding for a word that was not present
in the training corpus. Since that word was not used, there is not a
vector representation of that word in the embedding. This results in
very rigid embeddings that require that OoV words be handled during
preprocessing to avoid errors.

By embedding n-character grams, words that were not present may be
decomposed into strings of characters that are present in the embedding.
It is easy to reason that the space of all combinations of, say,
3-character grams is smaller than the space of words. This of course
only holds up to a certain n before the space of character combinations
exceeds the size of the space of unique words. As mentioned earlier,
this is not without its tradeoffs but does come with the advantage of
OoV not being as much of a potential issue provided the training set is
sufficiently large.

Best Practice 14.3

Use a grid search over a reasonable set of hyper-parameters to produce
the best model possible. This in combination with k-fold cross
validation can increase the likelihood that the resulting model will be
the strongest and most likely to generalize to unseen data.

Deep Learning in NLP

While traditional machine learning models may successfully perform some
NLP tasks to a limited degree, there is an inherent limitation to how
far these models can go. The complexity of language is better captured
with highly non-linear models that have large representational capacity.
This is where deep learning tends to excel. Deep learning is the use of
neural network models as the model in machine learning tasks.

A neural network, in its simplest case, is a sequence of layers of
matrix multiplication and non-linear activation functions with the
output from one layer being input into the next. This iterative process
allows neural networks to learn highly complex, high dimensional
representations of the input data.

Models

A large number of the models that have enjoyed success in NLP tasks are
models that learn via error back propagation to update model weights.
The trends in research have pursued two main veins: increasing the model
capacity or architectural innovations.

Increasing model capacity can be as simple as adding more layers or
modules to increase the number of learnable parameters (weights) in a
model. Innovations often occur in new training techniques, which are
necessary in order to facilitate training such large models on massive
volumes of data, and can take days or weeks to train on huge clusters of
accelerated compute hardware. Architectural advances are actual changes
in the ways the model can learn from the data. In the case of
transformers, the use of multi-head attention mechanisms and
encoder-decoder structures with positional encoding resulted in
considerable gains over previous state-of-the-art NLP methods.

In some cases, the changes in training and architecture result in
significant changes. As was the case with BERT, which used
masked-language modeling pre-training and encoder units to produce a
model that can be easily fine-tuned for a variety of tasks without
needing to fully retrain a huge model from scratch every time a new task
is introduced.

Best Practice 14.4

Apply appropriate rigor in analyzing the performance of machine learning
models. Permutation tests, covariance analysis, etc. can be invaluable
for diagnosing issues before deploying models.

RNN, LSTM, biLSTM

A recurrent neural network (RNN) [15] is a special type of neural
network that passes its internal state (weights) forward as input for
each computation in a sequence of data. This allows the network to learn
using sequence data and makes them useful for NLP purposes. However, the
vanilla RNN can be prone to suffering from vanishing and exploding
gradients. This is when the gradients that are back propagated are
either so small that the weights do not change enough to learn or are so
large the weights change drastically and fail to converge.

While the vanishing and exploding gradient problem can be addressed
using techniques such as gradient clipping, they can also be mitigated
by using specialized RNN architectures. One such architecture is the
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [16] network. The LSTM introduces “gates”,
namely, input, output, and forget gates. The forget gate is responsible
for preventing gradients from vanishing or exploding.

The LSTM was a significant improvement over the vanilla RNN but can only
process sequences in a single direction. To learn the context of a data
point in a sequence, it is necessary to consider the points before and
after in both directions, thus the bi-directional LSTM (biLSTM). The
biLSTM is simply a LSTM layer that processes the sequence in the normal
manner and a second LSTM layer that processes the reversed input
sequence, the outputs are then combined into a single output. The two
LSTMs have different sets of weights and internal states. It is often
the case that a biLSTM will learn more quickly than an LSTM, depending
on the task. In the case of language, where context is important, a
biLSTM should often be preferred to an LSTM or RNN.

Transformers. In 2017, the transformer [17] architecture was introduced
and has since become the basis for most state-of-the-art and fundamental
models in NLP. The transformer is a neural transduction model that uses
an encoder-decoder structure and self-attention. The use of the novel
multi-head, scaled-dot product attention mechanism coupled with the
unique architecture within the encoder and decoder layers helped set new
state-of-the-art results.

Deep learning, transformer models in particular, can provide significant
advantages over traditional machine learning methods, at some cost in
terms of additional expertise and increased compute requirements.

BERT. In 2018, a new architecture and training methodology was proposed
that used multiple layers of bi-directional transformer encoder layers
as well as masked-language modeling and next sentence prediction
training on massive amounts of data. The resulting model, Bi-directional
Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [18], achieved
state-of-the-art results on several benchmarks.

A key advantage of BERT was the ability to extensively pre-train the
model then fine-tune the pre-trained weights on individual NLP tasks in
considerably less time. This meant that a single, large model could be
trained over the course of days, but used indefinitely on any task by
fine-tuning over hours or minutes.

For each task, a new prediction layer must be initialized to use the
contextual embedding, the output from the main BERT model, as input. The
weights inside BERT can be frozen or adjusted while training the new
prediction layer. There has been work done to identify good fine-tuning
procedures for BERT models such as a decaying learning rate with warm-up
period, a range for learning rates, batch sizes, etc.

Some useful BERT models that have been trained on biomedical text to
varying degrees include: Bio-BERT [19], BioClinical-BERT [20],
PubMed-BERT [21], and Blue-BERT [22], to name a few. All of these models
can be freely downloaded via huggingface for immediate use.

Best Practice 14.5

When using machine learning models, including deep learning models,
always use a simple baseline for comparison. This can be as simple as
some rules, a linear regression model, or as complex as a “vanilla” BERT
model depending on the task at hand. It may be the case where a random
forest will provide adequate performance and be faster at inference than
a transformer!

Pitfall 14.3

Jumping straight to the most sophisticated, state of the art model can
result in hours spent figuring out how to use a researcher’s GitHub
repository, or worse, implementing it from scratch based on a paper when
a more simple model may have sufficed. Starting with a simple model can,
critically, serve as a proof of concept for a product without the
resource overhead that comes with many deep learning models.

Graphs

A graph is a collection of vertices and edges. Vertices, or nodes,
represent some object or concept (drugs, proteins, diseases, etc.) and
edges are relationships between them. A graph is unique in that it
contains topological information that is absent in most other data
structures. This topological information can be leveraged for NLP,
particularly for medical NLP.

Representing biomedical information with a graph structure can unlock
insights via latent topological information that cannot be leveraged
with other data structures. While this will not always be applicable, it
can be powerful when it is.

Medicine is full of concepts and relationships between them. Drugs treat
conditions, diseases affect particular organs, proteins are associated
with biological processes. These relationships can be compiled into
graph structures for use in tasks such as drug repurposing (a case of
link prediction), predicting the type of relationship between nodes
(edge classification), and interaction discovery (another case of link
prediction).

Due to the special nature of graphs, specialized models have been
developed called graph neural networks (GNN) [23]. These can come in a
variety of flavors, but tend to leverage a mechanism called message
passing between nodes to facilitate learning.

Tasks

Link prediction is attempting to determine the potential for two nodes
to have some relationship where there currently is none, or rather,
predicting the existence of an edge that does not exist. One example of
this is to use a trained link prediction model to determine what the
most likely connections are to a particular condition. The result of
this could be filtered down to a ranked list of drugs that may not
currently be used to treat that condition. This is an instance of drug
repurposing and it can generate dozens of hypotheses to direct bench
research.

Another example of link prediction is to try and predict links between
drugs and dietary supplements. Given the lack of published research on
drug-supplement interactions, such a task can help uncover potential
interactions between a well-understood medication and a less-studied
supplement [24].

Edge classification is attempting to determine what type of edge exists
between two nodes. In the case of two drugs, for example, a trained edge
classification model will attempt to predict the type of interaction
between them (e.g. synergistic, opposite, etc.).

Graph Embeddings. A knowledge graph can be quite large and machine
learning can be difficult if trying to work with the graph structure
directly or one of its matrix representations. A graph embedding is a
low-dimensional representation of the nodes of a graph. Each node gets
associated with a learned vector representation in a low-dimensional
vector space. Initial efforts in graph embedding worked in Euclidean or
complex space and more recent efforts have explored hyperbolic space as
well [25, 26].

Key Concepts in This Chapter

Preprocessing is often required for many NLP tasks but the specific
preprocessing techniques will vary by desired outcome. This includes any
potential feature extraction that may be used.

There are many useful, freely available biomedical NLP resources. The
UMLS, MetaMap, SemRep, and cTAKEs are good as tools in their own right
or for baselines to compare newer methods against.

Common NLP tasks that will be useful in a clinical setting include NER
and RelEx as techniques of Information Extraction, Concept
Normalization, Text Classification, Language Generation, and Question
Answering. These can be used as means to ends (e.g. NER to extract
entity mentions from patient notes, entity mention counts can be used to
generate TF-IDF vectors which can be used in various machine learning
models to predict outcomes) or as ends in themselves (e.g. RelEx to find
if a patient had an adverse reaction to a particular substance).

Deep learning, transformer models in particular, can provide significant
advantages over traditional machine learning methods, at some cost in
terms of additional expertise and increased compute requirements.

Representing biomedical information with a graph structure can unlock
insights via latent topological information that cannot be leveraged
with other data structures. While this will not always be applicable, it
can be powerful when it is.

Pitfalls in This Chapter

Pitfall 14.1 Implementing techniques from scratch when not necessary. It
is unlikely that a hand-coded pipeline will be as fast as spaCy or
cTAKES when using multiple preprocessing steps.

Pitfall 14.2 Failing to document the results of all experiments can lead
to frustration and repeating experiments. Include logging functions to
document model parameters and performance metrics to avoid this.

Pitfall 14.3 Jumping straight to the most sophisticated, state of the
art model can result in hours spent figuring out how to use a
researcher’s GitHub repository, or worse, implementing it from scratch
based on a paper when a simpler model may have sufficed. Starting with a
simple model can, critically, serve as a proof of concept for a product
without the resource overhead that comes with many deep learning models.

Best Practices in This Chapter

Best Practice 14.1 Always test multiple preprocessing pipelines to find
what works best for the desired goals.

Best Practice 14.2 Document rationale for design decisions. Provide
performance metrics (speed and measures of accuracy) where possible.

Best Practice 14.3 Use a grid search over a reasonable set of
hyper-parameters to produce the best model possible. This in combination
with k-fold cross validation can increase the likelihood that the
resulting model will be the strongest and most likely to generalize to
unseen data.

Best Practice 14.4 Apply appropriate rigor in analyzing the performance
of machine learning models. Permutation tests, covariance analysis, etc.
can be invaluable for diagnosing issues before deploying models.

Best Practice 14.5 When using machine learning models, including deep
learning models, always use a simple baseline for comparison. This can
be as simple as some rules, a linear regression model, or as complex as
a “vanilla” BERT model depending on the task at hand. It may be the case
where a random forest will provide adequate performance and be faster at
inference than a transformer!

Questions and Discussion Topics in This Chapter

1.  1.

    We want to try and determine what supplements patients undergoing
    surgical operations are using and correlate supplement use against
    outcomes.
    1.  (a)

        The first step would be to identify supplements in patient
        notes. What type of task is this?
        1.  (i)

            What existing tools might be used for this?

             

         

    2.  (b)

        What types of preprocessing might be necessary?

         

    3.  (c)

        How might weakly supervised learning be leveraged in the absence
        of a gold standard dataset?

         

     

2.  2.

    We want to build a graph using biomedical research papers to
    investigate potential alternative uses for an existing drug.
    1.  (a)

        What are some node types that would be of interest? (e.g. drug,
        gene, etc.)
        1.  (i)

            What task would this be considered?

             

        2.  (ii)

            What would be some advantages of applying concept
            normalization?

             

        3.  (iii)

            What existing tools can help with this?

             

         

    2.  (b)

        What are some edge types that would be of interest? (e.g.
        affects, treats, etc.)
        1.  (i)

            What task would this be considered?

             

        2.  (ii)

            What existing tools can help with this?

             

         

    3.  (c)

        Assume we do not have annotated data to train a model with. How
        might a transformer model be leveraged in this case?

         

    4.  (d)

        Once the graph is constructed, what task are we now dealing
        with?
        1.  (i)

            What would be a good baseline model for this task?

             

        2.  (ii)

            How could the predictions of the trained model be evaluated?

             

         

     

3.  3.

    Theoretically speaking, why might a feed-forward neural network
    outperform a SVM on a language related task? (Consider the capacity
    of each model)
    1.  (a)

        What is the key difference between a feed-forward neural network
        receiving TF-IDF vectors and a LSTM receiving word embeddings?
        (Is there additional information contained in the sequential of
        specific tokens?)

         

     

4.  4.

    Explain how the UMLS, MetaMap, SemRep, and SemMedDB are related.

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Mikolov T, Chen K, Corrado G, Dean J. Efficient estimation of word
    representations in vector space. arXiv:​1301.​3781 [cs.CL]; 2013.

2.  2.

    Pennington J, Socher R, Manning CD. GloVe: global vectors for word
    representation; 2014.

3.  3.

    Bodenreider O. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS):
    integrating biomedical terminology. Nucleic Acids Res.
    2004;32(Database issue):D267–70.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​nar/​gkh061.Crossref

4.  4.

    Kilicoglu H, Shin D, Fiszman M, Rosemblat G, Rindflesch TC.
    SemMedDB: a PubMed-scale repository of biomedical semantic
    predications. Bioinformatics. 2012;28(23):3158–60.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bioinformatics/​bts591. Epub 2012 Oct
    8.Crossref

5.  5.

    Wang Y, Wang L, Rastegar-Mojarad M, Moon S, Shen F, Afzal N, Liu S,
    Zeng Y, Mehrabi S, Sohn S, Liu H. Clinical information extraction
    applications: a literature review. J Biomed Inform. 2018;77:34–49.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jbi.​2017.​11.​011. Epub 2017 Nov 21.Crossref

6.  6.

    Fan Y, Zhou S, Li Y, Zhang R. Deep learning approaches for
    extracting adverse events and indications of dietary supplements
    from clinical text. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2021;28(3):569–77.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​jamia/​ocaa218.Crossref

7.  7.

    Wang Y, Zhao Y, Schutte D, Bian J, Zhang R. Deep learning models in
    detection of dietary supplement adverse event signals from Twitter.
    JAMIA Open. 2021;4(4):ooab081.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​jamiaopen/​ooab081.Crossref

8.  8.

    Zhou S, Schutte D, Xing A, Chen J, Wolfson J, He Z, Fang Y, Zhang R.
    Identification of dietary supplement use from electronic health
    records using transformer-based language models. BMC Med Inform
    Decision Making. 2022;

9.  9.

    Li J, Zhou Y, Jiang X, Natarajan K, Pakhomov SV, Liu H, Xu H. Are
    synthetic clinical notes useful for real natural language processing
    tasks: a case study on clinical entity recognition. J Am Med Inform
    Assoc. 2021;28(10):2193–201.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​jamia/​ocab112.Crossref

10. 10.

    Singh E, Bompelli A, Wan R, et al. A conversational agent system for
    dietary supplements use. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2022;22:153.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12911-022-01888-5.Crossref

11. 11.

    Demner-Fushman D, Mrabet Y, Ben AA. Consumer health information and
    question answering: helping consumers find answers to their
    health-related information needs. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
    2020;27(2):194–201. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​jamia/​ocz152.Crossref

12. 12.

    Aronson AR, Lang FM. An overview of MetaMap: historical perspective
    and recent advances. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2010;17(3):229–36.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​jamia.​2009.​002733.Crossref

13. 13.

    Kilicoglu H, Rosemblat G, Fiszman M, Shin D. Broad-coverage
    biomedical relation extraction with SemRep. BMC Bioinform.
    2020;21(1):188. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12859-020-3517-7.Crossref

14. 14.

    Savova GK, Masanz JJ, Ogren PV, Zheng J, Sohn S, Kipper-Schuler KC,
    Chute CG. Mayo clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction
    System (cTAKES): architecture, component evaluation and
    applications. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2010;17(5):507–13.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​jamia.​2009.​001560.Crossref

15. 15.

    Rumelhart DE, Hinton GE, Williams RJ. Learning internal
    representations by error propagation. Tech. rep. ICS 8504. San
    Diego, CA: Institute for Cognitive Science, University of
    California; 1985.Crossref

16. 16.

    Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput.
    1997;9(8):1735–80.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​neco.​1997.​9.​8.​1735.Crossref

17. 17.

    Attention is all you need. NIPS'17: Proceedings of the 31st
    international conference on neural information processing systems;
    2017, pp. 6000–6010

18. 18.

    Devlin J, Chang M-W, Lee K, Toutanova K. BERT: Pre-training of deep
    bidirectional transformers for language understanding. NAACL-HLT.
    2019;(1):4171–86.

19. 19.

    Lee J, Yoon W, Kim S, et al. BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical
    language representation model for biomedical text mining.
    Bioinformatics. 2020;36:1234–40.Crossref

20. 20.

    Alsentzer E, Murphy J, Boag W, et al. Publicly available clinical
    BERT embeddings. In: Proceedings of the 2nd clinical natural
    language processing workshop; 2019, pp. 72–8.

21. 21.

    Gu Y, Tinn R, Cheng H, et al. Domain-specific language model
    pretraining for biomedical natural language processing.
    ArXiv200715779 Cs Published Online First: 20 August 2020.
    http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2007.​15779. Accessed 25 Sep 2020.

22. 22.

    Peng Y, Yan S, Lu Z. Transfer learning in biomedical natural
    language processing: an evaluation of BERT and ELMo on ten
    benchmarking datasets. In: Proceedings of the 18th BioNLP workshop
    and shared task; 2019, pp. 58–65.

23. 23.

    Scarselli F, Gori M, Tsoi AC, Hagenbuchner M, Monfardini G. The
    graph neural network model. IEEE Trans Neural Netw.
    2009;20(1):61–80. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TNN.​2008.​2005605. Epub
    2008 Dec 9.Crossref

24. 24.

    Schutte D, Vasilakes J, Bompelli A, Zhou Y, Fiszman M, Xu H,
    Kilicoglu H, Bishop JR, Adam T, Zhang R. Discovering novel
    drug-supplement interactions using SuppKG generated from the
    biomedical literature. J Biomed Inform. 2022;131:104120.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jbi.​2022.​104120. Epub 20.Crossref

25. 25.

    Choudhary S, Luthra T, Mittal A, Singh R. A survey of knowledge
    graph embedding and their applications. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2107.07842; 2021.

26. 26.

    Nickel M, Kiela D. Poincaré embeddings for learning hierarchical
    representations. Adv Neural Inform Process Syst. 2017;30

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_15

Considerations for Specialized Health AI & ML Modelling and Applications: Imaging—Through the Perspective of Dermatology

Dennis H. Murphree¹  , Anirudh Choudhary², Puneet K. Bhullar³ and
Nneka I. Comfere¹

(1)

Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

(2)

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA

(3)

Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA

 

 

Dennis H. Murphree

Email: murphree.dennis@mayo.edu

Abstract

This chapter focuses on healthcare applications of deep learning in
computer vision, specifically in the context of dermatology and
dermatopathology.

Keywords

Convolutional neural networksComputer vision tasksArchitectures for
dermatologyPathology

Introduction

Artificial intelligence and machine learning have made impressive
progress in recent years, particularly in the realm of image analysis.
In healthcare many specialties are image-centric in their data focus,
with dermatology being a prime example. Other specialties that employ
the astonishing power of deep neural networks when applied to images
include radiology, cardiology and ophthalmology amongst others. Some
non-image datasets have even been successfully recast as images in order
to take advantage of the power of convolutional networks, for example
treating the time series from 12-lead electrocardiograms as if they were
images.

In modern day (2022) dermatology, the intersection with artificial
intelligence appears in several forms. In this chapter we will describe
the dermatology AI landscape, providing an overview of the types of
questions commonly asked and the data and processing needed to attempt
to answer those questions.

We also suggest that while we warmly embrace the progress that AI in
dermatology has made, in our opinion the most helpful frameworks going
forward will likely fall under the category of "augmented intelligence",
wherein humans and computers work synergistically to improve care
delivery [1]. We also wish to direct the reader to Chapter ‘ “From
“Human versus Machine” to “Human with Machine” ’ for a discussion of
AI-assisted decision making.

Please note that fully explaining many of the best practices and
pitfalls identified in this chapter is beyond a reasonable scope. Rather
they are intended to point the interested reader in the right direction.

Brief Review

Recent advances of AI in dermatology have primarily depended on
leveraging so called deep neural networks (DNNs). This style of learning
uses neural network-based computational models consisting of multiple
processing layers. Traditional artificial neural networks (ANNs) are
typically comprised of a limited number of layers built of a linear
combination of “nodes”. A node is similar to a linear regression model
embedded inside a non-linear activation function. The weights both
internal to the nodes as well as those in the combination of nodes are
optimized from the data, and the network is trained to obtain supervised
representations optimized for a specific task.

Deep neural networks have more complex architectures with a higher
number of layers and connections, thus allowing them to learn data
representations with multiple levels of abstraction. DNNs are usually
trained in an end-to-end manner using backpropagation. In AI-based
dermatology studies, the most common architecture employed is a special
variety known as a convolutional neural network (CNN).

Convolutional neural networks are the primary AI tools in dermatology as
of 2022.

CNNs are inspired by the visual cortex and leverage a convolution
operator (a combination of matrix multiplication and summation) followed
by feature pooling (averaging) to learn translation-invariant
representations. They achieve superior performance due to their capacity
to learn and extract deep and hierarchical features from skin image
datasets. Current CNN architectures typically consist of multiple
convolutional and pooling layers stacked together to model the input
data space, where the output of one layer serves as the input to the
following. Many state-of-the-art architectures used in dermatology have
originally been developed by technology companies, and include examples
such as ResNet, DenseNet121, EfficientNet and GoogleNet.

Best Practice 15.1

Always start with a known state-of-the-art network architecture rather
than designing your own. EfficientNet is often a (relatively) fast way
to see if your dataset has an extractable signal.

The most prevalent applications of AI in dermatology have been via
traditional supervised learning, wherein a DNN is trained to learn the
relationship between input data and known corresponding target labels.
Examples of supervised learning include CNNs trained for skin cancer
diagnosis, risk stratification of skin cancer (indolent vs aggressive),
and general lesion identification.

DNNs require significant amounts of training data to perform well, and
current dermatology datasets particularly pathology datasets are of
limited size relative to massive troves of internet photographs, for
example, ImageNet, used by major technology firms in training models. An
important improvement therefore to the traditional training of DNNs for
use in dermatology is transfer learning. In transfer learning, instead
of starting from scratch, one begins with a network that is known to
perform well on a similar problem. Transfer learning dramatically
reduces the amount of training data required, and is particularly useful
when examples with known outcomes can be challenging to acquire.
Unsurprisingly, many of the published dermatology deep learning studies
to date employ transfer learning to train their DNNs.

Best Practice 15.2

Use transfer learning any time you can find a dataset similar enough to
yours.

Pitfall 15.1

When using transfer learning, if you cannot find a dataset naturally
similar to yours and must start with weights from e.g. ImageNet, always
try training from scratch as well. In pathology in particular sometimes
it is better to just start over.

For a more complete description of these topics specific to dermatology,
please see Murphree et al. [2] and Puri et al. [3]. For more general
descriptions please consult [4] or [5].

Current Applications

Broadly speaking applications of computer vision in dermatology can be
categorized either by input data or by problem type.

Categorizing application by input type. Input data is usually one of the
following: clinical photographs, dermoscopic photographs, or digitized
pathology slides (also known as whole slide images, or WSI). Dermoscopic
photos are captured via special instruments known as dermatoscopes.
These instruments are used by dermatologists to reduce reflections from
the skin, and provide for a more uniform but very distinctive looking
image. Dermoscopic images are immediately distinguishable from standard
photographs by their unique circular appearance. Clinical photographs
obtained by providers are often different enough in quality from those
captured by patients that the two can be considered different data
types.

Best Practice 15.3

Be alert to data differences in photographs acquired by patients vs
those acquired by medical photographers or informed providers. If you
mix them, be certain to check that there is balance among outcomes by
origin. Are photographs acquired in a dermatologists office more likely
to contain cases than controls?

Categorizing applications by problem type. Problem type is most
typically supervised learning, where a label of interest is known for
each observation, and can appear as classification or segmentation. For
example, photographs of lesions may be labeled as malignant or benign.
Similarly, regions of a pathology slide may be labeled (annotated) as
epidermis, dermis, eccrine gland, etc. In the first case one might seek
to classify the lesion in the photograph, while in the second one might
seek to segment the slide into different regions of known tissue type.
Often the two are combined, for example segmenting a slide to identify
regions of tumor, then using those regions as training data input for
e.g. a tumor risk classifier.

In addition to traditional supervised learning, in the pathology space
in particular there is growing interest in weakly supervised learning,
where expensive pixel-level annotations can be replaced in favor of
slide-level labels. Slide level labels are often able to be extracted in
an automated fashion from electronic health records, thus do not require
manual effort by pathology specialists.

Best Practice 15.4

Weakly supervised learning may be a promising future direction to
alleviate the burden of acquiring costly and time-consuming pixel level
annotations.

Here we discuss different current or recent applications divided by
problem type, with a special section on dermatopathology.

Classification

In a classification problem, the goal is to learn a label (or set of
labels) for an image in its entirety. For example, given a photograph of
a skin lesion the classifier might distinguish between melanoma and
benign nevus, and if melanoma then might further characterize it as
aggressive or indolent.

Given the understandably pressing nature of the disease, the vast
majority of AI applications in dermatology have focused on cancer,
primarily cutaneous lesions. Comparatively less attention has been paid
other categories of skin disease such as inflammatory dermatoses
(rashes). This may also be driven in part by the greater spatial
uniformity of lesions in general. Here we will discuss only lesions.

Various AI-based approaches have been developed in the detection and
diagnosis of skin cancer ranging from conventional low-level pixel
processing methods using handcrafted features to more recent CNN-based
deep learning approaches. CNNs have achieved state-of-the-art
performance in skin lesion analysis along with superior performance to
dermatologists in distinguishing between pigmented and non-pigmented
skin lesions across multiple studies. For example, Esteva et al. [6] was
the first to propose a CNN model to identify epidermal and melanocytic
lesions, comparing its performance to 21 board-certified dermatologists
on two specific tasks: distinguishing squamous cell carcinomas (SCC)
from benign seborrheic keratoses (SK) and malignant melanomas from
benign nevi. On a biopsy-proven test set of 135 epidermal, 130
melanocytic non-dermoscopy images and 111 melanocytic dermoscopy images,
dermatologists were asked whether to biopsy, treat the lesion or
reassure the patient without biopsy. In parallel, the CNN was tasked
with classifying the same lesions. The network outperformed the average
performance of the dermatologists in each case. The authors conclude by
graphical inspection that the CNN’s performance was comparable to that
of the board-certified dermatologists. However, we note that no formal
statistical test was applied. Concurrently, Han et al. (2019) [7] used a
ResNet-based CNN to automatically classify 12 skin disorders, achieving
a level of performance comparable to 16 dermatologists. The network
determined coarse and irregular portions of the lesion as important
features for malignant tumors, which was highlighted via gradient-based
activation maps (Grad-CAM) generated from the CNN. The activation maps
allowed interpretability of the CNN’s classification output. Another
study by Codella et al. [8] combined CNN with hand-coded features and
sparse coding which could potentially achieve higher accuracy than
dermatologists in melanoma detection. Brinker et al. (2019) [9] proposed
an enhanced CNN architecture for skin lesion classification using 12,378
images. They did a thorough evaluation by comparing the classification
performance of their CNN on 100 images and to that of 157 dermatologists
across 12 university hospitals in Germany. This system was shown by some
metrics to outperform the average dermatologist.

Haenssle et al. (2018) [10] similarly sought to compare the performance
of a CNN trained to recognize melanoma in dermoscopic images to 58
international dermatologists with varying levels of experience in
dermoscopy (29% beginner, 19% skilled, and 52% expert by self-report).
The dermatologists were asked to classify lesions in two stages,
including dermoscopy alone in the first stage and dermoscopy with
clinical images and additional clinical information in the second stage.
While the stage II performance of both beginner and skilled
dermatologists improved significantly relative to stage I, the CNN,
which was trained on images only still outperformed dermatologists of
all experience levels in both the stages. This study highlights the
importance of including a large group of dermatologists with varying
levels of experience, as well as using open source datasets and lesions
from different anatomic sites and of different histologic types during
CNN training. They also demonstrate the importance of integrating
clinical information and clinical experience when comparing human
performance to algorithmic performance.

Recently, Soensken et al. (2021) [11] proposed a deep CNN which
identifies early-stage melanoma by capturing wide-field photographs of
patient bodies using mobile phones, subsequently ranking suspicious
pigmented lesions (SPL) and flagging them for further examination. The
AI tool achieved more than 90% sensitivity in distinguishing SPL from
non-suspicious lesions and achieved comparable performance to
board-certified dermatologists, thus highlighting its efficacy as a
successful triage tool.

While the above studies are highlighted for their CNN performance in
comparison to human dermatologists, there are numerous studies that
address lesion identification. Most of these studies are focused on
improved algorithmic performance with some of the recent studies
focusing on improving model robustness. For example, Han et al (2018)
[12] demonstrated that CNNs trained on images from Asian patients
performed poorly on Caucasian patients and vice-versa, highlighting the
importance of training CNNs with skin lesions from a wide range of age
groups and ethnicities. Gessert et al. (2020) [13] used an ensemble of
deep learning models including EfficientNets, SENet, and ResNeXt WSL
using a search strategy for skin lesion classification. Maron et al.
(2021) [14] proposed a benchmark out-of-distribution dataset for
melanoma detection by adding artificial noise-based corruption and image
perturbations to lesion images and observed that while DenseNet121 [15]
showed the best corruption robustness, AlexNet achieved better
perturbation robustness. Sayed, Soliman, and Hassanien (2021) [16]
proposed an approach to tackle class-imbalance in existing melanoma
classification datasets from ISIC challenges [17] and proposed a random
over-sampling method followed by data augmentation achieving
state-of-the-art accuracy using a simpler CNN architecture named
SqueezeNet [18].

Although the mentioned studies demonstrate the richness and variety of
applications of CNNs to classifying a variety of cutaneous lesions,
including some that appear to perform well relative to non-specialists
or trainees, at this time (2022) there appears to be only a single
prospective clinical trial [19] utilizing AI for skin disease. We look
forward to seeing more of these trials performed.

Segmentation

Segmentation is similar to classification, but rather than trying to
predict a label for an image in its entirety it seeks to do so for each
pixel in the image.

This problem is in many ways more challenging than classification.
Nevertheless, deep learning has achieved promising success in skin
lesion segmentation, in particular with melanoma. Lesion segmentation is
still a challenging task for deep learning methods because of various
complexities including regions of interest (ROIs) of varying shapes and
sizes, fuzzy boundaries, capture-dependent color variation and the
presence of hair. Due to these complexities, traditional “handcrafted”
approaches such as those based on thresholding, region-based active
contour models or clustering tend to underperform. In contrast,
CNN-based methods can automatically create features that are maximally
helpful, for example, to distinguish lesions from normal skin. Most
segmentation frameworks leverage an encoder-decoder network wherein an
“encoder” network consisting of convolution and pooling layers is used
to extract features from the input image which are then passed to a
“decoder” network which performs a series of unpooling and disconnection
operations to construct the segmentation output. Goyal, Yap, and
Hassanpour (2017) [20] used Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) to learn
hierarchical features and derive multi-class segmentation maps for three
distinct forms of skin lesions: benign nevi, melanoma, and seborrheic
keratoses. Yuan and Lo (2019) [21] achieved the highest segmentation
accuracy (Jaccard (JAC) index of 76.5%) in the International Skin
Imaging Collaboration’s (ISIC) 2017 challenges [17] by using a 19-layer
convolutional-deconvolutional neural network to segment skin lesions by
training their model with different color spaces of dermoscopy images.
Sarker et al. (2018) [22] proposed an architecture combining
skip-connections, dilated residual and multi-scale pyramid pooling
networks to extract additional contextual information. They also
leveraged End Point Error as a content loss function to preserve
melanoma boundaries.

The most popular architecture which has achieved state-of-the-art
performance in skin lesion segmentation is U-Net [23].

U-Net was proposed for biomedical image segmentation and is based on
Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) for natural object detection. It has
a U-shaped architecture which concatenates the feature maps from the
encoder layer with corresponding upsampled decoder feature maps using
“skip-connections”, thus allowing it to retain fine-grained details
required for segmentation. Lin et al. (2017) [24] did the initial study
highlighting the efficacy of U-Net based histogram equalization (dice
coefficient of 77%) over C-means clustering (dice coefficient of 61%)
for skin lesion segmentation. Various architectures combining U-Net with
alternate CNN architectures have been proposed subsequently. For
instance, Zafar et al. (2020) [25] proposed a fully automatic skin
lesion segmentation combining U-Net and ResNet achieving an average JAC
Index of 77.2% on ISIC-2017 dataset. Recently, Ashraf et al. (2022) [26]
highlighted that a JAC Index above 80% in lesion segmentation guarantees
that the approach is reliable and appropriate for subjective clinical
assessment. They proposed three deep learning models, including U-Net,
deep residual U-Net (ResUNet), and improved ResUNet (ResUNet++) along
with an improved pre-processing pipeline employing an inpainting
algorithm to eliminate unnecessary hair structures. They also leveraged
test time image augmentation and a conditional random field (CRF) in the
postprocessing stage achieving state-of-the-art 80.73% Jaccard index on
ISIC 2017 dataset.

Dermatopathology

Deep learning in dermatopathology is centered around traditional
pathology slides that are digitized into images (WSIs) by scanners.
Histology whole slides provide a much greater amount of cellular-level
information highlighting morphological and spatial arrangement, thus
making them attractive for deep learning-based biomarker extraction.

Due to their immense size, special technical considerations are
critically important when working with digitized pathology slide images.
Currently the best practice is to divide the slide into smaller patches
of tissue, often chosen to match a given neural network architecture.

Best Practice 15.5

A common paradigm for deep learning on pathology slides is to first
divide the slide into small patches of tissue. Then one trains a
tissue-level classifier, typically a deep neural network. This predicts
the type of tissue in the patch using labels from pixel-level
annotations. Afterwards, a slide-level classifier can be trained to
predict using the tissue-level predictions as input and the slide labels
as output. The slide-level classifier is typically a model such as
logistic regression, often chosen to avoid overfitting.

Pitfall 15.2

While important in all applications of ML in healthcare, deep learning
on whole slide images is especially prone to inadvertently learning
biases in the dataset rather than actual physiology. A pernicious
example is that of scanner effects. In a scanner effect, the model
learns which scanner was used to aquire an image. This causes problems
when one outcome of interest is more frequently acquired on one model of
scanner, something common in multicenter studies. A red flag is if many
examples of a single (potentially rare) disease need to be supplied by a
single institution. Similar biases can occur if images are acquired
using different staining protocols or scanning parameters.

The majority of applications of AI in dermatopathology to date have
focused on the traditional formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue that
is the mainstay of modern pathology. However, there is growing interest
in also utilizing the fresh frozen tissue common in dermatologic
surgery.

A prototypical AI project in dermatopathology focuses on extracting
several features from WSI for diagnostic prediction tasks such as cancer
grading or cancer subtyping. Moreno-Andrés et al. [27] developed a
diagnostic support tool to identify mitotic cells within detected tumor
regions for whole slide images (WSI). The authors report a diagnostic
accuracy of 83% for their model trained on 59 WSIs. This tool could
augment a dermatopathologist’s practice by identifying areas of the
slide with the highest density of mitotic figures, and could also
potentially reduce the need for the immunohistochemical stains for
mitosis.

Olsen et al [28] similarly trained a CNN using 450 WSI to classify basal
cell carcinomas, dermal nevi, and seborrheic keratoses. Their Visual
Geometry Group (VGG) network achieved an AUC of 0.99 for basal cell
carcinomas, 0.97 for dermal nevi, and 0.99 for seborrheic keratoses.
Hart et al [29] developed a CNN to differentiate between Spitz and
conventional melanocytic lesions on histopathology. They trained their
model on 100 curated whole slide images and first evaluated their model
on curated image sections. Their model demonstrated 99% accuracy in this
experiment. They then conducted a second experiment evaluating the
model’s performance on noncurated image patches of the entire slide. In
contrast to the curated experiment, the model achieved a significantly
lower accuracy of 52.3% on the non-curated patches. Hekler et al [30]
built a similar CNN trained on 695 whole slide images to classify images
as melanoma or benign nevi. They compared the performance of their CNN
to dermatopathologists. Performance was evaluated on randomly cropped
10× magnification sections. The CNN achieved a melanoma
sensitivity/specificity/accuracy of 76%/60%/68% respectively, while the
11 dermatopathologists achieved a mean sensitivity/specificity/accuracy
of 51.8%/66.5%/59.2% respectively. However, these results should be
interpreted with caution—in a normal clinical setting, pathologists have
the ability to evaluate the whole slide and are not restricted to
randomly cropped segments.

Sankarapandian et al. [31] presented a deep learning-based triaging
system which performs hierarchical melanocytic specimen classification
into low (MPATH I-II), Intermediate (MPATH III), or High (MPATH IV-V)
diagnostic categories, enabling prioritization of melanoma cases. They
leverage transfer learning using a pretrained ResNet50 network for
extracting patch-level features from WSI and formulate the
classification problem in a weakly-supervised multiple instance paradigm
using tissue-level labels only. By combining patch features using
max-pooling, their tool is able to classify suspected melanoma without
requiring pixel-level annotations and could substantially reduce
diagnostic turnaround time for melanoma by ensuring that suspected
melanoma cases are routed directly to subspecialists.

Thomas et al. [32] proposed an interpretable deep learning method to
classify several common skin cancers (basal cell carcinoma, squamous
cell carcinoma and intraepidermal carcinoma) using WSI. Using manual
labelling they characterised the tissue into 12 meaningful
dermatological classes, including hair follicles, sweat glands as well
as identifying the well-defined stratified layers of the skin.
Subsequently, they trained a classifier to classify the sub-regions of
WSI into the 12 classes thus representing the WSI with a segmentation
map similar to a pathologist. By analysing the tissue context using the
segmentation map obtained from the classifier, they achieved high
accuracy of WSI classification as well as ensured interpretability.

One notable limitation in the dermatopathology literature is the limited
work on leveraging AI to predict patient prognosis and response to
therapy based on the morphological slide features. While existing
approaches have tried to link pathological features, such as tumour
grade and subtype, to effective patient prognosis, none of the methods
have demonstrated a direct link between pathology images with multiscale
features as well as patient’s genetic profiles with survival outcomes
and treatment response for adjuvant/neoadjuvant therapy.

Datasets and Challenges

All of the approaches described here depend critically on sufficient
quantities of appropriate data, ideally free of biases and
representative of a wide variety of patients. While this is unlikely to
ever be achieved in practice, dermatology benefits from several large,
publicly available datasets. Many of these datasets have been partially
combined under the auspices of the International Skin Imaging
Collaboration (ISIC) Archive [17]. Although the ISIC Archive has several
known limitations [33], it is an invaluable resource for advancing AI
research in dermatology. The collaboration also hosts challenges [17]
each year, typically associated with prominent computer vision
conferences, that provide an engaging opportunity for computer
scientists to apply new techniques to relevant dermatologic problems.

Best Practice 15.6

Keep an up-to-date list of publicly available datasets so that you can
use them when appropriate.

Conclusion

As an image-centric specialty dermatology has become an area of
particular interest for applications of artificial intelligence and
computer vision in healthcare. While many approaches have focused on
pigmented and non-pigmented lesions, melanoma in particular, the field
is vast, encompassing some 3000 known skin diseases and affecting
approximate one third of the global population [34–36]. The opportunity
this presents to ease the global disease burden, particularly by
enhancing remote access to specialty care, is incredibly exciting and we
look forward to its bright future.

Key Concepts in This Chapter

Deep Neurual Networks, especially convolutional neural networks, are the
primary AI tools in dermatology as of 2022.

Broadly speaking applications of computer vision in dermatology can be
categorized either by input data or by problem type.

Input data is usually one of the following: clinical photographs,
dermoscopic photographs, or digitized pathology slides (also known as
whole slide images, or WSI).

Problem type is most typically supervised learning, where a label of
interest is known for each observation, and can appear as classification
or segmentation.

In a classification problem, the goal is to learn a label (or set of
labels) for an image in its entirety. For example, given a photograph of
a skin lesion the classifier might distinguish between melanoma and
benign nevus, and if melanoma then might further characterize it as
aggressive or indolent.

Segmentation is similar to classification, but rather than trying to
predict a label for an image in its entirety it seeks to do so for each
pixel in the image.

The most popular architecture which has achieved state-of-the-art
performance in skin lesion segmentation is U-Net.

Due to their immense size, special technical considerations are
critically important when working with digitized pathology slide images.
Currently the best practice is to divide the slide into smaller patches
of tissue, often chosen to match a given neural network architecture.

Pitfalls in This Chapter

Pitfall 1. When using transfer learning, if you cannot find a dataset
naturally similar to yours and must start with weights from e.g.
ImageNet, always try training from scratch as well. In pathology in
particular sometimes it is better to just start over.

Pitfall 2. While important in all applications of ML in healthcare, deep
learning on whole slide images is especially prone to inadvertently
learning biases in the dataset rather than actual physiology. A
pernicious example is that of scanner effects. In a scanner effect, the
model learns which scanner was used to aquire an image. This causes
problems when one outcome of interest is more frequently acquired on one
model of scanner, something common in multicenter studies. Similar
biases can occur if images are acquired using different staining
protocols or scanning parameters.

Best Practices in This Chapter

Best Practice 15.1. Always start with a known state-of-the-art network
architecture rather than designing your own. EfficientNet is often a
(relatively) fast way to see if your dataset has an extractable signal.

Best Practice 15.2. Use transfer learning any time you can find a
dataset similar enough to yours. See pitfall below however.

Best Practice 15.3. Be alert to data differences in photographs acquired
by patients vs those acquired by medical photographers or informed
providers. If you mix them, be certain to check that there is balance
among outcomes by origin.

Best Practice 15.4. Weakly supervised learning may be a promising future
direction to alleviate the burden of acquiring costly and time-consuming
pixel level annotations.

Best Practice 15.5. A common paradigm for deep learning on pathology
slides is to first divide the slide into small patches of tissue. Then
one trains a tissue-level classifier, typically a deep neural network.
This predicts the type of tissue in the patch using labels from
pixel-level annotations. Afterwards, a slide-level classifier can be
trained to predict using the tissue-level predictions as input and the
slide labels as output. The slide-level classifier is typically a model
such as logistic regression, often chosen to avoid overfitting.

Best Practice 15.6. Keep an up-to-date list of publicly available
datasets so that you can use them when appropriate.

Questions and Discussion Topics in This Chapter

1.  1.

    Discuss: Are photographs acquired in a dermatologists office more
    likely to contain cases than controls?

     

2.  2.

    Describe a red flag to look for when being alert to scanner effects.

     

3.  3.

    What is the primary difference between supervised learning and
    weakly supervised learning?

     

4.  4.

    Noise and artifacts may be present in images that are not visible to
    the human eye. Read this blog post by Andrew Janowczyk:
    http://​www.​andrewjanowczyk.​com/​the-noise-in-our-digital-pathology-slides/​
    1.  (a)

        How might this affect a study?

         

    2.  (b)

        What approaches could you take to mitigate it?

         

     

5.  5.

    What are some of the ways that published studies have compared
    machine performance to dermatologist performance? Do any study
    designs have particular advantages or disadvantages?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Kovarik C, Lee I, Ko J. Ad Hoc Task Force on Augmented Intelligence.
    Commentary: position statement on augmented intelligence (AuI). J Am
    Acad Dermatol. 2019;81(4):998–1000.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jaad.​2019.​06.​032. Epub 2019 Jun
    25.Crossref

2.  2.

    Murphree DH, Puri P, Shamim H, Bezalel SA, Drage LA, Wang M,
    Pittelkow MR, Carter RE, Davis MDP, Bridges AG, Mangold AR, Yiannias
    JA, Tollefson MM, Lehman JS, Meves A, Otley CC, Sokumbi O, Hall MR,
    Comfere N. Deep learning for dermatologists: Part I. Fundamental
    concepts. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022;87:1343–51.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jaad.​2020.​05.​056.Crossref

3.  3.

    Puri P, Comfere N, Drage LA, Shamim H, Bezalel SA, Pittelkow MR,
    Davis MDP, Wang M, Mangold AR, Tollefson MM, Lehman JS, Meves A,
    Yiannias JA, Otley CC, Carter RE, Sokumbi O, Hall MR, Bridges AG,
    Murphree DH. Deep learning for dermatologists: Part II. Current
    applications. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022;87, 6:1352–60.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jaad.​2020.​05.​053.Crossref

4.  4.

    LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G. Deep learning. Nature. 2015;521:436–44.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​nature14539.Crossref

5.  5.

    Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A. Deep learning. Cambridge,
    Massachusetts: The MIT Press; 2016.

6.  6.

    Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa RA, Ko J, Swetter SM, Blau HM, Thrun S.
    Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural
    networks. Nature. 2017;542(7639):115–8.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​nature21056.Crossref

7.  7.

    Han SS, Park GH, Lim W, Kim MS, Na JI, Park I, Chang SE. Deep neural
    networks show an equivalent and often superior performance to
    dermatologists in onychomycosis diagnosis: automatic construction of
    onychomycosis datasets by region-based convolutional deep neural
    network. PLoS One. 2018;13(1):e0191493.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journal.​pone.​0191493.Crossref

8.  8.

    Codella N, Cai J, Abedini M, Garnavi R, Halpern A, Smith JR. Deep
    learning, sparse coding, and SVM for melanoma recognition in
    dermoscopy images. In: Machine Learning in Medical Imaging (Lecture
    Notes in Computer Science), pp. 118–126; 2015. doi:
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-319-24888-2_​15

9.  9.

    Brinker TJ, Hekler A, Enk AH, von Kalle C. Enhanced classifier
    training to improve precision of a convolutional neural network to
    identify images of skin lesions. PLOS One. 2019;14(6):e0218713.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journal.​pone.​0218713.Crossref

10. 10.

    Haenssle HA, Fink C, Schneiderbauer R, Toberer F, Buhl T, Blum A,
    Kalloo A, Hassen ABH, Thomas L, Enk A, Uhlmann L, Reader study
    level-I and level-II Groups, Alt C, Arenbergerova M, Bakos R,
    Baltzer A, Bertlich I, Blum A, Bokor-Billmann T, Bowling J,
    Braghiroli N, Braun R, Buder-Bakhaya K, Buhl T, Cabo H, Cabrijan L,
    Cevic N, Classen A, Deltgen D, Fink C, Georgieva I, Hakim-Meibodi
    L-E, Hanner S, Hartmann F, Hartmann J, Haus G, Hoxha E, Karls R,
    Koga H, Kreusch J, Lallas A, Majenka P, Marghoob A, Massone C,
    Mekokishvili L, Mestel D, Meyer V, Neuberger A, Nielsen K, Oliviero
    M, Pampena R, Paoli J, Pawlik E, Rao B, Rendon A, Russo T, Sadek A,
    Samhaber K, Schneiderbauer R, Schweizer A, Toberer F, Trennheuser L,
    Vlahova L, Wald A, Winkler J, Wölbing P, Zalaudek I. Man against
    machine: diagnostic performance of a deep learning convolutional
    neural network for dermoscopic melanoma recognition in comparison to
    58 dermatologists. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(8):1836–42.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​annonc/​mdy166.Crossref

11. 11.

    Soenksen LR, Kassis T, Conover ST, Marti-Fuster B, Birkenfeld JS,
    Tucker-Schwartz J, Naseem A, Stavert RR, Kim CC, Senna MM,
    Avilés-Izquierdo J, Collins JJ, Barzilay R, Gray ML. Using deep
    learning for dermatologist-level detection of suspicious pigmented
    skin lesions from wide-field images. Sci Transl Med. 2021;13,
    581:eabb3652. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scitranslmed.​abb3652.Crossref

12. 12.

    Han SS, Kim MS, Lim W, Park GH, Park I, Chang SE. Classification of
    the clinical images for benign and malignant cutaneous tumors using
    a deep learning algorithm. J Invest Dermatol. 2018;138(7):1529–38.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jid.​2018.​01.​028.Crossref

13. 13.

    Gessert N, Nielsen M, Shaikh M, Werner R, Schlaefer A. Skin lesion
    classification using ensembles of multi-resolution EfficientNets
    with meta data. MethodsX. 2020;7:100864.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​mex.​2020.​100864.Crossref

14. 14.

    Maron RC, Schlager JG, Haggenmüller S, von Kalle C, Utikal JS, Meier
    F, Gellrich FF, Hobelsberger S, Hauschild A, French L, Heinzerling
    L, Schlaak M, Ghoreschi K, Hilke FJ, Poch G, Heppt MV, Berking C,
    Haferkamp S, Sondermann W, Schadendorf D, Schilling B, Goebeler M,
    Krieghoff-Henning E, Hekler A, Fröhling S, Lipka DB, Kather JN,
    Brinker TJ. A benchmark for neural network robustness in skin cancer
    classification. Eur J Cancer. 2021;155:191–9.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ejca.​2021.​06.​047.Crossref

15. 15.

    Huang G, Liu Z, Van Der Maaten L, Weinberger KQ. Densely connected
    convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
    computer vision and pattern recognition; 2017, pp. 4700–4708.

16. 16.

    Sayed GI, Soliman MM, Hassanien AE. A novel melanoma prediction
    model for imbalanced data using optimized SqueezeNet by bald eagle
    search optimization. Comput Biol Med. 2021;136:104712.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​compbiomed.​2021.​104712.Crossref

17. 17.

    ISIC Challenge. https://​challenge.​isic-archive.​com/​. Accessed 24 Dec
    2022

18. 18.

    Iandola FN, Han S, Moskewicz MW, Ashraf K, Dally WJ, Keutzer K.
    SqueezeNet: AlexNet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and<
    0.5 MB model size. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360; 2016.

19. 19.

    Han SS, Kim YJ, Moon IJ, Jung JM, Lee MY, Lee WJ, Won CH, Lee MW,
    Kim SH, Navarrete-Dechent C, Chang SE. Evaluation of artificial
    intelligence–assisted diagnosis of skin neoplasms: a single-center,
    paralleled, unmasked, randomized controlled trial. J Invest
    Dermatol. 2022;142(9):2353–2362.e2.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jid.​2022.​02.​003.Crossref

20. 20.

    Goyal M, Yap MH, Hassanpour S. Multi-class semantic segmentation of
    skin lesions via fully convolutional networks. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1711.10449; 2017.

21. 21.

    Yuan Y, Lo Y-C. Improving dermoscopic image segmentation with
    enhanced convolutional-deconvolutional networks. IEEE J Biomed
    Health Inform. 2019;23(2):519–26.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​JBHI.​2017.​2787487.Crossref

22. 22.

    Sarker MMK, Rashwan HA, Akram F, Banu SF, Saleh A, Singh VK,
    Chowdhury FUH, Abdulwahab S, Romani S, Radeva P, Puig D. SLSDeep:
    skin lesion segmentation based on dilated residual and pyramid
    pooling networks. In Medical image computing and computer assisted
    intervention—MICCAI 2018 (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), pp.
    21–29; 2018. doi: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-030-00934-2_​3

23. 23.

    Ronneberger O, Fischer P, Brox T. U-Net: convolutional networks for
    biomedical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and
    computer-assisted intervention—MICCAI 2015 (Lecture Notes in
    Computer Science), pp. 234–241; 2015. doi:
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-319-24574-4_​28

24. 24.

    Lin BS, Michael K, Kalra S, Tizhoosh HR. Skin lesion segmentation:
    U-nets versus clustering. In 2017 IEEE symposium series on
    computational intelligence (SSCI), pp. 1–7; 2017.

25. 25.

    Zafar K, Gilani SO, Waris A, Ahmed A, Jamil M, Khan MN, Kashif AS.
    Skin lesion segmentation from dermoscopic images using convolutional
    neural network. Sensors. 2020;20(6):1601.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​s20061601.Crossref

26. 26.

    Ashraf H, Waris A, Ghafoor MF, Gilani SO, Niazi IK. Melanoma
    segmentation using deep learning with test-time augmentations and
    conditional random fields. Sci Reports. 2022;12(1):3948.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-022-07885-y.Crossref

27. 27.

    Moreno-Andrés D, Bhattacharyya A, Scheufen A, Stegmaier J.
    LiveCellMiner: A new tool to analyze mitotic progression. PLoS One.
    2022;17(7):e0270923.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journal.​pone.​0270923.Crossref

28. 28.

    Olsen TG, Hunter Jackson B, Feeser TA, Kent MN, Moad JC,
    Krishnamurthy S, Lunsford DD, Soans RE. Diagnostic performance of
    deep learning algorithms applied to three common diagnoses in
    dermatopathology. J Pathol Inform. 2018;9(1):32.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​4103/​jpi.​jpi_​31_​18.Crossref

29. 29.

    Hart SN, Flotte W, Norgan AF, Shah KK, Buchan ZR, Mounajjed T,
    Flotte TJ. Classification of melanocytic lesions in selected and
    whole-slide images via convolutional neural networks. J Pathol
    Informatics. 2019;10(1):5.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​4103/​jpi.​jpi_​32_​18.Crossref

30. 30.

    Hekler A, Utikal JS, Enk AH, Solass W, Schmitt M, Klode J,
    Schadendorf D, Sondermann W, Franklin C, Bestvater F, Flaig MJ,
    Krahl D, von Kalle C, Fröhling S, Brinker TJ. Deep learning
    outperformed 11 pathologists in the classification of
    histopathological melanoma images. Eur J Cancer. 2019;118:91–6.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ejca.​2019.​06.​012.Crossref

31. 31.

    Sankarapandian S, Kohn S, Spurrier V, Grullon S, Soans RE, Ayyagari
    KD, Chamarthi RV, Motaparthi K, Lee JB, Shon W. A pathology deep
    learning system capable of triage of melanoma specimens utilizing
    dermatopathologist consensus as ground truth. In Proceedings of the
    IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 629–638;
    2021.

32. 32.

    Thomas SM, Lefevre JG, Baxter G, Hamilton NA. Interpretable deep
    learning systems for multi-class segmentation and classification of
    non-melanoma skin cancer. Med Image Anal. 2021;68:101915.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​media.​2020.​101915.Crossref

33. 33.

    Cassidy B, Kendrick C, Brodzicki A, Jaworek-Korjakowska J, Yap MH.
    Analysis of the ISIC image datasets: usage, benchmarks and
    recommendations. Med Image Anal. 2022;75:102305.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​media.​2021.​102305.Crossref

34. 34.

    Bickers DR, Lim HW, Margolis D, Weinstock MA, Goodman C, Faulkner E,
    Gould C, Gemmen E, Dall T. The burden of skin diseases: 2004: a
    joint project of the American Academy of Dermatology Association and
    the Society for Investigative Dermatology. J Am Acad Dermatol.
    2006;55(3):490–500.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jaad.​2006.​05.​048.Crossref

35. 35.

    Hay RJ, Augustin M, Griffiths CEM, Sterry W, The Board of the
    International League of Dermatological Societies and the Grand
    Challenges Consultation Groups. The global challenge for skin
    health. Br J Dermatol. 2015;172(6):1469–72.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​bjd.​13854.Crossref

36. 36.

    Hay RJ, Johns NE, Williams HC, Bolliger IW, Dellavalle RP, Margolis
    DJ, Marks R, Naldi L, Weinstock MA, Wulf SK, Michaud C, Murray CJL,
    Naghavi M. The global burden of skin disease in 2010: an analysis of
    the prevalence and impact of skin conditions. J Invest Dermatol.
    2014;134(6):1527–34. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​jid.​2013.​446.Crossref

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_16

Regulatory Aspects and Ethical Legal Societal Implications (ELSI)

Steven G. Johnson¹  , Gyorgy Simon¹ and Constantin Aliferis¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Steven G. Johnson

Email: joh06288@umn.edu

Abstract

This chapter reviews the context of regulating AI/ML models, the risk
management principles underlying international regulations of clinical
AI/ML, the conditions under which health AI/ML models in the U.S. are
regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the FDA’s Good
Machine Learning Practice (GMLP) principles. The GMLP principles do not
offer specific guidance on execution, so we point the Reader to the
parts of the book that discuss bringing these principles to practice via
concrete best practice recommendations. Intrinsically linked with
regulatory aspects are the Ethical, Legal, Social Implications (ELSI)
dimensions. The chapter provides an introduction to the nascent field of
biomedical AI ethics covering: general AI ELSI studies, AI/ML racial
bias, and AI/ML and Health equity principles. Contrary to conventional
risks/harms (data security and privacy, adherence to model use as stated
in consent), ethical AI/ML involves model effectiveness and harms that
can exist within the intended scope of consent. On the positive side, in
the case of biomedical AI, these risks are in principle measurable and
knowable compared to hard-to-quantify risks/harm due to data breaches.
The chapter discusses (and gives illustrative examples) of the
importance of causality and equivalence classes for practical detection
of racial bias in models. The chapter concludes with a series of
recommended best practices for promoting health equity and reducing
health disparities via the design and use of health AI/ML.

Keywords

AI/ML Risk managementISO 14971FDA’s AI GuidanceHealth
equitydisparitiesRacial bias and the Causal-Path-to-Outcomes
PrincipleELSI factors for health AI/ML

Model Implementation in the Context of Regulation

Model predictions, in order to have an impact on healthcare outcomes,
must be deployed in patient care settings and used by clinicians so that
they affect their decisions or actions. The results of models can be
presented to clinicians in the form of a report, as part of a real-time
dashboard or within worklists that get updated frequently. But the best
method, clinical decision support (CDS), is to present the information
from the model at the precise time during a clinical workflow when it is
most useful to the clinician and patient.

Clinical Decision Support provides clinicians, staff, patients, or other
individuals with knowledge and person-specific information,
intelligently filtered or presented at appropriate times, to enhance
health and health care.[1]

The best CDS addresses the following 5 “rights”: The right information,
to the right person, in the right format, through the right channel, at
the right time in the workflow.[2]

EHR vendors have historically provided their own proprietary methods for
implementing CDS within clinical workflows, but there are standards that
are slowly being adopted that could make model implementation easier and
more portable across systems. CDS Hooks has emerged as a vendor-agnostic
way to implement models.[3] The architecture supports the AI/ML models
running on a server external to the EHR itself, which allows more
flexibility in the maintenance and sharing of the model. The AI/ML model
itself must be written in the programming language it was developed with
and run in a suitable environment. EHR vendors are starting to create
model execution environments (i.e. Epic Nebula, Cerner Project Apollo),
but they are not currently very interoperable.

Once models are implemented within production clinical workflows, they
must be monitored and their performance evaluated (chapter
“Characterizing, Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML & AI
Models in Clinical and Organizational Application”). It is also
important to select the appropriate performance metrics that depend on
the problem the CDS models are solving (chapter “Evaluation”). Model
performance in production may not match the performance estimated during
model development. Model performance may also change over time due to
input data drifts, and model drifts. Data drifts occur when the data
distribution in the application population changes, or when additional
terminology codes are adopted, or EHR documentation methods change
thereby potentially changing input data expectations. Model drifts occur
as a result of model outputs causing practice changes leading to changes
in the validity of the models. In both of these cases, model retraining
eventually becomes necessary.

ISO 14971 Standard on Risk Management of Medical Devices

After an AI or ML model has been fit, its performance is evaluated in
controlled conditions, and the model is refined according to
clinical-grade model technical criteria of performance and reliability,
as described in chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”,
after it is implemented in care. There are several regulations that
govern clinical grade AI/ML models and systems. This chapter describes
current regulatory requirements.

While the exact rules and regulations surrounding the use of clinical
decision support tools may change, regulations in many countries,
including the USA, European Union, Canada, and Australia, are informed
by the ISO 15971 standard [4]. Conversely, several revisions to the
standard were made to better align it with regional law. This standard,
entitled “Application of risk management to medical devices”, describes
the process of risk management for medical devices throughout its entire
life cycle. After reading this section, the Reader should be able to
define key concepts related to risk management, be familiar with the
related terminology, describe risk management in broad strokes, and
understand the key decisions to make.

The ISO 14971 standard describes the process of risk management for
medical devices through their entire life cycle.
https://​www.​iso.​org/​standard/​72704.​html

The central thesis of risk management is that the expected benefits from
using the device must outweigh the risk of potential harms.

To expand on this central thesis, we have to establish some definitions.

A medical device is defined as ”an instrument, apparatus, implement,
machine, implant, software, or related article to be used alone or in
combination for the diagnosis, prevention, treatment, monitoring or
alleviation of disease, injury”, or for supporting or sustaining life.

ISO 14971 provides a broad definition of a medical device with an
extensive open-ended list of potential purposes. Given the context of
this book, the medical device will most commonly be an AI/ML model
assisting with or making clinical decisions, for example in the form of
a risk or prognostic model, or as a decision support tool estimating
risks under various treatment options.

An AI model is not a medical device if it is running as part of a
device.

- Benefit is defined as the positive impact or desirable outcome
  stemming from the use of the medical device in question.

- Harm is injury or damage to the health of people, property or
  environment.

- Risk quantifies harm. It has two components: the probability of risk
  and the severity of said harm.

- Risk management is a process that consists of (i) establishing the
  intended use and foreseeable misuse of a medical device, (ii)
  identifying potential sources of harm and estimating the associated
  risks, (iii) determining whether the risks are acceptable, (iv) taking
  measures to reduce these risks, and (v) monitoring the device during
  the remainder of its life cycle and repeating the risk assessment as
  needed.

Let us look at these steps in more detail. Phrases in quotation marks
are the terminology used by the standard.

1.  (i)

    The process starts by establishing the intended use and the
    foreseeable misuse of the device. The “intended use” (also known as
    “intended purpose” in the EU) provides a description of how the
    device is intended to be used, including its purpose, the
    description of the target patient population, as well as a
    description of the users of the device, of the environment in which
    it will be used, and of the process of how the device is to be used.
    Moreover, the standard mandates that characteristics (quantitative
    as well as qualitative) that can affect the safety of the device be
    considered and limits need to be defined on these characteristics
    for safe use.

     

2.  (ii)

    Next, potential sources of harm (“hazards”) are identified.
    Sequences or combinations of events that could lead to harm should
    be considered and documented. For each source of harm, the
    associated risks, both their probabilities and their severities, are
    estimated. This step is referred to as “risk analysis” in the
    standard, which consists of “risk assessment”, where the potential
    sources of harm are identified and “risk estimation” where the risk
    probabilities and severities are estimated.

     

Best Practice 16.1

Consider all relevant risks in different phases of the life cycle. Risks
can change over time, e.g., the probability or severity of risk can
change due to advancements in treatments or due to patient population
drift.

As far as the scope of risk analysis is concerned, risks related to data
and system security are explicitly included, as are risks stemming from
the malfunction of the device.

Risks are not always estimable. For example if a set but very rare
sequence of operations causes a fault deterministically, its risk may be
hard to estimate with certainty. Similarly, some harms, such as the
emergence of antibiotic-resistant pathogens caused by antibiotic
overuse, may be impractical to estimate (quantify) in the context of
infection risk models. In such cases, the potential harms themselves
should be listed (without quantified risks).

1.  (iii)

    The next step is called “risk evaluation”. In this step, it is
    determined whether the risks are acceptable.

     

Under some circumstances, the risk from using the device cannot be
reduced to acceptable levels. In such cases a “risk-benefit analysis”
can be carried out, proving that the expected benefit outweighs (the
high) risk. For example, the use of a life-support device could fall
into this category. In case of a “risk-benefit analysis”, the benefits
cannot include economic or business advantages (cost-benefit analysis
can serve that purpose).

Risk evaluation for clinical decision support, that is when the device
is applied to a particular patient, is excluded from the scope, because
the tradeoff between the benefits and risks is very patient-dependent.
Business decision making is also excluded from the scope.

1.  (iv)

    If the risks are not acceptable (too high), then “risk control” is
    performed. As part of risk control, measures to reduce risk are
    developed, implemented, and verified. After the implementation and
    verification of these risk reduction measures, the remaining risk
    (“residual risk”) is evaluated. If it is still deemed unacceptably
    high, further risk reduction measures are implemented and the
    residual risks are re-evaluated. These steps are repeated until the
    residual risk becomes acceptable.

     

If, in spite of all the risk control measures, the residual risk remains
too high, the device may be abandoned, or the device itself or its
intended use may be revised and the whole risk management process must
be repeated from the beginning.

If the residual risk is acceptable and the expected benefits outweigh
the potential harms, then a risk management report is produced detailing
the above steps.

The “verification” of a measure is the provision of objective evidence
proving that the measure successfully meets certain pre-defined
objectives. This refers to distinct processes: proving that the measure
is actually implemented and also proving that the measure reduced the
risk. The level of effort should be commensurate with the level of risk.

Note that the risk control measures themselves can introduce new and
different risks.

1.  (v)

    The device enters the post-production phase of its life cycle and
    post-production monitoring of the device commences. Information
    about the use and misuse of the device is collected, and a decision
    is made whether the risk evaluation should be repeated. This may
    lead to the need for additional risk control measures and
    re-evaluation of the residual risks.

     

Pitfall 16.1

The ISO 14971 is not an implementation standard. It mandates that
certain actions be taken but does not prescribe exactly how they will be
carried out.

Best Practice 16.2

The rationale for the risk management plan is that having a plan
produced ahead of time makes it less likely that a risk management step
is overlooked or accidentally skipped.

FDA Regulation of AI/ML Use

In this section, we will focus on the regulatory framework developed by
the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the regulation
of Clinical Decision Support Software.[5] We will review a history of
the evolution of the regulations and examine characteristics for what
the FDA considers a medical device and therefore what needs to go
through the FDA regulatory approval process. These regulations and
processes will likely evolve over time and the information in this
section may eventually be out of date. But the underlying reasons for
the regulatory review should still be valid and it is important that
these reasons are considered during the development of an AI/ML model.

The US Congress passed the 21st Century Cures Act in December of 2016
[6]. The Cures Act exempted certain software from regulation as long as
(1) the healthcare provider could independently review the basis of the
recommendation and (2) they didn’t rely on it to make a diagnostic or
treatment decision. But it wasn’t very clear about which types of
medical software could be exempted. In this timeframe, health systems
developed algorithms and CDS, and they generally didn’t seek FDA
approval.

The FDA has monitored the evolution of how software was being used in
medical decisions, and especially how software was developed, how AI/ML
algorithms were trained on new data and how they evolved over time. In
2019, the FDA released a draft guidance on CDS software [7] in which it
proposed a risk-based approach based on the International Medical Device
Regulators Forum (IMDRF) Framework which could be used to categorize CDS
as a medical device CDS or a non-device CDS. Based on feedback and
comments, the FDA released its Final Guidance on September 22, 2022 [5].
This guidance abandoned the risk-based approach and provides a more
detailed definition of which types of CDS are considered devices and
should therefore be regulated. To clarify: the decision, whether a model
needs to be regulated or not is no longer based on risks, however, risk
management is still the central tenet of regulation (for the devices
that need to be regulated).

The FDA’s Final Guidance defined four criteria and if the CDS meets all
four criteria, then it is not considered a device CDS and is not
regulated by the FDA [5]. If the model fails to meet any one (or more)
of these criteria, then it is subject to FDA regulations. The four
criteria are as follows:

1.  1.

    the model is not intended to acquire, process, or analyze a medical
    image or a signal from an in vitro diagnostic device or a pattern or
    signal from a signal acquisition system;

     

2.  2.

    the model is intended for the purpose of displaying, analyzing, or
    printing medical information about a patient or other medical
    information (such as peer-reviewed clinical studies and clinical
    practice guidelines);

     

3.  3.

    the model is intended for the purpose of supporting or providing
    recommendations to a health care professional about prevention,
    diagnosis, or treatment of a disease or condition; and

     

4.  4.

    the model is intended for the purpose of enabling such health care
    professional (HCP) to independently review the basis for such
    recommendations that such software presents so that it is not the
    intent that such health care professional rely primarily on any of
    such recommendations to make a clinical diagnosis or treatment
    decision regarding an individual patient.

     

The Final Guidance provides a detailed explanation for each of the
criteria and uses examples to illustrate what is and is not considered a
medical device.

Criterion 1: the FDA makes it clear that any software that analyzes
medical images or device signals is a device. Then it goes further to
define a pattern as multiple, sequential, or repeated measurements of a
signal. They specifically give examples of patterns as
electrocardiograms (ECG), continuous glucose monitors (CGM) and next
generation sequencing (NGS). Examples of software that do not meet
Criterion 1 and are therefore devices, include software that uses CT
images to estimate fractional flow reserve, software that performs image
analysis for diagnostically differentiating between ischemic and
hemorrhagic stroke and software that analyzes multiple signals (e.g.,
perspiration rate, heart rate, eye movement, breathing rate) from
wearable products to monitor whether a person is having a heart attack.
But software that uses physiologic signals for biometric identification
(i.e. retinal scan) is not a medical device since it is not being used
for a medical purpose.

Criterion 2: the FDA describes medical information about a patient to be
“the type of information that normally is, and generally can be,
communicated between health care professionals in a clinical
conversation…”. The information’s relevance to a clinical decision must
be well understood and accepted. Other medical information includes
“information such as peer-reviewed clinical studies, clinical practice
guidelines, and information that is similarly independently verified and
validated as accurate, reliable…”. By this definition a single glucose
measure (lab result) is medical information about a patient, but
multiple glucose measurements over a period of time would be considered
a pattern. Examples of non-devices are providing order sets, displaying
evidence-based practice guidelines, drug-drug interactions and reminders
for preventive care. Examples of a regulated device is software that
analyzes patient-specific medical information (e.g., daily heart rate,
SpO₂, blood pressure, etc.) to compute a score that predicts heart
failure hospitalization because the score is not generally communicated
between health care professionals and its relevance to a clinical
decision is not well understood.

Criterion 3, addresses providing recommendations to HCPs. In particular,
the FDA considers that if the software provides a specific diagnosis or
treatment or provides a time-critical recommendation, then it may
replace the HCPs clinical judgement (because the HCP is not given enough
time to consider the recommendation and they are not given alternatives
with supporting evidence). In that case, the CDS should be regulated. If
a HCP is given a list of preventative, diagnostic or treatment options
or a list of next steps (as long as it is not done in a time-critical
manner), then that is allowable non-device CDS. On the other hand,
examples of device CDS include software the predicts opioid addiction
(it is a specific diagnosis) or software that alerts to potential for a
patient to develop sepsis (requires a time-critical response). The FDA
also considers automation bias, in which an HCP may rely too much on the
output of the software for their decisions since it is coming from a
(presumed infallible) computer.

Criterion 4, lastly, seeks to ensure that the HCP can review the basis
for the recommendations so that they do not solely rely on the
recommendation but use their clinical judgement. In support of this, the
FDA recommends that the software (1) labels its intended use; (2)
describes all inputs, their relevance and expected data quality; (3)
lists applicable patient population; (4) provides a summary of the
algorithm logic and methods; (5) presents results from clinical studies
and validations to evaluate the model performance and (6) shows relevant
patient-specific information and any missing, corrupted, or unexpected
inputs that will enable the HCP to independently review the basis for
the recommendations. The Final Guidance gives examples of software that
provide recommendations (i.e. mammography treatment plan, depression
treatment options) in a non time-critical manner but that do not provide
all six aspects described above. Therefore, they are considered devices
and should be regulated.

Over the past 25 years, only 521 AI software devices have been approved
by the FDA, mostly in radiology[8]. The Final Guidance has only recently
been published and it explicitly states that it is a non-binding
recommendation. It remains to be seen how the FDA will enforce these
recommendations and what actions the CDS and health AI/ML community will
take to comply.

FDA’s “Good ML Practice”

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Health Canada, and the
United Kingdom’s Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
(MHRA) have jointly identified 10 guiding principles that can inform the
development of Good Machine Learning Practice (GMLP) [9]. These
principles are primarily meant for clinical AI/ML models that will
influence the health of patients. However, some of these guidelines are
broader in scope, and are also applicable to knowledge discovery or
healthcare operations and business models.

Caution: The GMLP principles are just that—principles; they offer no
concrete guidance on best practices that can help satisfy these
principles.

In order to help with converting the principles to action, in this
section, we will present the ten GMLP principles, quote from FDA’s
commentary about the principles and cross-reference with the chapters in
the current book that discuss best practices that relate to each GMLP
principle.

FDA GMLP 1. Multi-Disciplinary Expertise Is Leveraged Throughout the
Total Product Life Cycle.

This principle advocates for “in-depth understanding of a model’s
intended integration into clinical workflow, and the desired benefits
and associated patient risks, can help ensure that ML-enabled medical
devices are safe and effective and address clinically meaningful needs
over the lifecycle of the device.” (The quoted text is directly adopted
from the FDA document.) This resonates with our BP practice
recommendations in chapter “Principles of Rigorous Development and of
Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”, which advocate for having a
concrete clinically-motivated problem formulation; our best practice
recommendations in chapter “Evaluation” help with the evaluation of the
model in terms of clinical effectiveness; and chapter “Characterizing,
Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML & AI Models in Clinical
and Organizational Application” helps with risk characterization and
management.

FDA GMLP 2. Good Software Engineering and Security Practices Are
Implemented.

“Model design is implemented with attention to the `fundamentals’: good
software engineering practices, data quality assurance, data management,
and robust cybersecurity practices.”

Data management and quality assurance are addressed in chapter “Data
Preparation, Transforms, Quality, and Management” and good software
engineering principles are described in chapters “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”, “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” and “Characterizing, Diagnosing and
Managing the Risk of Error of ML & AI Models in Clinical and
Organizational Application” (i.e., relevant to method and model
development, and mitigating the risks associated with clinical ML/AI).
Although cyberattacks can cause damage and disruption through ML/AI
models, we note that cybersecurity requires a holistic approach on the
healthcare institution’s part and the onus of defending a system from
cyberattacks should not, under typical circumstances, be placed
exclusively on ML/AI developers.

FDA GMLP 3. Clinical Study Participants and Data Sets Are Representative
of the Intended Patient Population.

We extensively covered the concept of generalization/validity in the
chapter on “Data Design” as inferring knowledge from the study sample
through the available population about the target population.

FDA GMLP 4. Training Data Sets Are Independent of Test Sets.

The model performance estimators (leave out validation,
cross-validation, bootstrap, external validation) in chapter
“Evaluation” and the guidelines for avoiding over-fitting, under-fitting
and model over/under confidence errors in chapter “Overfitting,
Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance
Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and AI” follow and
elaborate on this principle.

FDA GMLP 5. Selected Reference Datasets Are Based Upon Best Available
Methods.

Accepted, best available methods for developing a reference dataset
(that is, a reference standard) ensure that clinically relevant and well
characterized data are collected and the limitations of the reference
are understood. If available, accepted reference datasets in model
development and testing that promote and demonstrate model robustness
and generalizability across the intended patient population are used.
Chapters “Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and
AI Methods and Systems”, “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”,
and especially “Data Design” address the issue of proper data for
development and validation.

FDA GMLP 6. Model Design Is Tailored to the Available Data and Reflects
the Intended Use of the Device.

Selecting the best modeling algorithms for the task and data is a
fundamental tenet of this book. In earlier chapters, we drew attention
to the perils of ignoring the vast selection of existing methods in
favor of some particularly popular methods. Chapters “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health
Science”, “Foundations of Causal ML” explained the characteristics of
commonly used and state-of-the-art methods so that they can best be
matched to the clinical problem at hand. Chapter “The Development
Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” discusses the importance of deeply
understanding and formally describing the clinical problem to be solved,
as well as the capabilities of available algorithms, so that models can
be developed that serve the intended use. Chapter “Data Design”
describes how the training data can be designed and sampled so that it
supports these needs. Finally, chapters “Evaluation”, “Overfitting,
Underfitting and General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance
Pitfalls and Best Practices in Machine Learning and AI” provide detailed
guidance on how the model can be evaluated both in terms of performance,
risk and other factors related to the intended use.

FDA GMLP 7. Focus Is Placed on the Performance of the Human-AI Team.

“Where the model has a ‘human in the loop,’ human factors considerations
and the human interpretability of the model outputs are addressed with
emphasis on the performance of the Human-AI team, rather than just the
performance of the model in isolation.” Chapter “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems” places semantic clarity and model
interpretability/explainability as a major desired property. Chapters
“Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”, “An Appraisal and
Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare &
Health Science”, “Foundations of Causal ML” discuss interpretability of
many AI/ML models and algorithms. Chapters “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”, “The
Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models” and “Characterizing, Diagnosing and
Managing the Risk of Error of ML & AI Models in Clinical and
Organizational Application” discuss the role of explainable AI and
interpretable ML methods. Finally, chapter “From ‘Human versus Machine’
to ‘Human with Machine’” describes human cognitive biases as they
related to decision making and computer interaction, and discusses ways
to effectively combine the strengths of human and computer decisions
while minimizing their weaknesses.

FDA GMLP 8. Testing Demonstrates Device Performance during Clinically
Relevant Conditions.

“Statistically sound test plans are developed and executed to generate
clinically relevant device performance information independently of the
training data set. Considerations include the intended patient
population, important subgroups, clinical environment and use by the
Human-AI team, measurement inputs, and potential confounding factors.”

This principle is addressed in the evaluation methods, and error
management material in chapters “Evaluation”, “Overfitting, Underfitting
and General Model Overconfidence and Under-Performance Pitfalls and Best
Practices in Machine Learning and AI” and “Characterizing, Diagnosing
and Managing the Risk of Error of ML & AI Models in Clinical and
Organizational Application”.

FDA GMLP 9. Users Are Provided Clear, Essential Information.

FDA Principle 9 is that “users are provided ready access to clear,
contextually relevant information that is appropriate for the intended
audience (such as health care providers or patients) including: the
product’s intended use and indications for use, performance of the model
for appropriate subgroups, characteristics of the data used to train and
test the model, acceptable inputs, known limitations, user interface
interpretation, and clinical workflow integration of the model. Users
are also made aware of device modifications and updates from real-world
performance monitoring, the basis for decision-making when available,
and a means to communicate product concerns to the developer.”

Chapter “Reporting Standards, Certification/Accreditation, and
Reproducibility” describes the latest minimal information reporting
standards for health AI/ML and related models, critically reviews gaps,
and proposes that additional information across the range of best
practices in the book is included in such reporting.

FDA GMLP 10. Deployed Models Are Monitored for Performance and
Re-training Risks are Managed.

Specifically that: “deployed models have the capability to be monitored
in “real world” use with a focus on maintained or improved safety and
performance. Additionally, when models are periodically or continually
trained after deployment, there are appropriate controls in place to
manage risks of overfitting, unintended bias, or degradation of the
model (for example, input data drift) that may impact the safety and
performance of the model as it is used by the Human-AI team.” Monitoring
the real-world performance of models, re-training them, and the known
risks of continuous model training are discussed in chapter
“Characterizing, Diagnosing and Managing the Risk of Error of ML & AI
Models in Clinical and Organizational Application”.

Additional Regulatory Frameworks and Initiatives of Relevance

Recently, governments in the United States, European Union, and other
countries have sought to create policy and legal frameworks governing
the deployment and the use of AI/ML models and systems. The goal of
these regulatory frameworks is to expand the digital economy while
providing safety, quality, and ethical use standards for software that
is employed for all high-risk purposes, including clinical decision
support and other purposed affecting health [10, 11].

The AI Act is a landmark EU legislation to regulate Artificial
Intelligence based on its capacity to harm people [12]. Among other
provisions, it enforces an obligation for each EU country (or groups of
countries) to set up at least one regulatory sandbox, a controlled
environment, where AI technology could be tested safely. One of the ways
for an AI to fall into the high-risk category is if it is used in one of
the sectors listed under AIA Annex III, such as health, and would “pose
a risk of harm to the health, safety or fundamental rights of natural
persons in a way that produces legal effects concerning them or has an
equivalently significant effect”.

The final definition of AI in the AIA will have immense consequences as
to which systems are regulated and which can bypass regulation [13].

Moreover under the EU’s draft AI Act, open source developers would have
to adhere to guidelines for risk management, data governance, technical
documentation and transparency, as well as standards of accuracy and
cybersecurity (reinforcing the commentary in the present volume related
to the risks associated with open source code) [14].

The US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) following a
direction from the US Congress, issued recently [15, 16], the Artificial
Intelligence Risk Management Framework(AI RMF 1.0), a guidance document
for voluntary use by organizations designing, developing, deploying or
using AI systems to help manage the many risks of AI technologies.

NIST points out that this is a “voluntary framework aiming to help
develop and deploy AI technologies in ways that enable the United
States, other nations and organizations to enhance AI trustworthiness
while managing risks”. Also that “AI systems are ‘socio-technical’ in
nature, meaning they are influenced by societal dynamics and human
behavior. AI risks can emerge from the complex interplay of these
technical and societal factors, affecting people’s lives in situations
ranging from their experiences with online chatbots to the results of
job and loan applications.”

The AI RMF is divided into two parts. The first part discusses how
organizations can frame the risks related to AI and outlines the
characteristics of trustworthy AI systems. The second part, the core of
the framework, describes four specific functions—govern, map, measure,
and manage—to help organizations address the risks of AI systems in
practice. These functions can be applied in context-specific use cases
and at any stages of the AI life cycle.

In addition, NIST plans to launch a Trustworthy and Responsible AI
Resource Center to help organizations put the AI RMF 1.0 into practice.

In general, the landscape of AI/ML policy and law, both broadly and in
health sciences and healthcare, is fluid, rapidly evolving and
organizations should closely monitor relevant developments and develop
compliance readiness for adhering to laws and regulations, and for
aligning with voluntary frameworks promoting safe and accountable AI/ML.

Concepts of Ethical and Social Implications of Health AI/ML

We open this section with the observation that traditional Ethical,
Legal and Social Implications (ELSI) concerns, related to advanced Big
Data technologies, emphasized the risks associated with the use of data
for secondary research outside the scope of informed consent. Data
privacy risks in particular (e.g. because of unauthorized uses, or data
breaches [17]) describe an out-of-consent scope set of problems where
potential harm to patients is often hard to quantify or predict and may
even be unknowable in some cases.

As AI/ML is becoming more poised to affect human patients’ well-being, a
new set of ELSI challenges has emerged related to the performance,
efficiency, risk, interpretability, governance, and acceptance of this
technology. Models may under-perform or have high margins of error, or
preferentially benefit or harm a group of individuals, or create a set
of risks that may exist within the scope of consent and intended use. As
we will see in this section, some of these newer risks are, at least in
principle, directly measurable and addressable. Significant challenges
exist, however, in formulating the goals of ethical AI/ML as it relates
to problems of bias and equity, and in operationalizing it.

Overall the emerging field of ethical health AI/ML represents a fruitful
ground of scientific collaboration between ethicists, policy scholars,
patient/group advocates, and biomedical data scientists, where best
practices can eliminate ethical and social risks in systematic,
measurable and controllable ways.

Important Definitions & Concepts Related to Ethical Social Justice Implications of Health AI/ML

Definition: Minority health (MH) “refers to the distinctive health
characteristics and attributes of racial and/or ethnic minority groups,
as defined by the U.S. Management and Budget Office (OMB), that can be
socially disadvantaged due in part to being subject to potential
discriminatory acts” [18, 19]

Definition: Minority Health Populations. NIH uses the racial and ethnic
group classifications determined by the OMB. Currently the minority
racial and ethnic groups are American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian,
Black or African American, and Native Hawaiian or other Pacific
Islander. The ethnicity used is Latino or Hispanic. Although these five
categories are minimally required, the mixed or multiple race category
should be considered in analyses and reporting, when available.
Self-identification is the preferred means of obtaining race and ethnic
identity [18, 19].

Definition. Health equity means social justice in health (i.e., no one
is denied the possibility to be healthy for belonging to a group that
has historically been economically/socially disadvantaged) [20].
Margaret Whitehead defined health inequalities as health differences
that are avoidable, unnecessary, and unjust [21, 22].

Definition. Health Disparity. A health disparity (HD) is a health
difference that adversely affects disadvantaged populations, based on
one or more of the following health outcomes:

- Higher incidence and/or prevalence and earlier onset of disease.

- Higher prevalence of risk factors, unhealthy behaviors, or clinical
  measures in the causal pathway of a disease outcome.

- Higher rates of condition-specific symptoms, reduced global daily
  functioning, or self-reported health-related quality of life using
  standardized measures.

- Premature and/or excessive mortality from diseases where population
  rates differ.

- Greater global burden of disease using a standardized metric [18, 19].

Health disparities are the metric we use to measure progress toward
achieving health equity. A reduction in health disparities (in absolute
and relative terms) is evidence that we are moving toward greater health
equity. Moving toward greater equity is achieved by selectively
improving the health of those who are economically/socially
disadvantaged, not by a worsening the health of those in advantaged
groups [20, 21].

Definition. Populations with Health Disparities. For NIH, populations
that experience health disparities include:

- Racial and ethnic minority groups.

- People with lower socioeconomic status (SES).

- Underserved rural communities.

- Sexual and gender minority (SGM) groups.

Definition. Health Determinants. Factors that impact an individual’s
health and the risk of experiencing health disparities. Each of these
health determinants plays an important role in health disparities and
interacts in complex ways to impact an individual’s health. Health
Determinants capture areas that go beyond the social determinants and
include factors, such as individual behaviors, lifestyles, and social
responses to stress; biological processes, genetics, and epigenetics;
the physical environment; the sociocultural environment; social
determinants; and clinical events and interactions with the health care
and other systems [18, 19].

General Studies on ELSI for Health AI/ML

The ELSI literature on health AI is nascent but growing rapidly. Among
other efforts, various factors have been studied and used in order to
establish parameters for the ethical use of health AI/ML. We will
highlight here a few studies as being indicative of this emerging
scholarship.

Cartolovni et al. [23] conducted a scoping review that included 94 AI
ELSI related publications. They identified four “main clusters of
impact”: AI algorithms, physicians, patients, and healthcare in general.
The most prevalent issues were found to be patient safety, algorithmic
transparency, lack of proper regulation, liability & accountability,
impact on patient-physician relationship, and governance of AI empowered
healthcare.

Guan et al. [24] identified ethical risk factors of AI decision making
from the perspective of qualitative research, constructed a risk-factor
model of AI decision making ethical risks using rooting theory, and
explored risk management strategies. They point to technological
uncertainty, incomplete data, and management errors as the main sources
of ethical risks in AI decision making and find that the intervention of
risk governance elements can effectively block the social risks. Guan,
in a different study, [25] highlighted the importance of the roles of
governments in ethical auditing and the responsibilities of stakeholders
in an ethical governance system of health AI.

Price et al. [26] focused on privacy in the context of Big Data related
medical innovation. They discuss how to define health privacy; the
importance of equity, consent, and patient governance in data
collection; discrimination in data uses; and how to handle data
breaches.

Martinez-Martin et al. [27] investigates the ethical aspects of ambient
intelligence, a fast growing area of AI involving the use of contactless
sensors and contact-based wearable devices embedded in health-care (or
home) settings to collect data (e.g., images of physical spaces, audio
data, or body temperature). These sensors and devices are coupled with
machine learning algorithms to efficiently and effectively interpret
these data. These researchers point to ethical challenges around
privacy, data management, bias, fairness, and informed consent as
prerequisites for acceptance of the field and success of its goals.

In another study Martinez-Martin et al. [28] examine the ethical
challenges presented by direct-to-consumer (DTC) digital psychotherapy
services that do not involve oversight by a professional mental health
provider. They found that there is inadequate regulation in this area
that exacerbates concerns over safety, privacy, accountability, and
other ethical obligations to protect an individual in therapy. The types
of DTC services that present ethical challenges include apps that use a
digital platform to connect users to minimally trained nonprofessional
counselors, as well as services that provide counseling steered by
artificial intelligence and conversational agents.

Parviainen et al. [29] address the timely issues surrounding the
health-related use of chatbots. Such technology is not sufficiently
mature to be able to replace the judgements of health professionals. The
COVID-19 pandemic, however, has significantly increased the utilization
of health-oriented chatbots, for instance, as a conversational interface
to answer questions, recommend care options, check symptoms, and
complete tasks such as booking appointments.

They suggest the need for new approaches in professional ethics as the
large-scale deployment of artificial intelligence may revolutionize
professional decision-making and client-expert interaction in healthcare
organizations.

Racial Bias and AI/ML

In a case that attracted national attention (see also chapter “Lessons
Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In
Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of
Best Practices” as a case study of AI/ML failures) a model was used to
decide which patients have high severity of illness so that more
resources would be allocated to their treatment. The underlying
operating principle of allocating more resources to more seriously ill
patients and less resources to patients with non-serious disease is
generally sound. Unfortunately, the developers of the model decided to
use health expenditures (“cost”) as a proxy for the severity. Because
expenditures/cost are driven not only by severity (through intensity of
treatment) but also by access to healthcare, which itself is driven by
racial disparities in health, using cost as a proxy for severity led to
prioritizing less seriously ill patients of one racial group with better
access to care over another racial group with less access to care. The
analysis of [30] demonstrates the importance of not carelessly
substituting important variables with correlates, because this can lead
to systematic harm to populations of a particular race (or other
characteristic that should not be linked to the quality of care
received).

In a study aiming at revealing racial biases [31] the investigators
examined whether a ML model’s decisions were sensitive to the inclusion
of race as a predictive variable and found no biases in the examined
model. Without challenging the results of [31] (which would require
re-analysis of the data), we take the opportunity to point out a general
pitfall: the strategy employed for racial bias detection is fraught with
pitfalls and is not recommended for broad use. This is because of at
least three reasons:

Pitfall 16.2

Using race variable’s effect on model decision as a flawed criterion for
detecting racial bias:

1.  1.

    Race may have no effect in a model because other variables have the
    same information content as race. In other words, this bias
    detection strategy can systematically generate false negatives in
    certain distributions.

     

2.  2.

    Race may be a justifiable predictor variable if biological reasons
    (or, more broadly, well-justified standard of care) suggest its
    appropriateness. For example, if members of a racial group carry a
    genetic mutation that increases risk for a disease, then a
    diagnostic or risk model for that disease should use race (in the
    absence of genotyping information) without this being a negative
    bias. In other words this bias detection strategy can also generate
    systematic false positives.

     

3.  3.

    The Berkson bias (see chapter “Data Design”) can induce spurious
    correlations if in the hospital (or other selected) populations,
    race correlates with diagnosis, treatment, and/or other decisions
    that influence outcomes. In such cases, diagnosis, treatment, etc.
    models may benefit (improve in accuracy) from the inclusion of race,
    but this is a reflection of selection bias of the hospitalized
    population, rather than racial bias. This is another systematic
    false positive scenario for the race variable inclusion-exclusion
    strategy.

     

It is useful to illustrate the importance of incorporating race in AI/ML
models with the following example in Fig. 1. As demonstrated by this
example, it is generally a good idea to incorporate race (or other
group) variables in the models and optimize decisions for each group
separately.

[]

3 graphs with a positively correlating line. Left. Mixture of groups 1
and 2. All blue positives above, and red positives and negatives with
blue negatives on the other. Center and Right. Groups 1 and 2 separately
have positives and negatives grouped on either side.

Principles of Health Equity and AI/ML

The literature on AI/ML and health equity is growing. The current crop
of studies is pointing to several important common themes, but, as we
will see, it is occasionally not precise or technical enough to be
readily operationalized.

For example, [32] found that various AI/ML reporting standards do not
mention or do not have provisions for reporting how “fairness” is
achieved in AI/ML models. These authors also proposed a set of
recommendations:

- Engage members of the public and, in particular, members of
  marginalized communities in the process of determining acceptable
  fairness standards.

- Collect necessary data on vulnerable protected groups in order to
  perform audits of model function (e.g., on race, gender).

- Analyze and report model performance for different intersectional
  subpopulations at risk of unfair outcomes.

- Establish target thresholds and maximum disparities for model function
  between groups.

- Be transparent regarding the specific definitions of fairness that are
  used in the evaluation of a machine learning for healthcare (MLHC)
  model.

- Explicitly evaluate for disparate treatment and disparate impact in
  MLHC clinical trials.

- Commit to post-market surveillance to assess the ongoing real-world
  impact of MLHC models.

Chen et al. [33] provide a social-justice based framework and analysis
of all stages of ML creation and deployment. They make the following
recommendations:

  ---- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1.   Problems should be tackled by diverse teams and using frameworks that increase the probability that equity will be achieved. Further, historically understudied problems are important targets to practitioners looking to perform high-impact work.
  2.   Data collection should be framed as an important front-of-mind concern in the ML modeling pipeline, clear disclosures should be made about imbalanced datasets, and researchers should engage with domain experts to ensure that data reflecting the needs of underserved and understudied populations are gathered.
  3.   Outcome choice should reflect the task at hand and should preferably be unbiased. If the outcome label has ethical bias, the source of inequity should be accounted for in ML model design, leveraging literature that attempts to remove ethical biases during preprocessing, or with use of a reasonable proxy.
  4.   Reflection on the goals of the model is essential during development and should be articulated in a preanalysis plan. In addition to technical choices like loss function, researchers must interrogate how, and whether, a model should be developed to best answer a research question, as well as what caveats are included.
  5.   Audits should be designed to identify specific harms and should be paired with methods and procedures. Harms should be examined group by group, rather than at a population level. ML ethical design checklists are one possible tool to systematically enumerate and consider such ethical concerns prior to declaring success in a project.
  ---- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Gianfrancesco et al. [34] identify several potential problems in
implementing machine learning algorithms in health care systems with a
strong focus on equity and propose suggested solutions as follows:

- Problem1: Overreliance on Automation

  Solution:
  - Ensure interdisciplinary approach and continuous human involvement.

  - Conduct follow-up studies to ensure results are meaningful.

- Problem 2: Algorithms Based on Biased Data

  Solution:
  - Identify the target population and select training and testing sets
    accordingly.

  - Build and test algorithms in socioeconomically diverse health care
    systems.

  - Ensure that key variables, such as race/ethnicity, language, and
    social determinants of health, are being captured and included in
    algorithms when appropriate.

  - Test algorithms for potential discriminatory behavior throughout
    data processing.

  - Develop feedback loops to monitor and verify output and validity.

- Problem 3: Non-clinically Meaningful Algorithms

- Solution:
  - Focus on clinically important improvements in relevant outcomes
    rather than strict performance metrics.

  - Impose human values in algorithms at the cost of efficiency.

McCradden et al. [35] provide recommendations for ethical approaches to
issues of bias in health models of machine learning. These authors
sharply criticize efforts to impose equal outputs of ML models
(“neutral” models; e.g. [36]) given that underlying medical reasons may
warrant such differences (see also Pitfall 16.1 (2) above). These
authors also stress the importance of model transparency, model
development transparency, good model goals and data design, model
auditing post-deployment and “engaging diverse knowledge sources”. The
last recommendation means that “Ethical analysis should consider
real-world consequences for affected groups, weigh benefits and risks of
various approaches, and engage stakeholders to come to the most
supportable conclusion. Therefore, analysis needs to focus on the
downstream effects on patients rather than adopting the presumption that
fairness is accomplished solely in the metrics of the system”.

Some Technical Observations on the Importance of Causal Modeling, Equivalence Classes, and System-Level Thinking

Causal modeling for detecting and correcting racial bias. Prosperi et
al. [37] emphasize the importance of using causal modeling for health
AI. We will use an example motivated by the general parameters of the
racial bias case study incident analyzed in [30]. This example
demonstrates the generally-applicable suitability of causal approaches
for avoiding and detecting racial bias (also discussed in section
“General Studies on ELSI for Health AI/ML” and chapter “Lessons Learned
from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In
Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of
Best Practices”). Figure 2 shows the scenario where a racial group has
limited access to healthcare compared to other groups. In that (socially
unjust) environment, race determines health access. The differential
access to care, for the same level of illness severity, leads to less
treatment intensity received than other groups who have better access.
Treatment intensity determines health expenditures (cost incurred by the
health care provider). The left side of the graph depicts recent history
and on the right side, present time where decisions have to be made
about allocating scarce resources (i.e., the treatment intensity
variable). Present-time treatment intensity is affected by severity of
illness and determines health expenditure/cost. Severity of illness and
treatment intensity determine medical outcomes.

[]

A flow diagram includes race, health access, treatment intensity, health
expenditure, and illness severity over a historical time period. Present
time continues with illness severity and includes treatment intensity,
medical outcomes, and health expenditure.

Figure 3 now switches attention to the same scenario with some variables
unobserved (as commonly happens in real-life modeling). It also shows
how a spurious correlation develops between past health expenditure and
present severity of illness (through past severity of illness).

[]

A flow diagram includes race, health access, treatment intensity, health
expenditure, illness severity, treatment intensity, medical outcomes,
and health expenditure. The health expenditure and illness severity of
historical times, and illness severity of present time are outlined as a
group.

Finally, Fig. 4 shows how the present day picture (with several
variables unobserved) looks to the analyst. A striking characteristic of
the model is that race causally influences treatment intensity. There is
no medical reason for this to happen, and thus this should alert the
analyst to investigate why such a racial bias exists in the process that
generated the data. Moreover, past health expenditure will be flagged by
latent variable detection algorithms as confounded or possibly
confounded and is not detected as definitively causal for medical
outcomes. Using past health expenditures as proxy for the severity of
illness (which is causal) will therefore not be warranted by the model.

[]

A graph depicting the present time begins with a race that points with
an exclamation mark to treatment intensity. Race also points to past
health expenditure, which further points to medical outcomes with a
question mark. Treatment intensity points to medical outcomes and health
expenditure.

By comparison, if the same analyst builds a (optimally predicitve and
compact) predictive model for medical outcomes, such a model would look
like a function of {Past Health expenditures, and current intensity of
treatment}. Race would most likely drop out of such a model because it
is independent of medical outcomes given past expenditures and treatment
intensity. The model would also tend to predict medical outcomes well.
The analyst would be blinded by a purely predictive model to the role of
race and may also be led to falsely believe that such a model can be
used to guide health resource allocation (treatment intensity) to the
patient who need it the most and expect that outcomes will improve.

This example is paradigmatic of a general rule useful for applied
analysis which exploits algorithmic detection of causal paths to reveal
racial biases and inequitable practices.

Causal-Path-to-Outcomes Principle of Bias Detection: If there are one or
more causal paths from race or other minority, marginalized or
underserved population indicator variables to medical decisions that
affect outcomes and they are not medically justified, this indicates an
unethical bias that should be addressed (in the modeling, and/or in the
practice that the model captures).

Ethical implications of equivalence class modeling for racial and other
bias detection. If a large equivalence class exists for predictively
optimal models, it is entirely possible for measured factors indicative
of racial or other bias to escape detection by being replaced in the
model by information equivalent variables. This can happen maliciously
or accidentally, if the equivalence class is large and algorithms used
cannot model the equivalence class but instead choose a random member.

To illustrate, consider a data distribution where race (or any other
variable indicative of bias) is equivalent with many proxy variables
with respect to its influence to an important decision or outcome. Then
it is entirely possible for modelers and auditors to miss that a
seemingly innocuous feature (or set of features) are information
equivalent with race or encapsulate its information with respect to the
outcome.

Pitfall 16.3

Standard statistical practices such as measuring collinearity are not
sufficient solutions for detecting information equivalence, since
collinearity measures whether variable set S is highly correlated with
race (or other bias factor) rather than whether race and S have the same
information content with respect to sensitive decisions and outcomes.

For more information on equivalence classes refer to chapter “Lessons
Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In
Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of
Best Practices” (and for algorithms capable of discovering them in
chapters “An Appraisal and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods
Applicable in Healthcare & Health Science” and “Principles of Rigorous
Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI Methods and Systems”).

Ethical implications of system-level thinking when designing AI/ML
models. Oftentimes, AI/ML models are created within a narrow context and
without having access to the “big picture” of a health system. For
example, consider a hypothetical model designed to calculate risk of
death for patients with acute pneumonia if admitted or not admitted in
the Pulmonary ICU of a hospital. Assume that the model is highly
accurate and can identify all patients that will receive significant
benefit from the ICU and those who will not. Further assume that for the
target population of this model the expected admissions (if the model’s
recommendation is followed) will not exceed ICU capacity. Unfortunately,
the model cannot be deployed on those grounds alone, if we consider that
other patients’ needs may “compete” for the same pulmonary ICU beds,
such as patients with acute asthma or other life-threatening pulmonary
diseases. Assume further that a second model is built to decide who
should be admitted from this second class of patients and is similarly
accurate. However, it may well be the case that the combined recommended
admissions by the two models now exceed the ICU’s capacity. This
scenario points to an obvious incongruity between the two models. Like
any scarce resource allocation problem that may affect patient’s
welfare, this scenario is paradigmatic of serious ethical dilemmas that
must be managed carefully and responsibly.

In a complex health system much more numerous, complex and subtle such
interactions may combine and sabotage successful deployment and use of
the health system’s AI/ML ecosystem.

To use an electrical engineering analogy, the ML models function as
components of a larger system that presently lacks protections against
overloading the system. Well-designed electrical devices are engineered
in such a way that their input and output obeys specifications ensuring
that a system of interconnected such units will function properly.

What are the protections that can be enforced to make a complex system
of AI/ML and human processes work harmoniously with one another?
Technical approaches to solving this problem include:

1.  (a)

    Develop models for locally optimized decisions and then use
    operations research, multi-objective optimization, and other
    integrative planning and management optimization frameworks to
    optimize their combined outputs [38–40]. AI/ML planning and ML
    systems can also help in optimizing such higher-level systems [41].

     

2.  (b)

    Build in the AI/Ml models, from the ground up, the interactions
    among the various components of the health system so that the models
    are aware of, and are designed to satisfy, the higher level
    “objective functions”.

     

3.  (c)

    Pursue a hybrid approach where some problem solving areas are
    narrowly addressed and others jointly.

     

In general, the first approach is more modular and scalable, assuming
that interactions can be managed by the subsequent
combination/optimization. The second approach can capture important
decision interactions that may be invisible at a higher level. These
distinctions are analogous to stacking individual model outputs versus
building combined models (chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare & Health
Science”). The third approach is more flexible and should be
advantageous, if implemented correctly.

Non-technical approaches, include:

1.  (a)

    Appropriate governance and oversight of the AI/ML that has the
    large-scale view of the role and function of the AI/ML models in a
    system context.

     

2.  (b)

    Initiating the creation of AI/ML by not only local problems (e.g.,
    the needs of a small specialty unit), but these same local problems
    informed by larger perspectives and considerations, as well. Or
    conversely initiating large-scale goals for the AI/ML that is then
    addressed in a divide-and-conquer focused-model/system manner.

     

Guidelines for Ethical Health AI/ML (with a Focus on Health Equity)

We will conclude this chapter with recommended guidelines toward the
overarching goals of using AI to create benefit to individuals and
populations and not harm. A particular focus here will be on use of
health AI/ML to reduce disparities and improve health equity.

Within these general directions we differentiate between AI/ML modeling
that seeks to understand weaknesses and areas of improvement in the
healthcare system and health science research (i.e., models geared
toward uncovering and detecting factors compromising health or health
equity), versus models for optimizing decisions, changing practices,
individualizing decisions, and influencing policy.

We will call the first type of models Models for Understanding and the
latter category, Action Models. As the guidelines show, these two models
require different treatment. We will also interleave rationale for some
of the recommendations (when such rationale is not obvious from prior
discussion).

Best Practice 16.3

Health AI/ML should strive to always benefit and never cause harm to any
individual or group of individuals. Do not design, develop or deploy
models that make unnecessary and avoidable errors, or are grossly
inefficient, or harmful in any way to any individual or group of
individuals.

This book has described, across many chapters, many recommended
practices toward implementing the above goal. In the remainder we will
present best practices that support the above goal but specifically
strengthen it for health equity, fairness and social justice.

Best Practice 16.4

AI should strive to decrease, and ensure that it does not increase
health disparities. Do not design, develop or deploy models that may
increase health disparities or systematically benefit or harm specific
groups over others. Whenever possible seek to design, develop or deploy
models that increase health equity.

Best Practice 16.5

Importance of an ethical, equity and social justice-sensitive culture of
health AI/ML.

1.  1.

    Cultivate a culture promoting health equity values and is broadly
    ethics-sensitive within the data science team.

     

2.  2.

    Ensure proper training in health equity and overall biomedical
    ethics of all data scientists working on the project.

     

3.  3.

    Participate in organizational efforts to build and sustain an
    organizational culture promoting strong biomedical ethics values.

     

4.  4.

    Seek advice and active involvement from ethics experts, patients,
    patient advocates, and community representatives regarding possible
    harm of the contemplated AI/ML work to individuals, and threats to
    health equity. Seek to obtain insights, guidance and community
    support on how the AI/ML work can lead to reduction of disparities.

     

5.  5.

    Hold yourself and others accountable to the above principles and
    aims.

     

Best Practice 16.6

Data Design must support health equity. Always collect data on health
determinants especially those intertwined with health disparities and
use them in modeling along with all other data relevant to the problem
at hand. Ensure that representation of underserved and minority groups
is adequate and well-aligned with ethical and health justice principles.

Best Practice 16.7

Model development and evaluation must support health equity.

1.  1.

    Always, during problem formulation, data design, and model
    development, validation and deployment stages, consider and actively
    pursue modeling that does not compromise (and ideally benefits)
    equity.

     

2.  2.

    Analyze the model decisions with respect to health determinant
    variables. Use interpretable/explainable models, causal modeling,
    and equivalence class modeling in order to develop a robust
    understanding of how the model’s output may affect health equity and
    what related biases the model may exhibit. Fix problems related to
    bias.

     

3.  3.

    If medical outcomes are not part of the model, and only intermediate
    proxies are modeled, examine their suitability. Also examine how
    model decisions affect outcomes post model deployment. Study how
    health determinants affect outcomes via the model’s function.

     

Best Practice 16.8

Revealing racial bias and discriminatory practices. Use AI/ML to reveal
harmful biases in health care, and health science practices (in
aggregate and individually). Use the models to flag such biases and
suggest ways to remove them. Models that reveal biases in order to
correct them, by necessity capture the bias variables, their effects and
interactions. “Sterilizing” these models from the bias they model,
defeats the purpose of their existence and their value.

The “Causal-Path-to-Outcomes Principle of Bias Detection”. If there are
one or more causal paths from race or other minority population
indicator variables, to outcomes and they are not medically justified,
this indicates an ethical bias that should be addressed (either in the
modeling, or in the practice that the model captures).

Best Practice 16.9

Equitable access to beneficial AI. Ensure that all who would benefit
from an AI/ML model have access to it.

Best Practice 16.10

System-level interactions and their ethical implications. AI/ML models,
when deployed, will not operate in a vacuum. Different models designed
for different populations when optimized separately for the individual
populations, may be non-enforceable because they may “hit a wall” of
limited resources. In such cases, system-level planning, goal-setting,
and technical solutions must be brought to bear to optimize
multi-objective functions and systems of local AI/ML respecting ethical
principles and factors.

Key Concepts Discussed in This Chapter

Clinical Decision Support

ISO 14971 standard for risk management for medical devices

Medical Device

Benefit, Harm, Risk, Risk management

FDA’s Final Guidance for AI-based clinical decision support

Minority health

NIH Minority health populations

Health equity, health inequity, health disparity

Populations with health disparities

Health determinants

Causal-Path-to-Outcomes Principle of bias detection

Pitfalls Discussed in This Chapter

Pitfall 16.1. The ISO 14971 is not a implementation standard. It
mandates that certain actions to be taken but does not prescribe exactly
how they will be carried out.

Pitfall 16.2. Using race variable’s effect on model decision as a flawed
criterion for detecting racial bias:

1.  1.

    Race may have no effect in a model because other variables have the
    same information content as race. In other words, this bias
    detection strategy can systematically generate false negatives in
    certain distributions.

     

2.  2.

    Race may be a justifiable predictor variable if biological reasons
    (or, more broadly, well-justified standard of care) suggest its
    appropriateness. For example, if members of a racial group carry a
    genetic mutation that increases risk for a disease, then a
    diagnostic or risk model for that disease should use race (in the
    absence of genotyping information) without this being a negative
    bias. In other words this bias detection strategy can also generate
    systematic false positives.

     

3.  3.

    The Berkson bias (see chapter “Data Design”) can induce spurious
    correlations if in the hospital (or other selected) populations,
    race correlates with diagnosis, treatment, and/or other decisions
    that influence outcomes. In such cases, diagnosis, treatment, etc.
    models may benefit (improve in accuracy) from the inclusion of race,
    but this is a reflection of selection bias of the hospitalized
    population, rather than racial bias. This is another systematic
    false positive scenario for the race variable inclusion-exclusion
    strategy.

     

Pitfall 16.3. Standard statistical practices such as measuring
collinearity are not sufficient solutions for detecting information
equivalence, since collinearity measures whether variable set S is
highly correlated with race (or other bias factor) rather than whether
race and S have the same information content with respect to sensitive
decisions and outcomes.

Best Practices Discussed in This Chapter

Best Practice 16.1. Consider all relevant risks in different phases of
the life cycle. Risks can change over time, e.g., the probability or
severity of risk can change due to advancements in treatments or due to
patient population drift.

Best Practice 16.2. The rationale for the risk management plan is that
having a plan produced ahead of time makes it less likely that a risk
management step is overlooked or accidentally skipped.

Best Practice 16.3. Health AI/ML should strive to always benefit and
never cause harm to any individual or group of individuals. Do not
design, develop or deploy models that make unnecessary and avoidable
errors, or are grossly inefficient, or harmful in any way to any
individual or group of individuals.

Best Practice 16.4 AI should strive to decrease, and ensure that it does
not increase health disparities. Do not design, develop or deploy models
that may increase health disparities or systematically benefit or harm
specific groups over others. Whenever possible seek to design, develop
or deploy models that increase health equity.

Best Practice 16.5. Importance of an ethical, equity and social
justice--sensitive culture of health AI/ML.

1.  1.

    Cultivate a culture promoting health equity values and is broadly
    ethics-sensitive within the data science team.

     

2.  2.

    Ensure proper training in health equity and overall biomedical
    ethics of all data scientists working on the project.

     

3.  3.

    Participate in organizational efforts to build and sustain an
    organizational culture promoting strong biomedical ethics values.

     

4.  4.

    Seek advice and active involvement from ethics experts, patients,
    patient advocates, and community representatives regarding possible
    harm of the contemplated AI/ML work to individuals, and threats to
    health equity. Seek to obtain insights, guidance and community
    support on how the AI/ML work can lead to reduction of disparities.

     

5.  5.

    Hold yourself and others accountable to the above principles and
    aims.

     

Best Practice 16.6 Data Design must support health equity. Always
collect data on health determinants especially those intertwined with
health disparities and use them in modeling along with all other data
relevant to the problem at hand. Ensure that representation of
underserved and minority groups is adequate and well-aligned with
ethical and health justice principles.

Best Practice 16.7 Model development and evaluation must support health
equity.

1.  1.

    Always, during problem formulation, data design, and model
    development, validation and deployment stages, consider and actively
    pursue modeling that does not compromise (and ideally benefits)
    equity.

     

2.  2.

    Analyze the model decisions with respect to health determinant
    variables. Use interpretable/explainable models, causal modeling,
    and equivalence class modeling in order to develop a robust
    understanding of how the model’s output may affect health equity and
    what related biases the model may exhibit. Fix problems related to
    bias.

     

3.  3.

    If medical outcomes are not part of the model, and only intermediate
    proxies are modeled, examine their suitability. Also examine how
    model decisions affect outcomes post model deployment. Study how
    health determinants affect outcomes via the model’s function.

     

Best Practice 16.8. Revealing racial bias and discriminatory practices.
Use AI/ML to reveal harmful biases in health care, and health science
practices (in aggregate and individually). Use the models to flag such
biases and suggest ways to remove them. Models that reveal biases in
order to correct them, by necessity capture the bias variables, their
effects and interactions. “Sterilizing” these models from the bias they
model, defeats the purpose of their existence and their value.

The “Causal-Path-to-Outcomes Principle of Bias Detection”. If there are
one or more causal paths from race or other minority population
indicator variables, to outcomes and they are not medically justified,
this indicates an ethical bias that should be addressed (either in the
modeling, or in the practice that the model captures).

Best Practice 16.9. Equitable access to beneficial AI. Ensure that all
who would benefit from an AI/ML model have access to it.

Best Practice 16.10. System-level interactions and their ethical
implications. AI/ML models, when deployed, will not operate in a vacuum.
Different models designed for different populations when optimized
separately for the individual populations, may be non-enforceable
because they may “hit a wall” of limited resources. In such cases,
system-level planning, goal-setting, and technical solutions must be
brought to bear to optimize multi-objective functions and systems of
local AI/ML respecting ethical principles and factors.

Questions and Discussion Topics in This Chapter

1.  1.

    Explain the relationship between “intended use” and the concepts of
    target population, accessible population, study sample, inclusion
    and exclusion criteria from chapter “The Development Process and
    Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and
    Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Models”.

     

2.  2.

    What is the difference between risk assessment, risk estimation,
    risk evaluation, and risk control?

     

3.  3.

    Consider the risk model (from chapter “Data Design in Biomedical
    AI/ML”) used in diabetic patients that helps assess patients’ risk
    of major cardiac events. The risk assessed by this model can be used
    for determining whether the patient should receive more aggressive
    treatment.
    1.  (a)

        What are the potential benefits?

         

    2.  (b)

        What are the potential harms?

         

    3.  (c)

        Are the risks of these harms estimable? If so, how would you
        estimate them?

         

     

4.  4.

    What potential problems can you think of when AI models are used for
    risk evaluation?

     

5.  5.

    The ISO standard requires “risk evaluation”, which is the step that
    determines whether a risk is acceptable, but does not provide
    guidance on how to perform this step. Explain how measures of
    clinical utility from chapter “Evaluation” relate to “risk
    evaluation”. Explain how the decision curve (chapter “Evaluation”)
    can be used for “risk evaluation”.

     

6.  6.

    Risk assessment includes the malfunction of models in its scope.
    1.  (a)

        Can you think of malfunctions that an AI-based prognostic model
        could experience?

         

    2.  (b)

        More generally, what kind of malfunctions can AI-based models
        experience?

         

     

7.  7.

    Describe how you would go about using ML to model a care provider’s
    decisions in such a way that the model may reveal biased treatment
    of certain groups of patients. Use ideas from explanation methods
    described in chapter “The Development Process and Lifecycle of
    Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML
    Models” and the “Causal-Path-to-Outcomes Principle of Bias
    Detection”. In particular, such a model can be thought as “global
    surrogate model” for a black box AI (which is the human care
    provider in this case).
    1.  (a)

        What kind of data would you need?

         

    2.  (b)

        What would be the technical challenges and pitfalls in creating
        such a model?

         

    3.  (c)

        What would it mean for such a model to be high fidelity?

         

    4.  (d)

        Assuming that an accurate model is created, how would you put it
        in practice to alert against biased care provider decisions or
        actions.

         

    5.  (e)

        How would you use the model to help in the education of the care
        provider?

         

     

8.  8.

    This is a self-introspective exercise – no need to report to class.
    What are your personal knowledge, attitudinal, or experiential gaps
    regarding a better understanding and practice of health equity and
    other ethical issues that once addressed will make a you a better
    health care or health sciences professional?

     

9.  9.

    This is a self-reflective exercise – no need to report to class.
    Going back to prior work of yours, what limitations do you see in
    light of this chapter in terms of ELSI dimensions? How would you
    improve past work if you would do it anew today?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Osheroff JA, Teich JM, Middleton B, Steen EB, Wright A, Detmer DE. A
    roadmap for national action on clinical decision support. J Am Med
    Inform Assoc. 2007;14:141–5.Crossref

2.  2.

    Campbell RJ. The five rights of clinical decision support: CDS tools
    helpful for meeting meaningful use. J AHIMA. 2013;84:42–7. (web
    version updated February 2016)

3.  3.

    McCallie D, Mandel J, Shekleton K, Strasberg H, Narus S, Marshall P,
    DeVault P, Vetter I. Beyond SMART remote decision support with CDS
    hooks. AMIA annual symposium proceedings 2016; 2016.

4.  4.

    ISO 14971:2019, Medical devices—application of risk management to
    medical devices. Paragraph 3.10

5.  5.

    FDA. Clinical decision support software guidance for Industry and
    Food and Drug Administration Staff. In: U.S. Food and Drug
    Administration; 2022. https://​www.​fda.​gov/​media/​109618/​download.
    Accessed 12 Dec 2022.

6.  6.

    21st Century Cures Act. H.R. 34, 114th Congress; 2016.
    https://​www.​gpo.​gov/​fdsys/​pkg/​BILLS-114hr34enr/​pdf/​BILLS-114hr34enr.​pdf.
    Accessed 12 Dec 2022

7.  7.

    FDA. Clinical decision support software; draft guidance for Industry
    and Food and Drug Administration Staff; 2019.
    https://​www.​federalregister.​gov/​documents/​2019/​09/​27/​2019-21000/​clinical-decision-support-software-draft-guidance-for-industry-and-food-and-drug-administration.
    Accessed 12 Dec 2022.

8.  8.

    FDA. Artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML)-enabled
    medical devices; 2022.
    https://​www.​fda.​gov/​medical-devices/​software-medical-device-samd/​artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning-aiml-enabled-medical-devices.
    Accessed 12 Dec 2022.

9.  9.

    FDA, Health Canada, UK MHRA. Good machine learning practice for
    medical device development: guiding principles; 2021.
    https://​www.​fda.​gov/​medical-devices/​software-medical-device-samd/​good-machine-learning-practice-medical-device-development-guiding-principles

10. 10.

    AI Act: co-rapporteurs seek closing high-risk classification,
    sandboxes. Euractiv.​com.
    https://​www.​euractiv.​com/​section/​artificial-intelligence/​news/​ai-act-co-rapporteurs-seek-closing-high-risk-classification-sandboxes/​

11. 11.

    Online collection of all of the official EU AI Act documents.
    https://​artificialintell​igenceact.​eu/​documents/​

12. 12.

    European Commission: proposal for a regulation laying down
    harmonised rules on artificial intelligence; 21 April 2021.
    https://​digital-strategy.​ec.​europa.​eu/​en/​library/​proposal-regulation-laying-down-harmonised-rules-artificial-intelligence

13. 13.

    Bryson JJ. Europe is in danger of using the wrong definition of AI.
    Wired Magazine; 2022.
    https://​www.​wired.​com/​story/​artificial-intelligence-regulation-european-union/​

14. 14.

    Engler A. The EU’s attempt to regulate open-source AI is counter
    productive. Brookings.edu; 2022.
    https://​www.​brookings.​edu/​blog/​techtank/​2022/​08/​24/​the-eus-attempt-to-regulate-open-source-ai-is-counterproductiv​e/​

15. 15.

    NIST risk management framework aims to improve trustworthiness of
    artificial intelligence. NIST Januray 26, 2023.
    https://​www.​nist.​gov/​news-events/​news/​2023/​01/​nist-risk-management-framework-aims-improve-trustworthiness-artificial

16. 16.

    AI Risk Management Framework. NIST.
    https://​www.​nist.​gov/​itl/​ai-risk-management-framework

17. 17.

    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office for Civil
    Rights. Breach portal.
    https://​ocrportal.​hhs.​gov/​ocr/​breach/​breach_​report.​jsf

18. 18.

    National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities.
    Minority health and health disparities: definitions and parameters.
    https://​www.​nimhd.​nih.​gov/​about/​strategic-plan/​nih-strategic-plan-definitions-and-parameters.​html

19. 19.

    Executive Office of the President, U.S. Management and Budget
    Office. Standards for maintaining, collecting, and presenting
    federal data on race and ethnicity; 2016.
    https://​www.​federalregister.​gov/​documents/​2016/​09/​30/​2016-23672/​standards-for-maintaining-collecting-and-presenting-federal-data-on-race-and-ethnicity

20. 20.

    Braveman P. What are health disparities and health equity? We need
    to be clear. Public Health Reports. 2014;129(1_suppl2):5–8.Crossref

21. 21.

    Whitehead M, Dahlgren G. Concepts and principles for tackling social
    inequities in health: Levelling up Part 1. World Health
    Organization: Studies on social and economic determinants of
    population health, 2, pp. 460–474; 2006.

22. 22.

    Whitehead M. The concepts and principles of equity and health.
    Health Promotion Int. 1991;6(3):217–28.Crossref

23. 23.

    Čartolovni A, Tomičić A, Mosler EL. Ethical, legal, and social
    considerations of AI-based medical decision-support tools: a scoping
    review. Int J Med Inform. 2022;161:104738.Crossref

24. 24.

    Guan H, Dong L, Zhao A. Ethical risk factors and mechanisms in
    artificial intelligence decision making. Behav Sci.
    2022;12(9):343.Crossref

25. 25.

    Guan J. Artificial intelligence in healthcare and medicine:
    promises, ethical challenges and governance. Chin Med Sci J.
    2019;34(2):76–83.

26. 26.

    Price WN, Cohen IG. Privacy in the age of medical big data. Nat Med.
    2019;25(1):37–43.Crossref

27. 27.

    Martinez-Martin N, Luo Z, Kaushal A, Adeli E, Haque A, Kelly SS,
    Wieten S, Cho MK, Magnus D, Fei-Fei L, Schulman K. Ethical issues in
    using ambient intelligence in health-care settings. Lancet Digital
    Health. 2021;3(2):e115–23.Crossref

28. 28.

    Martinez-Martin N, Kreitmair K. Ethical issues for
    direct-to-consumer digital psychotherapy apps: addressing
    accountability, data protection, and consent. JMIR Mental Health.
    2018;5(2):e9423.Crossref

29. 29.

    Parviainen J, Rantala J. Chatbot breakthrough in the 2020s? An
    ethical reflection on the trend of automated consultations in health
    care. Med Health Care Philos. 2022;25(1):61–71.Crossref

30. 30.

    Obermeyer Z, Powers B, Vogeli C, Mullainathan S. Dissecting racial
    bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations.
    Science. 2019;366(6464):447–53.Crossref

31. 31.

    Kostick-Quenet KM, Cohen IG, Gerke S, Lo B, Antaki J, Movahedi F,
    Njah H, Schoen L, Estep JE, Blumenthal-Barby JS. Mitigating racial
    bias in machine learning. J Law Med Ethics.
    2022;50(1):92–100.Crossref

32. 32.

    Gichoya JW, McCoy LG, Celi LA, Ghassemi M. Equity in essence: a call
    for operationalising fairness in machine learning for healthcare.
    BMJ Health Care Inform. 2021;28(1)

33. 33.

    Chen IY, Pierson E, Rose S, Joshi S, Ferryman K, Ghassemi M. Ethical
    machine learning in healthcare. Annu Rev Biomed Data Sci.
    2021;4:123–44.Crossref

34. 34.

    Gianfrancesco MA, Tamang S, Yazdany J, Schmajuk G. Potential biases
    in machine learning algorithms using electronic health record data.
    JAMA Intern Med. 2018;178(11):1544–7.Crossref

35. 35.

    McCradden MD, Joshi S, Mazwi M, Anderson JA. Ethical limitations of
    algorithmic fairness solutions in health care machine learning.
    Lancet Digital Health. 2020;2(5):e221–3.Crossref

36. 36.

    Fletcher RR, Nakeshimana A, Olubeko O. Addressing fairness, bias,
    and appropriate use of artificial intelligence and machine learning
    in global health. Front Artif Intellig. 2021;3:561802.Crossref

37. 37.

    Prosperi M, Guo Y, Sperrin M, Koopman JS, Min JS, He X, Rich S, Wang
    M, Buchan IE, Bian J. Causal inference and counterfactual prediction
    in machine learning for actionable healthcare. Nat Mach Intellig.
    2020;2(7):369–75.Crossref

38. 38.

    Winston WL. Operations research: applications and algorithms.
    Cengage Learning; 2022.

39. 39.

    Rais A, Viana A. Operations research in healthcare: a survey. Int
    Trans Operat Res. 2011;18(1):1–31.Crossref

40. 40.

    Marler RT, Arora JS. Survey of multi-objective optimization methods
    for engineering. Struct Multidiscip Optimiz. 2004;26:369–95.Crossref

41. 41.

    Pianykh OS, Guitron S, Parke D, Zhang C, Pandharipande P, Brink J,
    Rosenthal D. Improving healthcare operations management with machine
    learning. Nat Mach Intellig. 2020;2(5):266–73.Crossref

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_17

Reporting Standards, Certification/Accreditation, and Reproducibility

Gyorgy Simon¹   and Constantin Aliferis¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

Abstract

This chapter covers the interrelated topics of (a) enhancing the
quality, safety and reproducibility of clinical AI/ML via reporting
standards frameworks; (b) recent efforts for accrediting health care
provider organizations for AI readiness and maturity; (c) professional
certification; and (d) education and related accreditation in the space
of educational programs of data science and biomedical informatics
specific to AI/ML.

Keywords

Reporting StandardsTRIPOD (and other common
standards)CertificationAccreditation

Reporting Standards

An essential element of successful application of a previously developed
and validated model is to have documented exactly the intent of the
model, its method of construction, the data used, the analytical
modeling, the characteristics of the intended application population and
the expected generalization performance and safety characteristics.
These pieces of information can enable third parties, independent of the
developers, to evaluate the rigor of the models, determine the
appropriateness of their application to their settings, and perform
further evaluations, refinements and enhancements as needed. For all the
above to be feasible, sufficient documentation and reporting of the
model development and validation process must exist. Certain narrower
subsets of the above functions fall also under the rubric of scientific
reproducibility, which is a major indicator of reliable science, of
AI/ML models with a high likelihood of successful application in
additional populations and settings. Reporting standards have been
devised in the scientific publication sphere to facilitate these goals.
However, these reporting standards can also be applied to internal
organizational documentation practices.

The publication reporting standards prescribe a minimal set of
information that different types of scientific publications in health
sciences must include. They are not designed to improve research
quality, study design or any aspect of research and development other
than reproducibility. Even when publication is not a primary goal, these
reporting standards can be useful as a guide for internal documentation
of AI/ML model development.

In this chapter, we review and synthesize several existing reporting
standards, and comment on their usefulness and applicability to AI/ML
development.

Reporting standards prescribe a minimal set of information that needs to
be included in the model description.

Problems with reporting has been recognized as early as 1929 [1], and
several guidelines have been proposed. The first evidence-based
recommendations, CONSORT, have been published for clinical trials in
1996. These guidelines have established a protocol for developing
reporting standards, for disseminating these guidelines, and recognized
the need for collaboration among various stakeholders, including the
researchers and the journals. The most established organization for
reporting guidelines is the Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparancy Of
heath Research, EQUATOR [2]. In their own words, “The EQUATOR Network is
an ‘umbrella’ organization that brings together researchers, medical
journal editors, peer reviewers, developers of reporting guidelines,
research funding bodies and other collaborators with mutual interest in
improving the quality of research publications and of research itself.”

The EQUATOR Network has over 250 reporting standards, covering a
multitude of study types and settings. There are core reporting
standards for several areas relevant to this book, including randomized
trials (CONSORT), observational studies (STROBE), diagnostic accuracy
(STARD), genetic risks prediction (GRIPS), and others. The most relevant
standard is the Transparent Reporting of a Multivariable Prediction
Model for Individual Prognosis or Diagnosis (TRIPOD).

Purpose and Value of Documenting AI/ML Models

Decision makers at health care provider organizations may appraise
published models to determine appropriateness for particular clinical
applications. Researchers may wish to replicate the same modeling
process to compare the resulting model with alternatives. AI/ML data
scientists may want to improve upon the model, etc. The publication of
the model must contain sufficient information so that readers (i) can
determine whether the research is sound, (ii) can determine whether the
model has clinical utility in the intended or other contexts and (iii)
test whether they can reproduce the results.

Moreover, changes in healthcare are constant; among many changes,
demographics shift, practice patterns improve, diagnostic criteria are
updated and new treatments are introduced. As a result, models need to
be re-evaluated, updated, extended regularly. Complete documentation can
help anticipate which elements need to be updated. The model or its
predictors may have to be completely reconstructed for example due to
changes in the underlying technologies or the model may have to be
recomputed to prove the correctness of the development process to
determine liability. Proper documentation of the model is necessary for
these purposes and the reporting standards provide help in ensuring that
at least a minimal set of required elements have been included in the
documentation.

Pitfall 17.1

Poorly documented AI/ML models and their development and evaluation
processes make independent review and replication efforts difficult.

Pitfall 17.2

Information required by reporting standards is a minimal set; additional
information is often necessary.

Best Practice 17.1

Document the model, its development, validation and deployment process.

Best Practice 17.2

Document AI/ML models using reporting standards and extend with problem
and technology-specific necessary information even if not part of the
standard. Such extensions can be based on the various development stages
and Best Practices in the present volume.

Relation to Reproducibility

Reproducibility is a cornerstone of science. Research is reproducible if
independent scientists can recreate the findings (e.g., AI/ML models and
their performance characteristics) based on the reported information. In
the last decade, several large studies have been conducted to measure
the reproducibility of published studies. In an attempt to reproduce
results from 100 manuscripts in the psychology literature, a research
team found that while 97% of the original studies reported a significant
effect, only 36% of replication studies found that effect [3].
Replication efforts in biomedical and other fields found that
approximately only 50% of the research studies was reproducible [4–6].
Failure of the studies to replicate was found to be predictable; e.g.,
predictions by peers about whether a study would replicate were highly
correlated with the actual replication results [7]. The purpose of the
reporting standards in this context is not to advocate for a particular
modeling methodology, but to include information in the AI/ML model
documentation that allows readers to decide whether the model
development process used in the manuscript was sound and to test the
reproducibility if needed.

The key purpose of reporting standards/guidelines is to remind
researchers what information to include in the manuscript and to remind
peer-reviewers what information to look for. Reporting guidelines do not
prescribe how research should be done.

Reporting Standards Adoption

In terms of current adoption of reporting standards, a 2022 study [8]
examined 152 articles published in the year 2019 to determine which of
the 22 key pieces of information recommended by the TRIPOD reporting
standard were included. They found that some information, such as
interpretation of the results and source of data were included in almost
all publications, while others such as the flow of subjects and the
predictive performance of the model were included in less than 10%.
According to the TRIPOD authors, a model cannot be appraised properly
without these pieces of information (we will appraise these claims and
describe the TRIPOD standard later in the chapter).

Appraisal of the TRIPOD Standard

Among general purpose reporting standards, TRIPOD is the most applicable
to AI/ML models. It comprises a checklist [9] of 22 items, a statement
document [10], and an Explanation and Elaboration document [11]. Being a
reporting standard for publications, the 22 items are organized by the
section of the publication they must be included in: title, abstract,
methods, results, etc.

At a high level, key information required includes the clinical context,
the study objective, outcome (whether the outcome assessment was
“blind”—carried out without knowing the predicted risk), data source,
study setting (including the dates), participant information
(eligibility, inclusion, exclusion criteria, treatments received),
assessment of the predictors (including whether the assessment was
“blind”—devoid of knowledge about the outcome), methods information
(missing data, feature selection, model type), performance (calibration
and discrimination), limitations, potential for clinical use, and
funding information. As immediately obvious by examining the TRIPOD
reportable elements, there is no guidance on how to pursue AI/ML
modeling to ensure safety and effectiveness. Therefore full conformance
with TRIPOD reporting does not lead to or guarantee these objectives.

Pitfall 17.3

TRIPOD does NOT guarantee that the resulting model is correct, free of
bias and safe for clinical use.

TRIPOD is a reporting standard that seeks to bring to public view
elements of proper construction of AI/ML models (e.g. population choice,
outcomes and model accuracy, data used etc.). However, several
fundamental limitations exist that include:

1.  (a)

    TRIPOD assumes that the reader knows all appropriate best practices
    for the right design and execution of the above elements.

     

2.  (b)

    TRIPOD is more of ex post factor forensic tool rather than proactive
    enabler of good AI/ML.

     

3.  (c)

    The reporting entity may misrepresent the reported information and
    TRIPOD has no means of ensuring validity of reporting.

     

4.  (d)

    TRIPOD reported elements are neither complete nor are they necessary
    to ensure high quality AI/ML models.

     

5.  (e)

    TRIPOD does not aim to avoid biases and does not assess the risk of
    pertinent biases.

     

To address some of TRIPOD’s limitations other reporting standards have
been devised such as PROBAST [12] with a focus on bias reduction, and
CHARMS [13] aiming to help reduce pitfalls in the study design, and
provide checklists for this purpose.

We also note that TRIPOD is aimed at multivariate models, primarily
regression models. Some of its items are not appropriate across machine
learning methods. For example, not all machine learning methods have an
intercept or a baseline hazard which are required by TRIPOD. At the time
of this writing it has been announced that new AI-focused reporting
standard versions of TRIPOD and PROBAST will be developed using a survey
and Delphi methodology [14].

Synthesis of Reporting Recommendations from Multiple Existing Standards

Given that reporting standards are not tailored to AI/ML, it is useful
to attempt a synthesis of recommendations adopting elements from
multiple standards. Below we provide such an example, using items from
four documentation standards for documenting ML models using EHR data.
The standards are TRIPOD [T] (predictive models), PROBAST [P]
(assessment tool for the potential of biases), CHARMS [C] (model
appraisal and systematic reviews) and RECORD [R] (retrospective study
using individual level data). We re-iterate that depending on the
specifics of the models additional necessary documentation has to be
provided in accordance with the Best Practices in the present volume.

In Table 1, we include the recommendation itself, organized by modeling
steps, and denote which item it corresponds to in each standard.

Table 1

Synthesis of four reporting standards. The columns correspond to the
four reporting standards and the number to the corresponding item in
each reporting standard

+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| Item                        | T       | P       | C       | R        |
+:============================+:========+:========+:========+:=========+
| Study Goals and Design                                               |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 1. Type of study            | 1       |         | 1       |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (diagnostic, prognostic,    |         |         |         |          |
| treatment effect            |         |         |         |          |
| estimation, causal          |         |         |         |          |
| structure discovery, etc)   |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 2. Type of predictive       |         |         | 3       |          |
| modeling study              |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (Model development with     |         |         |         |          |
| external validation,        |         |         |         |          |
| without external            |         |         |         |          |
| validation, external        |         |         |         |          |
| validation of an existing   |         |         |         |          |
| model)                      |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 3. Objective                | 3b      |         | 2       | 3        |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 4. Medical context;         | 3a      |         | 2       | 2        |
| Rational for the study      |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 5. Intended moment of using |         |         | 7       |          |
| the model                   |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| Source of Data                                                       |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 6. Source of data for       | 4a      | 1.1     | 8       | 1        |
| training and validation     |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (e.g. EHR, individual-level |         |         |         |          |
| routinely collected,        |         |         |         |          |
| registry, randomized trial, |         |         |         |          |
| etc)                        |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 7. Key dates                | 4b      |         | 9d      |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (start and end of accrual,  |         |         |         |          |
| start and end of follow-up, |         |         |         |          |
| index date)                 |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| Participants                                                         |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 8. Study Setting            | 5a      |         |         | 5        |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (primary care, ICU,         |         |         |         |          |
| academic center, community  |         |         |         |          |
| hospital, etc)              |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| Number of locations and     |         |         |         |          |
| centers                     |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 9. Eligibility criteria     | 5b      | 1.2     | 4, 9a   |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 10. Patient selection       |         |         |         | 6.1, 6.2 |
| method                      |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (Codes, phenotype,          |         |         |         |          |
| algorithms, etc)            |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 11. Linkage of databases    |         |         |         | 6.3      |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 12. Treatments received     | 5c      |         | 9c      |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 13. Study size              | 8       |         | 13      | 10       |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| Flow diagram for sample     | 13a     |         |         | 13       |
| selection                   |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 14. Was there filtering of  |         |         |         | 13.1     |
| participants based on data  |         |         |         |          |
| quality?                    |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 15. Exclusion criteria      |         | 1.2     |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 16. Were all selected       |         | 4.3     |         |          |
| patients included in the    |         |         |         |          |
| analysis?                   |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 17. Number of outcome       | 14a     | 4.1     | 12a     | 15       |
| events                      |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 18. Number of events in     |         |         | 12b     |          |
| relation to the number of   |         |         |         |          |
| predictors                  |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 19. Participant             | 13b     |         | 9b,     | 14       |
| characteristics             |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         | 13ab    |          |
| (demographic, clinical      |         |         |         |          |
| features, missing           |         |         |         |          |
| predictors, missing         |         |         |         |          |
| outcome)                    |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 20. Summary of follow-up    |         |         |         | 14c      |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| Outcome                                                              |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 21. Outcome definition      | 6a      | 3.1     | 5, 10a  | 7.1      |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 22. Is the outcome          |         | 3.2     | 10c     |          |
| pre-defined? Is it a        |         |         |         |          |
| standard outcome?           |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (Composite outcomes can     |         |         |         |          |
| render predictors           |         |         |         |          |
| insignificant)              |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 23. Were predictors         |         | 3.3     | 10e     |          |
| excluded from the outcome   |         |         |         |          |
| definition?                 |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (Unless the predictor is    |         |         |         |          |
| the definition of the       |         |         |         |          |
| outcome)                    |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 24. How and when was the    | 6a      |         |         |          |
| outcome assessed?           |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 25. Was the outcome defined |         | 3.4     | 10b     |          |
| the same way for all        |         |         |         |          |
| participants?               |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 26. Was the outcome         | 6b      | 3.5     | 10d     |          |
| assessment process blind to |         |         |         |          |
| the model predictions?      |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 27. Time gap between        |         | 3.6     | 10f     |          |
| predictor assessment and    |         |         |         |          |
| outcome determination       |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 28. Time span of prediction | 6a      |         | 6,10f   |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (e.g. 7-year diabetes)      |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| Predictor Variables                                                  |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 29. Definition of all       | 7a      |         | 11ab    | 8        |
| predictors variables        |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 30. Time of the predictor   | 7a      |         | 11c     |          |
| variable assessment         |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 31. Was the predictor       | 7b      | 2.2     | 11d     |          |
| variable assessment process |         |         |         |          |
| blind to the outcome?       |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 32. Were the predictor      |         | 2.1     |         |          |
| variables assessed the same |         |         |         |          |
| way for all participants?   |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 33. Are all predictor       |         | 2.3     |         |          |
| variables available at the  |         |         |         |          |
| time the model is intended  |         |         |         |          |
| to be used?                 |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| Modeling                                                             |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 34. How was missing data    | 9       | 4.4     | 13c     | 12c      |
| handled?                    |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (Complete case analysis,    |         |         |         |          |
| imputation, etc)            |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 35. How were the predictor  | 10a     |         | 11e     | 11       |
| variables handled?          |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 36. Univariate association  | 14b     |         |         |          |
| of the predictor variables  |         |         |         |          |
| with the outcome            |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 37. Pre-selection based on  |         | 4.5     |         |          |
| univariate association      |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (potential for bias by      |         |         |         |          |
| omission)                   |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 38. Type of model, model    | 10b     |         | 14acd   |          |
| construction process,       |         |         |         |          |
| feature selection           |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 39. Were the model          |         |         | 14b     |          |
| assumptions satisfied?      |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 40. Were complexities       |         | 4.6     |         | 12d      |
| considered?                 |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (informative censoring,     |         |         |         |          |
| competing risk, sampling of |         |         |         |          |
| controls, etc)              |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (RECORD 12d breaks this     |         |         |         |          |
| down by study type)         |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 41. How were confounders    |         |         |         | 12a      |
| controlled for?             |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 42. Sensitivity analysis    |         |         |         | 12e      |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 43. Subgroup analysis       |         |         |         | 12b      |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| Evaluation                                                           |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 44. Measures of model       | 10d     | 4.7     | 15ab    |          |
| evaluation                  |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| Both calibration and        |         |         |         |          |
| discrimination reported for |         |         |         |          |
| classification              |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 45. Method of model         | 10b     | 4.7     | 16a     |          |
| evaluation                  |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (bootstrap, cross           |         |         |         |          |
| validation, etc)            |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 46. Are confidence          | 16      |         |         |          |
| intervals reported          |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 47. Performance in the      | 19a     |         |         |          |
| development and validation  |         |         |         |          |
| data                        |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| Is over- and underfitting   |         |         |         |          |
| taken into consideration?   |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 48. If the performance was  | 10e, 17 |         |         |          |
| poor, was the model         |         |         |         |          |
| updated?                    |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 49. Model comparison        | 10d     |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 50. Was external validation |         |         | 16a     |          |
| performed?                  |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (temporal, geographical,    |         |         |         |          |
| different investigators,    |         |         |         |          |
| etc)                        |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 51. For validation,         | 16      |         | 16b     |          |
| describe model updates      |         |         |         |          |
| incl. recalibration         |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 52. Were risk groups        | 11      |         |         |          |
| defined? How?               |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 53. For external            | 12      |         | 17c     |          |
| validation, document        |         |         |         |          |
| differences between the     | 13c     |         |         |          |
| development and validation  |         |         |         |          |
| data sets.                  |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 54. Is there an alternative |         | 4.8     | 17b     |          |
| presentation of the final   |         |         |         |          |
| model                       |         | 4.9     |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (e.g. conversion into a     |         |         |         |          |
| score)                      |         |         |         |          |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| Are all components of the   |         |         |         |          |
| model taken into            |         |         |         |          |
| consideration (incl. the    |         |         |         |          |
| intercept)                  |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| Interpretation                                                       |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 55. Limitations             | 18      |         |         | 19.1     |
|                             |         |         |         |          |
| (non-representative sample, |         |         |         |          |
| few events, excessive       |         |         |         |          |
| missing data, informative   |         |         |         |          |
| missing data, data not      |         |         |         |          |
| collected for this purpose, |         |         |         |          |
| unmeasured confounders,     |         |         |         |          |
| eligibility changing over   |         |         |         |          |
| time, etc)                  |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 56. Performance in the      | 19a     |         | 18a     |          |
| development and validation  |         |         |         |          |
| data                        |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 57. Discuss the performance | 19b     |         | 18b     | 20       |
| in the context of the       |         |         |         |          |
| objective                   |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 58. Discuss potential       | 20      |         |         |          |
| clinical use                |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| Miscellaneous                                                        |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+
| 59. Study protocol in the   | 21      |         |         |          |
| supplements                 |         |         |         |          |
+-----------------------------+---------+---------+---------+----------+

The main purpose of this list is to demonstrate how multiple standards
can be combined to arrive at a more complete documentation that helps
the appraisal of the model, including the assessment of potential
biases, and help determine the applicability of the model to another
institution with different EHR data elements.

Throughout the book, we present a multitude of suggested best practices,
designed to increase the likelihood of good modeling and reduce to a
minimum the potential for error. These range from high level design down
to fine-grain implementation details and can be used to provide complete
reporting of critical factors affecting the quality of modeling. Such
reportable dimensions and categories are, aspects of causal modeling,
unstructured data modeling, diagnostics and assurances for overfitting
and under performance avoidance, model selection strategies, modern
feature selection, model explanation, regulatory conformance, equity and
fairness considerations, and many other critical pieces of information
not addressed in Table 1, and that should supplement and enhance the
current reporting standards.

HIMSS Analytic Maturity Model

Another important aid in ensuring the safe, fair, effective and
efficient use of AI/ML in clinical practice is the certification of
healthcare institutions by professional associations or societies with
credible expertise and well-designed, validated certification processes
for health AI/ML.

- Certification ensures that certified healthcare institutions satisfy a
  minimum core set of requirements that are set forth by a reputable
  professional association or society with expertise in the area.

- High quality certification ensures that meeting these requirements
  guarantees organizational competences.

- Certification bodies can also offer advice on how to achieve the
  certification goals in areas of weakness.

Currently there is no professional association specializing in clinical
or research AI/ML. HIMSS (Healthcare Information and Management Systems
Society), which focuses on Healthcare Information Technology, has
developed an 8-stage model of analytic maturity, called the Adaptation
Model of Analytic Maturity (AMAM) [15], measuring an institution’s
analytic capabilities. AMAM is also intended as a roadmap, which, in
consultation with HIMSS experts, lays a path forward for organizations
that wish to improve their analytic maturity. The eight stages, numbered
0–7, are as follows [15].

We caution the reader that while the intent is to help organizations
grow their analytical capabilities, there is a vast distance between
conventional analytic capabilities and AI/ML capabilities. While the
AMAM framework is not explicitly designed for AI/ML, there is language
that strongly implies AI/ML competencies. Such organization competencies
require a deep level of advanced scientific and technological
understanding that goes beyond conventional analytics and IT.

The high-level certification requirements of Table 2 for example, lack
the level of testable technical rigor and specificity that will ensure
safe and effective AI/ML technology deployment in a high-risk domain
such as clinical medicine. For example, there is little in the stated
requirements that ensures that deployed technology is performant,
reliable and cost-effective or that it can generate trust in patients,
providers, regulators and other stakeholders. Moreover, much needed
protection against grave decision making errors that can be produced by
poorly understood and applied AI/ML technology do not seem to be
sufficiently addressed. In general, (outside the narrow discussion of
the AMAM model) we caution against the following general pitfall:

Table 2

HIMSS Adoption model of analytic maturity stages

  Stage   Capabilities
  ------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  0       The organization does not have any analytic capabilities, but has the desire to develop them.
  1.      The organization has started to collect data and stores it at a central location (e.g. in a data warehouse). They have a strategy for developing data governance and for building out the analytic capabilities.
  2.      The organization has built a data warehouse and is maturing their data governance. They have established an analytic competency center, responsible for managing the organization’s analytic skills, standards and education.
  3.      The data quality in the data warehouse is stable, broadly accessible within the organization. Data access is well managed and tools to access the data are standardized. The institution has mastered basic reporting capabilities.
  4.      The institution has started directing analytic capabilities towards improving clinical, financial and operational processes. They have started making efforts towards providing analytic support for evidence-based clinical practice, tracking and reporting care and operational variability, and identifying and minimizing clinical and operational waste.
  5.      The institution has expanded point-of-care analytics. Analytic capabilities now support population health and have developed a thorough understanding of the economics of care. Quality based performance reporting is implemented.
  6.      The institution has reached maturity of predictive analytics and have started focusing on advanced data, such as genetic or biometric information, in preparation of more individualized medicine.
  7.      They have developed the ability to deliver mass customization of care along with prescriptive analytics. The institution is leveraging advanced data (e.g. genetic or biometric) to tailor treatment decisions to the individual for personalized medicine.

Pitfall 17.4

There is a world of difference between conventional hospital analytics
and AI/ML technology.

Significant dangers exist for certification processes that do not
discriminate among these domains to create false confidence in the
existence of deep institutional competency and mastery of technologies,
the complexity of which, in reality, radically exceeds the technical
capabilities of most healthcare institutions.

Such technologies have the potential to radically advance population
health when designed correctly, but also to hurt patients if not
properly developed and deployed.

Academic Accreditation and Professional Certification Efforts

Beside reporting standards that aim to promote the quality of AI/ML
scientific and technological development, and the certification of
healthcare organizations along the lines of AI/ML competencies, another
pillar of ensuring safety, equity, efficiency and effectiveness is
training a specialized workforce with deep expertise in the science and
technology of health AI/ML. In this section, we briefly look at two
functions: (i) The availability of formal educational programs that
educate health data science specialists in health AI/ML at the graduate,
and post graduate levels; (ii) The training and certification of the
broader health care and health sciences workforce to a minimally
necessary level of understanding of these technologies; and (iii) The
accreditation of educational programs that provide the above training
and certifications.

Currently there are few programs across the nation providing specialized
undergraduate, or graduate degrees in health data science and health
AI/ML. There is also no accreditation specific to health AI and ML.
Elements of healthcare and health science-related AI/ML are often taught
in health informatics programs. Very few institutions are offering
health AI/ML-focused degrees. The Commission on Accreditation for Health
Informatics and Information Management Education (CAHIIM) [16] currently
offers accreditation at the Master’s Degree level. The CAHIIM standard
is based on AMIA’s (American Medical Informatics Association)
informatics competencies that span health, social and behavioral
science, information science and technology, leadership,
professionalism, and areas at the intersections of these competencies
[17]. These requirements were neither designed to nor do they achieve a
comprehensive standard for specialty professional knowledge and
competencies in AI/ML.

In terms of continued certification of the broader healthcare workforce,
no organization offers AI/ML-specific certification. HIMSS (discussed
above) offers certification for health information management systems
(Certified Associate/Professional in Healthcare Information and
Management Systems; CAHIMS/CPHIMS) and digital transformation strategy
(Certified Professional in Digital Health Transformation Strategy;
CPDHTS). Alternatively, for board certified physicians engaging in
health information technology, the clinical informatics subspecialty
[18, 19], developed jointly with AMIA, is offered by the American Board
of Preventive Medicine or American Board of Pathology but is not
designed to develop deep competency in AI/ML.

Pitfall 17.5

There is no professional association/society specifically for health
AI/ML.

Pitfall 17.6

There is no accreditation or certification specifically for heath AI/ML.

Pitfall 17.7

There is a dearth of academic programs for educating health data
scientists and health AI/ML experts.

Conclusions

The field of health care and health science research is in dire need for
development of focused educational programs, meaningful individual and
institutional certification, and comprehensive reporting standards.
Initial efforts along these lines are promising and directionally sound;
however significant and intensive efforts and investments are needed in
these areas.

Key Concepts Discussed in This Chapter

Reporting standards prescribe a minimal set of information that needs to
be included in the model description.

The key purpose of reporting guidelines is to remind researchers what
information to include in the manuscript and to remind peer-reviewers
what information to look for. It does not prescribe how research is
done.

We discussed the TRIPOD standard for publishing predictive models.

We discussed additional standards. These include the PROBAST, which is a
tool for assessing the potential for biases, and CHARMS for appraisal of
models and systemic reviews.

Certification aims to ensure that healthcare institutions satisfy a
minimum core set of requirements toward developing technical competency.

Educational programs for specialists and certification for the broader
workforce will need to be expanded greatly in order to meet the demand
for experts necessitated by the explosive growth of AI/ML.

Pitfalls in This Chapter

Pitfall 17.1. Poorly documented AI/ML models and their development and
evaluation processes make independent review and replication efforts
difficult.

Pitfall 17.2. Information required by reporting standards is a minimal
set; additional information is often necessary.

Pitfall 17.3. TRIPOD does NOT guarantee that the resulting model is
correct, free of bias and safe for clinical use.

TRIPOD is a reporting standard that seeks to bring to public view
elements of proper construction of AI/ML models (e.g. population choice,
outcomes and model accuracy, data used etc.). However several
fundamental limitations exist that include:

1.  (a)

    TRIPOD assumes that the reader knows all appropriate best practices
    for the right design and execution of the above elements.

     

2.  (b)

    TRIPOD is more of ex post factor forensic tool rather than proactive
    enabler of good AI/ML.

     

3.  (c)

    The reporting entity may misrepresent the reported information and
    TRIPOD has no means of ensuring validity of reporting.

     

4.  (d)

    TRIPOD reported elements are neither complete nor are they necessary
    to ensure high quality AI/ML models.

     

5.  (e)

    TRIPOD does not aim to avoid biases and does not assess the risk of
    pertinent biases.

     

Pitfall 17.4. Significant dangers exist for imperfect or immature
certification processes to create institutional false confidence in the
existence of deep competency and mastery of technologies the complexity
of which radically exceeds the technical capabilities of most healthcare
providers. Such technologies have the potential to either radically
advance population health when designed correctly, but also to hurt
patients if not properly developed and deployed.

Pitfall 17.5. There is no professional association/society specifically
for health AI/ML.

Pitfall 17.6. There is no accreditation or certification specifically
for heath AI/ML.

Pitfall 17.7. There is a dearth of academic programs for educating
health data scientists and health AI/ML experts.

Best Practices in This Chapter

Best Practice 17.1. Document the model, its development, validation and
deployment process.

Best Practice 17.2. Document AI/ML models using reporting standards and
extent with problem and technology-specific necessary information even
if not part of the standard. Such extensions can be based on the various
development stages and Best Practices in the present volume.

Questions and Discussion Topics in This Chapter

1.  1.

    List some benefits of internally documenting a predictive model in a
    way that the model can be recreated, including the predictor
    variables, the outcomes, the training and validation data sets, and
    the model.

     

2.  2.

    Discuss benefits and possible downsides of publishing models in
    peer-reviewed scientific journals.

     

3.  3.

    Can you think of ways to publish a model other than a research
    article?

     

4.  4.

    Consider the 22 items of the TRIPOD checklist and answer the
    following questions.
    1.  (a)

        Which items are necessary and which can be omitted for the
        internal documentation of a model?

         

    2.  (b)

        If you develop a deep learning model, which items in the
        checklist may not make sense? Would you change your answer if
        the model was a GBM?

         

    3.  (c)

        Can you think of other data elements that you may want to record
        for a deep learning model?

         

    4.  (d)

        The TRIPOD checklist is designed for diagnostic and prognostic
        models. Would a model that quantifies the effect of an
        intervention fall into the purview of TRIPOD?

         

    5.  (e)

        Which of the TRIPOD items should be included for a model that
        quantifies the effect of an intervention for internal
        documentation? You can modify the item as necessary.

         

    6.  (f)

        For the same model (that quantifies the effect of intervention),
        are there additional pieces of information you would include
        for (a) internal documentation and (b) for publication of the
        model in a journal?

         

    7.  (g)

        If you were to build a multivariate regression model as a
        prognostic model based on genetic biomarkers, what additional
        information would you include?

         

    8.  (h)

        Consult the GRIPS checklist
        (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3175742/) and
        refine your answer to question (g).

         

     

5.  5.

    The PROBAST tool
    (https://www.probast.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/PROBAST_20190515.pdf)
    is designed to assess the risk of bias in predictive models. It is
    not intended as a reporting standard. Read the PROBAST items and
    propose new reporting items to add to the TRIPOD checklist that
    allows for assessing the risk of bias.

     

6.  6.

    Suppose you conduct a study for discovering the causal relationships
    among risk factors in Alzheimer’s disease. This is neither a
    diagnostic nor a prognostic study, so it falls outside the scope of
    TRIPOD. Which TRIPOD items are relevant and what additional
    information should be reported?

     

7.  7.

    Your goal is to document a prognostic predictive model, e.g. 7-year
    diabetes risk, for internal use in a manner that allows you to
    re-construct the predictors, outcome, training and validation data,
    and the model itself. Create a reporting checklist based on TRIPOD,
    PROBAST and CHARMS.

     

8.  8.

    The HIMSS certification has eight stages, while the CAHIIM
    accreditation is a pass/defer decision. Can you think of advantages
    to having multiple stages versus making a binary pass/fail decision?

     

9.  9.

    When you look at the stages 1-7 of the AMAM, each stage requires
    several competencies. Which AMIA competency areas correspond to AMAM
    competencies?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

References

1.  1.

    Altman DG, Simera I. A history of the evolution of guidelines for
    reporting medical research: the long road to the EQUATOR Network. J
    Roy Soc Med. 2016;109(2).
    https://​journals.​sagepub.​com/​doi/​pdf/​10.​1177/​0141076815625599​

2.  2.

    EQUATOR network. https://​www.​equator-network.​org/​

3.  3.

    Open Science Collaboration. Estimating the reproducibility of
    psychological science. Science. 2015;(6251):349.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​science.​aac4716.
    https://​www.​science.​org/​doi/​10.​1126/​science.​aac4716

4.  4.

    Camerer CF, Dreber A, Foresll E, Ho TH, et al. Evaluating
    replicability of laboratory experiments in economics. Science.
    2016;351(6280) https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​science.​aaf0918.

5.  5.

    Piper K. Science has been in a “replication crisis” for a decade.
    Have we learned anything? Vox; 2020.

6.  6.

    Baker M, Penny D. Is there a reproducibility crisis? Nature.
    2016;533

7.  7.

    Camerer CF, Dreber A, Holzmeister F, Ho TC, et al. Evaluating the
    replicability of social science experiments in Nature and Science
    between 2010 and 2015. Nat Human Behav. 2018;2:637–42.Crossref

8.  8.

    Navarro CLA, Damen JAA, Takada T, Nijman SW, et al. Completeness of
    reporting of clinical prediction models developed using supervised
    machine learning: a systematic review. BMC Med Res Methodol.
    2022;22:12.Crossref

9.  9.

    TRIPOD checklist.
    https://​www.​tripod-statement.​org/​wp-content/​uploads/​2020/​01/​Tripod-Checklist-Prediction-Model-Development-and-Validation-PDF.​pdf

10. 10.

    Collins GS, Reitsma JB, Altman DG, Moons KGM. Transparent reporting
    of a multivariable prediction model for individual prognosis or
    diagnosis (TRIPOD): the TRIPOD statement. BMJ. 2014:350.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bmj.​g7594. [TRIPOD statement].

11. 11.

    Moons KGM, Altman DG, Reitsma JB, Ioannidis JPA, et al. Transparent
    reporting of a multivariable prediction model for individual
    prognosis or diagnosis (TRIPOD): Explanation and Elaboration. Ann
    Intern Med. 2015;162:W1–W73. https://​doi.​org/​10.​7326/​M14-0698.
    [TRIPOD E&E].Crossref

12. 12.

    Moons KGM, Wolff RF, Riley RD, Whiting PF, Westwood M, Collins GS,
    Reitsma JB, et al. A tool to assess the risk of bias and
    applicability of prediction model studies: explanation and
    elaboration. Ann Intern Med. 2019; https://​doi.​org/​10.​7326/​M18-1377.
    [PROBAST].

13. 13.

    Moons KGM, de Groot JAH, Bouwmeester W, Vergouwe Y, Mallett S,
    Altman DG, et al. Critical appraisal and data extraction for
    systematic reviews of prediction modelling studies: the CHARMS
    checklist. PLoS Med. 2014;11(10):e1001744. [CHARMS].Crossref

14. 14.

    Collins GS, Dirman P, Navarro CLA, Ma J, Hooft L, Reitsma JB,
    Logullo P, Beam AL, et al. Protocol for development of a reporting
    guideline (TRIPOD-AI) and risk of bias tool (PROBAST-AI) for
    diagnostic and prognostic prediction model studies based on
    artificial intelligence. BMJ Open. 2021;11:e048008.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bmjopen-2020-04800.Crossref

15. 15.

    [AMAM] HIMSS. Adoption Model for Analytics Maturiy (AMAM). URL:
    https://​www.​himss.​org/​what-we-do-solutions/​digital-health-transformation/​maturity-models/​adoption-model-analytics-maturity-amam

16. 16.

    [CAHIIM] CAHIIM. URL: cahiim.​org

17. 17.

    AMIA Board. AMIA 2017 core competencies for applied health
    informatics education at the master’s degree level. JAMIA.
    2018;25(12):1657–68. [AMIA competencies]
    https://​www.​cahiim.​org/​docs/​default-source/​about-cahiim/​history/​final-amia-health-informatics-core-competencies-for-cahiim.​pdf?​sfvrsn=​fed062b8_​4

18. 18.

    Gardner RM, Overhage JM, Steen EB, Munger BS, Holmes JH, Williamson
    JJ, Detmer DE, for the AMIA Board of Directors. AMIA Board White
    Paper: core content for the subspecialty of clinical informatics.
    JAMIA. 2009;16:153–7. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1197/​jamia.​M3045.Crossref

19. 19.

    Safran C, Shabot MM, Munger BS, Holmes JH, Steen EB, Lumpkin JR,
    Detmer DE, for the AMIA Board of Directors. AMIA Board White Paper:
    program requirements for fellowship education in the subspecialty of
    clinical informatics. JAMIA. 2009;16:158–66.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1197/​jamia.​M3046.Crossref

© The Author(s) 2024

G. J. Simon, C. Aliferis (eds.)Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning in Health Care and Medical SciencesHealth
Informaticshttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39355-6_18

Synthesis of Recommendations, Open Problems and the Study of BPs

Constantin Aliferis¹   and Gyorgy Simon¹

(1)

Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

 

 

Constantin Aliferis

Email: constantinaibestpractices@gmail.com

Abstract

This chapter assembles a list of all best practices (BPs), and pitfalls,
discussed in the previous chapters. These are codified in a single
hierarchical structure and assistive checklists intended to make them
operationally useful. We differentiate between macro-, meso- and
micro-levels of pitfalls and corresponding best practices-roughly
corresponding to high-level principles, concrete differentiations of the
above and granular/detailed tools and techniques for implementation. The
recommended BPs are cross-referenced across the volume and key
corresponding literature and other sources. Several open problems remain
and the evolution of BPs for biomedical AI/ML is certain to become in
the years to come a field of inquiry with explosive growth and value.

Keywords

Macro-, Meso-, Micro-level guidelines and best practicesMaturity level
of guidelines and best practicesImpact level of guidelines and best
practicesContinuous evolution of guidelines and best practicesOpen
problems in best practices of health AI/ML

Bringing Best Practices Together

With all components of understanding pitfalls and codifying
corresponding best practices in place, we can now attempt a synthesis of
all the material in this volume in a unified framework represented in
Fig. 1. As can be seen, background knowledge on methods’ properties,
human cognitive biases, and cases studies (left, grey background)
informs the identification of pitfalls and the codification of
corresponding best practices (blue background, middle). These address
method development, model development, and components such as data
design and encoding, model selection, error estimation, over fitting and
under fitting avoidance, managing risk of model use are deployment and
addressing regulatory and ELSI requirements. Taken together and when
properly followed, these can enable the 7 dimensions of AI/ML trust,
adoption and acceptance (on the right, green color).

[]

A block flow diagram represents the backgrounds of A I M L properties,
human cognitive biases, and informative case studies that are mapped to
pitfalls and best practices for robust method development. It exhibits a
list of 7 trust and acceptance factors.

The many pitfalls and best practices we presented throughout the present
volume can be thought as belonging to 3 levels which are obvious to the
reader by the context of their presentation and discussion:

- Macro Level Guidance: corresponds to correct specification of
  high-level design, in which a problem is mapped to AI and ML modeling,
  broad objectives, high level principles.

- Micro Level Guidance: corresponds to lower-level (but still
  significant) implementation details.

- Meso Level Guidance: corresponds to conceptual and implementation
  elements in-between the high (macro) and low (micro) levels. It
  encompasses neither too broad (and abstract), nor too narrow (and
  minute) details.

Moreover it is important to appreciate that some of the pitfalls and
best practices are more immutable and unlikely to change than others as
the field of AI/ML progresses. It is useful to appreciate the
differences in maturity levels across pitfalls and guidelines presented
in this book and the literature.

Maturity level:

- A mature designation denotes immutable, perennial or otherwise robust
  recommendation.

- An evolving designation denotes a recommendation that is
  work-in-progress, evolving or otherwise subject to
  likely modifications in the future.

Finally, not all guidance has the same gravity. Some best practices are
critical and should be always adhered to according to their impact
level:

- High Impact: corresponds to an action that must be addressed,
  otherwise serious pitfalls may follow with significant probability. If
  not addressed, because of special circumstances of a particular
  problem context, then an explicit rationale must be developed to
  support the exception.

- Medium Impact: corresponds to recommendations that ideally should be
  addressed. If, however, resource constraints or other factors preclude
  addressing, then milder pitfalls may ensue, or serious pitfalls with
  very small probability. In this category we will also include
  recommendations that can be addressed at a later stage of developing
  the AI/ML solution.

In APPENDIX 3 of the present book, we collected all best practices of
the present volume and characterized them according to maturity and
importance. Indicative examples are given in the table below.

  Best Practice                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Maturity   Impact
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- --------
  10.1: [Context: model development and validation]. Deploy procedures that prevent, diagnose and remedy errors of overconfidence in, or over fitting of, models                                                                        MATURE     HIGH
  10.2.6: [Context: benchmarking of methods] follow theoretically and empirically proven specifications of reference (i.e., prototypical or official use of employed method)                                                            MATURE     MEDIUM
  10.5.7: Models for individual patients: use dense time series data, leverage population models, search for and model abrupt distribution shifts of the individual (including learning and modeling shifts at the population level).   EVOLVING   MEDIUM

Notice that this synthesis is enabled by examining these recommendations
across multiple stages and aspects of the AI/ML R&D process and thus the
reader can appreciate this final consolidated view with the benefit of
having accumulated diverse knowledge about the various scientific and
technical aspects of health AI/ML addressed in the book’s chapters.

Open Problems, Unknowns & Future Directions

We discuss next, some of the open problems and future directions in the
study of best practices for biomedical AI/ML.

Adapting best practices to novel or unanticipated contexts of use.
“Rules are for the obedience of fools and the guidance of wise
men”^([21]). This famous quote captures the notion that as
user expertise grows the need for strict adherence to rules reduces.

For example, as we saw throughout the present volume, the context of use
may influence the validity or application scope of a guideline. Every
best practice recommendation is stated with a set of use cases and
contexts in mind. It is important to consider if a particular R&D or
AI/ML technology deployment project has special characteristics that may
subtly or overtly affect the appropriateness of a particular guideline.
See for example the discussion of genomics and overfitting in chapter
“Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of
AI/ML In Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the
Role of Best Practices”. It is up to the project team to establish that
deviations from best practices, especially ones designated as critical
in the above checklists is appropriate. Conversely, if a recommended
best practice is assessed to be too lax for a problem at hand, it may be
necessary to incorporate additional restrictions, safeguards,
performance requirements etc. that go beyond the ones presented here.

Related to the above, newer technology may (and should) render manual
safeguards of today, automatic, and indeed this is a trend in ML, for
example many newer algorithms that incorporate multiple protections
against overfitting, or sampling variation (see chapter “An Appraisal
and Operating Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in
Healthcare & Health Science”). This is also the case for statistical
techniques that incorporate regularization/shrinkage and do not require
pre-processing data with PCA or other dimensionality reduction. Systems
that are designed around protocols and stacks that implement best
practices will also advance the ease of use and reduce the need for
manual enforcement of best practices.

Sufficiency vs necessity and assumption-mitigating factors. Often
techniques that are designed to work well under specific sufficient
assumptions surprise the research community by working well in settings
that violate these assumptions. Perhaps the most classic example in the
history of data science is the success of linear models even when
deployed in domains with non-linear data generating functions (for
example, due to bias-variance reasons, see chapter “Foundations and
Properties of AI/ML Systems”). Another example is the mitigation of the
hardness of large scale causal models despite the fact that worst case
computational complexity for even small networks is intractable (see
chapter “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML Systems”). Benchmarks have
shown that methods whose sufficient assumptions are violated, manage in
some situations to outperform better–designed methods (for example, in
very small samples simple univariate association strategies may
outperform more complex modeling strategies; or in another example XOR
parents of a response have non-zero first order effects if they are
correlated, i.e., they do not exhibit the worst-case behavior of the
textbook XOR function). These considerations suggest that data
scientists should operate with an open mind and employ a plurality of
techniques as these may yield good but unexpected results. They must
walk the fine line between allowing for empirical happy surprises on one
hand, and avoiding wishful thinking or not prioritizing methods
according to their fit to the problem, on the other.

Ramifications of tampering with validated codes. It takes lengthy,
costly and demanding efforts to build methods that meet specific
performance criteria with guaranteed properties (as detailed in chapter
“Principles of Rigorous Development and of Appraisal of ML and AI
Methods and Systems”). At the same time, changes to original
specifications that on the surface may appear insignificant can have
major effects on these properties and performance (see chapter “Lessons
Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of AI/ML In
Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role of
Best Practices” - text categorization benchmark study). This issue
becomes of great relevance in light of open science frameworks in which
anyone can access and modify codes and algorithms with potentially
uncontrollable consequences to quality due to the modifications.
Establishing unique identifiers for algorithm and code versions with
associated properties, benchmarks and other performance properties, may
serve as a possible solution to this problem.

Transparency of algorithms and codes is desirable in many ways
especially for validating methods and tools, however it opens up the
possibility for abuse, unintended damage or even “gaming” of models and
systems. Black box methods and systems are utterly undesirable when not
operating as intended or to the standard of safety and performance that
generates trust and adoption. On the opposite side of things, black box
systems that are “locked” to avoid tampering and degrading alterations
may be desirable under many circumstances. Also as it has been advocated
in the AI literature, if the well-validated statistical advantage of a
black box model is so superior to the performance of the best
transparent model, it may be impractical or even unethical to not use
the best performing model. Navigating these tradeoffs is certainly a
challenge.

Developing a culture that values and strives for performant and
responsible AI/ML is of paramount importance for wide spread adoption of
BPs. Such culture can be developed in key places: education (health
science and professional health schools), ethics training, engagement
with community, government, health systems, tech industry. This culture
should be built around guiding principles with sound scientific basis
and broad acceptance.

Over-engineering and over-regulating. As with every aspect of science
and technology, if best practices are enforced in very prescriptive,
bureaucratic or superficial ways lacking thoughtfulness, there is the
danger to stifle innovation and render progress slow. The need to ensure
safety and performance by adhering to best practices designed to support
these goals has to be carefully balanced against the very real
opportunity costs inherent in unnecessarily delaying deployment of
useful AI/ML both in healthcare and the health sciences.

Need for evolving best practices systematically. Undoubtedly, the
recommendations and codified best practices in this volume and
elsewhere will evolve as the science and technology of AI/ML advance and
as new use cases in health care and health science research emerge. It
is important that this evolution is informed by prior generations of
best practices and that the various stakeholders who will be called to
adopt and advance the state of the art in BPs will do so without
re-inventing the wheel. There is a body of knowledge in particular that
we cannot imagine to require radical re-design or abandonment in any
point in the foreseeable future. For example, we will always need to
have health care models and decision support systems with precise goals
guiding their design and deployment. We will always need reliable
estimators of model performance. We will always need to design data
capture, sampling and measurements in ways that support the modeling
objectives. We will always need to manage the trade-offs of model bias
and sampling variance. We will always need to pay particular attention
to the distinction between causal and associational models and their
strengths and limitations. We will always need to equip AI/ML models and
systems with protective measures against operating outside their
knowledge and safe performance boundaries. We will always need to ensure
against unethical and biased operation of such technology. These are
just a few examples of essentially immutable objectives stemming from
fundamental laws of statistics and learning theory, computer science,
statistical risk management, computability, and ethics.

Bypassing regulations by claiming exploratory intent. It is all too easy
to disguise a decision model that guides user actions as one that merely
advises or informs the user. This has been a problem throughout the
history of health AI/ML. Regulation must address such abuses, otherwise
they can render regulation perfunctory and ineffective but also because
they can grossly distort the performance and safety requirements at the
design stages of AI/ML systems.

Misaligned sentiment and technical reality. As we saw in chapter
“Lessons Learned from Historical Failures, Limitations and Successes of
AI/ML In Healthcare and the Health Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the
Role of Best Practices” a large distance between the reality of AI/ML
capabilities and the over-promising of results led to multiple and deep
crises in the history of the field. This danger is always present and
should be taken very seriously. It is the position of the present book
that rational and careful R&D and deployment facilitated by appropriate
best practices can accelerate passage thru the precarious terrain of the
hype cycle.

Need to conduct R&D with limited resources. For reasons of simplicity we
presented feasibility and mission-critical development as discrete and
mutually exclusive approaches. However even when mission-critical models
and systems are sought, “ideal” development, validation and deployment
of AI/ML not only is not always possible, but it could also be
economically unwise. A phased approach where R&D can be abandoned once
sufficient evidence against feasibility is gathered, is a more
economically realistic approach. This phased model of
feasibility → iterative development until mission-critical goals are
met, is a worthy direction that is also congruent with established
models of industrial R&D. However at this time the precise mechanisms to
optimally manage such phased development in the health AI context, is an
open problem.

We finally ask:

Do best practices need to be universally accepted? Should there be a
single set of acceptable and/or effective best practices for health
AI/ML? We can conceptualize health AI/ML BPs as comprising a necessary
shared core criteria, and a component corresponding to additional
sufficient criteria with multiple alternatives of equal outcomes. In
other words to the extent that BPs abide by the laws of statistics, data
science, and so forth, they may vary in various details (of sufficient
criteria). What has to be present in all useful guidelines is an
underlying shared core of necessary criteria. Finally, there is value in
establishing BPs that further specialize the general rules to narrow
fields of application with more or less restrictive requirements. We
expect that such variations will become a topic of fruitful research.

Conclusion

It is our hope that the specific guidances presented here, especially
when focused on persistent and immutable desiderata and laws of
biomedical data science, will be a useful basis for both the growing
success of biomedical AI/ML, and for assisting in the study of best
practices as its own worthwhile subfield of AI/ML.

Key Concepts Discussed in This Chapter

Macro, Meso, and Micro Level Guidelines and Best Practices

BP Maturity levels: Mature vs Evolving

BP Impact levels: High vs Medium Impact

Key Messages Discussed in This Chapter

- Bringing Best Practices together. From background knowledge on
  methods’ properties, to the identification of pitfalls and the
  codification of corresponding best practices to enable the 7
  dimensions of AI/ML trust, adoption and acceptance.

- A checklist that integrates and characterizes all discussed BPs
  (Appendix 3).

- Best practices may need to be adapted to novel or unanticipated
  contexts of use.

- In the future, newer technology may (and should) render manual
  safeguards automatic.

- Mitigating factors can exist that can overcome lack of sufficient
  assumptions for correctness or other properties.

- Tampering with validated codes may have unwanted ramifications.

- There are pros and cons of transparent algorithms and codes vs Black
  Box technology.

- Developing a culture that values and strives for performant, ethical
  and accountable AI/ML is of paramount importance for wide spread
  adoption of BPs

- Over-engineering and over-regulating AI/ML are dangers that need be
  recognized and addressed.

- Improving BPs is unavoidable but needs to be done systematically.

- Bypassing regulations by claiming exploratory intent may hinder
  successful regulation and AI/ML based solution design.

- Misaligned expectations and technical reality is a problem that may be
  mitigated by BPs.

- Phased feasibility to iterative development may allow
  more economically efficient R&D.

- Multiple sets of BPs that achieve equal outcomes are conceivable.

Classroom Assignments & Discussion Topics Chapter “Synthesis of
Recommendations, Open Problems and the Study of Best Practices”

1.  1.

    Choose 3 of the listed BPs in the book that you think are most
    likely to change in the future and explain why you chose those.

     

2.  2.

    Choose 3 of the listed BPs in the book that you think are least
    likely to change in the future and explain why you chose those.

     

3.  3.

    Give 2 examples where an unusual context of use may override a
    listed guideline of your choice.

     

4.  4.

    Should systems that incorporate BPs give users the option to turn
    the BPs off? Discuss.

     

5.  5.

    How can generative algorithm specifications enable safe alterations
    of core algorithms?

     

6.  6.

    Provide 3 examples of algorithms that embed the following BPs:
    managing model complexity, managing sampling variance,
    differentiating between causal and predictive modeling.

     

7.  7.

    Have you encountered positive and negative examples of attitudes
    toward AI/ML safety? Discuss.

     

8.  8.

    Give an example of over-engineering AI/ML.

     

9.  9.

    Give an example of over-regulating AI/ML.

     

10. 10.

    Can you think of ways to ensure that a stated exploratory intent is
    genuine?

     

11. 11.

    What generates in your view misaligned of societal sentiment about
    biomedical AI/ML with technical reality? Can you think of solutions?

     

12. 12.

    Assume that two sets of BPs exist and give different guidance for a
    particular context or use case. How would you resolve this
    situation?

     

[Creative Commons]

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by/​4.​0/​), which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

Footnotes

1

 

Appendix A: Models for Time-to-Event Outcomes

Gyorgy Simon and Constantin Aliferis

Time-to-Event Outcomes

Survival data, (aka time-to-event data), describes the distribution of
time until an event occurs. This event can be the failure of a device,
incidence of a disease, a recurrence of a disease, an adverse event, or
death. Time is the number of days, weeks, months, years, etc. from the
beginning of follow-up until the event. Alternatively, it can also be
calendar time such as the subject’s age at the time of the event. We
tend to think of events as negative, such as death (after all, the field
of survival analysis is named after studying survival time, the time to
death), but it can also be a positive event, such as discharge from
hospital. In the following, we use the terms “survival” and
“time-to-event” interchangeably as long as context clarifies the use,
and we also use the terms “event”, “failure” and “death”
interchangeably, unless this causes confusion.

Analytic tasks involving a time-to-event outcome are analogous to most
other outcome distributions. The main tasks are (1) estimating the
time-to-event (or the survival probability distribution S(t)); (2)
testing whether two time-to-event distributions are statistically
different; and (3) assessing whether one or more covariates (e.g.
exposures) significantly affect the survival distribution.

The need for survival analysis. At first glance, time-to-event could be
viewed as a continuous quantity and be modeled as one of the many known
non-negative distributions, however, this approach breaks down for the
following reasons. First, some subjects never experience the event of
interest within the practical time frame of the study. Discarding these
patients (with unknown time-to-event) leads to loss of information,
because we know that these patients did not experience an event until
the end of the study. In other words, time-to-event is not missing
completely, it has been bounded. Second, some subjects are lost to
follow-up before the study ends. Again, discarding such patients because
their time-to-event is missing, discards useful information (i.e., that
they had not experienced an event until the time they were lost to
follow-up). Both of these situations are referred to as right censoring
(see terminology section below). Third, in a study where the outcome is
not death, many enrollees may have already experienced the event before
enrollment. If this is allowed, cases with time-to-event = 0 can have
high probability. Moreover, parametric distributions handle the general
properties of time-to-event modeling poorly. As an example, fourth,
outliers (extreme survivors) are common, and they have potential to
become an influential point for some distributions. Also, fifth, many
parametric distributions have parameters that mathematically relate to
their moments (mean, variance). Censored data can make the estimation of
moments on which model parameters depend, difficult, thus compromising
the model.

Pitfall A.1.1

In most practical settings, it is a significant pitfall to model
time-to-event/survival using ordinary predictive modeling classification
or regression.

Best Practice A.1.1

When modeling time-to-event outcomes, specialized methods, such as the
ones described in this section, should be used, at minimum as
comparators with conventional techniques.

Terminology

Let T be a random variable with T_(i) denoting the time at which an
event happened to subject i. Let f(t) denote the density of T and let
F(t) denote the cumulative density of T. The cumulative density is
referred to as the failure function and is defined as

[$$ F(t)=\Pr\;\left(T\le t\right)={\int}_0^tf\left(\tau \right)\; d\tau
. $$]

The survival (or survivor) function is the complement of the failure
function and is defined as the probability that a subject survives
beyond a particular time t

[$$ S(t)=\Pr \left(T&gt;t\right)={\int}_t^{\infty }f\left(\tau \right)\;
d\tau =1-F(t). $$]

Properties of the survival function. The survival function is monotonic,
non-increasing, equals 1 at time 0 and decreases to 0 as time approaches
infinity [44].

Often, instead of the survival function, we model the instantaneous
“probability” of an event. The hazard function is the instantaneous
“probability” per unit time that an event occurs exactly at time t given
that the patient has survived at least until time t,

[$$ h(t)=\underset{\varDelta T\to 0}{\lim}\Pr \left(T\le t\le
T+\varDelta T|T&gt;t\right). $$]

Properties of the hazard function. The hazard function can be thought of
as the “velocity” of the failure function or the rate of change in the
failure function. Since the survival function is non-increasing, the
failure function is non-decreasing and h(t) is non-negative. The hazard
is not a true probability, it is a rate [44].

The cumulative hazard is

[$$ H(t)={\int}_0^th\left(\tau \right)\; d\tau . $$]

The hazard and survival functions are linked to each other through the
following relationship [45]. By taking the derivative of ln S(t), we get

[$$ \frac{d\;\ln\;S(t)\;}{dt}=\frac{dS(t)/
dt}{S(t)}=-\frac{f(t)}{S(t)}=-h(t), $$]

which leads to

[$$ S(t)=\exp \left(-H(t)\right). $$]

Figure A.1 shows the survival (left) and the hazard (right) functions
for the diabetes dataset in [46]. The horizontal axis corresponds to the
follow-up time (in years). For visualization purposes we show points (in
grey color) on the actual hazard “curve”. There is one point every
follow-up day. The hazard estimates can change frequently in any
direction as long as they remain non-negative. To further improve
interpretability, a smoothed version of the hazard curve is also
presented in black. The survival curve is a non-increasing step function
starting at 1 at time 0 and ends at 0 at time infinity. It appears
smooth in this figure because of the high resolution (daily) and large
sample size, but it is nonetheless a step function. Note that the
survival function relates to the lack of event (probability of not
having an event), while the hazard function relates to experiencing an
event (the rate of having an event).

[]

Two line graphs. 1. A graph of survival function versus follow-up
denotes a decreasing trend of a line. It starts at (0, 1.00) and ends at
(6, 0.90). 2. A graph of hazard versus follow-up years denotes an
initial increase and follows a decline after 3 years. Values are
approximate.

Censoring

When a patient is lost to follow-up and is no longer observable, the
time-to-event beyond the time of the patient dropping out cannot be
observed. This is not a typical missing data problem as it first
appears, because we have partial observations: the event did not occur
while the subject was under observation. This partial observability is
called censoring.

Left censoring happens, when the event takes place before the subject
enters observation. We know that the event has already occurred at time
0, but we do not know when. Right censoring happens when the event takes
place after the subject is no longer observed. We know that the event
did not take place during the observation period but we do not know
when/whether it occurred afterwards. Common reasons for right censoring
are that the study ended, the subject is lost to follow-up or the
subject withdrew from the study. Finally, interval censoring brackets
the time of the event between two time points. We know that the event
did not take place before the first time point and that it already
occurred by the second time point.

Let C denote the time to censoring with density g() and cumulative
density G(). With [$$ \tilde{T} $$] denoting the true time-to-event, the
subject’s follow-up time T is [$$ T=\min \left(C,\tilde{T}\right) $$].
Let δ denote the event type: δ = 1 if an event took place ([$$
\tilde{T}\le C $$]); and δ = 0 if the subject got censored ([$$
\tilde{T}&gt;C $$]).

Censoring is random, if [$$ {\tilde{T}}_i $$] is independent of C_(i)
given X_(i), where X_(i) is the covariate vector of observation i.
Random censoring assumes that subjects who are censored at time t are
similar in terms of their survival experience to the subjects remaining
in the study. Independent censoring is a related concept. When a study
has subgroups of interest, independent censoring is satisfied if
censoring is random in all subgroups. Uninformative censoring happens
when the distribution of C_(i) and [$$ {\tilde{T}}_i $$] do not share
parameters [45, 47].

Competing risks arises when we have multiple outcomes of interest and
the occurrence of one outcome prevents us from observing another
outcome. As an example, consider heart disease and mortality as two
outcomes of interest. If a patient dies (from a cause other than heart
disease) we can no longer observe the patient’s time to heart disease.
In this case, we may have complete observation of the time-to-death, but
we only have partial information about the time to heart disease: we
only know that it is greater than the time-to-death.

Inference About Survival

In this section, we discuss methods to summarize the time-to-event
distribution of a population. First, the time-to-event distribution can
be summarized into a statistic (a single number) much in the same way as
the mean or median summarizes aspects of a typical distribution. The
fundamental difference is censoring: some subjects may not experience an
event and thus their exact time-to-event is unknown. Next, we describe
the time-to-event distribution as a function of time. We show methods to
estimate the survival function and equivalently the cumulative hazard
function. Finally, we present methods of constructing confidence
intervals around the survival and cumulative hazard functions.

Summary Statistics of Survival

A concise way of describing the survival distribution is by presenting
summary statistics. Often used summary statistics of common statistical
distributions include the mean, the standard deviation, and the median.
However in survival analysis, in the presence of censoring, it is
desirable to account for the follow-up times when we compute summary
statistics. Below, In Table A.1, we describe some of the commonly used
survival statistics [44].

Table A.1

Common statistics to summarize survival time distributions

  Statistic               Definition                                                            Remark
  ----------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  Average survival time   [$$ \overline{\mathrm{T}}=1/N{\sum}_i{T}_i $$]                        Ignores censoring
  Average hazard rate     [$$ \overline{\mathrm{h}}=\frac{\sum_i{\delta}_i}{\sum_i{T}_i} $$]    Uses hazard instead of survival to account for censoring
  Median survival time    Survival time t, where S(t) = 0.5                                     Lessens the impact of outliers
  k-year survival rate    Percentage of patients surviving k-years after their diagnosis [48]   Common choices for k include 5, 7, 10

Estimating the Survival Function

We present two estimators of the survival function: the Kaplan–Meier and
the Nelson–Aalen estimator. They yield very similar results, with, the
Kaplan–Meier estimator is more commonly used for estimating survival
itself, while the Nelson–Aalen estimator estimates the cumulative hazard
function, which is converted into the survival function.

Kaplan–Meier (Product Limit) Estimator

Let the index j iterate over the distinct time points t_(j) when an
event took place. Let us assume that there are J such time points. The
product limit formula is

[$$
\hat{S}\left({t}_j\right)=P\left(T&gt;{t}_j\right)=P\left(T&gt;{t}_{j-1}\right)P\left(T&gt;{t}_{j-1}\right)=\left[1-P\left(T={t}_j|T&gt;{t}_{j-1}\right)\right]P\left(T&gt;{t}_{j-1}\right)=\left(1-{h}_j\right)S\left({t}_{j-1}\right),
$$]

where h_(j) is the hazard at time t_(j). Expanding this formula yields
the Kaplan–Meier estimate

[$$
\hat{S}\left({t}_j\right)={\prod}_j\left(1-{\hat{h}}_j\right)={\prod}_j\left(1-\frac{d_j}{n_j}\right),
$$]

where d_(j) is the number of events and n_(j) is the number of patients
at risk at time t_(j).

Nelson–Aalen Estimator

The Nelson–Aalen estimator estimates the cumulative hazard as

[$$ \hat{H}(t)={\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le t}\frac{d_j}{n_j}. $$]

The relationship between the cumulative hazard and the survival function
can be used to estimate survival, yielding the Breslow formula

[$$ \hat{S}\left({t}_j\right)=\exp
\left(-\hat{H}(t)\right)={\prod}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\exp\;\left(-\frac{d_j}{n_j}\right). $$]

Comparison of the Kaplan–Meier and the Breslow (Nelson–Aalen) estimators
(Fig. A.2). Since exp (−h_(j)) ∼ 1 − h_(j) for small h_(j), the
Kaplan–Meier and the Breslow estimates are very similar and
asymptotically equal. The Breslow estimate has uniformly lower variance
but is upwards biased [45]. When ties are present in the data, the
Kaplan–Meier estimate is more accurate. Fleming and Harrington proposed
a modification to the Breslow estimate by introducing a small jitter to
break the ties in the follow-up times.

[]

A line graph of survival function versus follow-up years denotes a
decreasing trend for the Kaplan–Meier and Nelson–Aalen estimators. Both
lines align with each other and have completely similar trends.

Confidence Intervals for the Survival Curves

Whenever conducting a survival analysis it is imperative to present
confidence intervals. Statistical packages routinely offer such
estimates. However when survival analysis is conducted with modified
conventional predictive methods often there are no facilities for CI
estimation. We thus present here the fundamentals of estimating CIs for
survival curves and hazard curves.

There are two fundamentally different approaches to constructing the
confidence intervals. First, the confidence interval can be constructed
in survival space, which requires the variance of the survival estimate.
A second approach is to build the confidence interval in a transformed
space and map the upper and lower limits back into survival space.
Common transformations include log, where the confidence interval is
constructed in essentially the cumulative hazard space, log–log,
log–logit, etc.

Greenwood’s Formula

First we consider constructing the confidence interval in survival
space. The variance of the log survival function can be estimated using
Greenwood’s formula

[$$ \mathrm{Var}\left(\log \hat{S}(t)\right)={\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\frac{d_j}{n_j\left({n}_j-{d}_j\right)}, $$]

where d_(j) and n_(j) are defined previously as the number of events at
t_(j) and the number of patients at risk at time t_(j), respectively.
The delta method can be used to derive the variance of the (non-log)
survival function, which yields the plain-scale confidence interval

[$$ \hat{S}(t)\pm z\sqrt{\hat{S}{(t)}^2{\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\frac{d_j}{n_j\left({n}_j-{d}_j\right)},} $$]

where z is the normal quantile corresponding to the confidence level.

Alternatively, the confidence interval can be constructed in
log-survival space and exponentiated back into (non-log) survival space,
yielding

[$$ \hat{S}(t)\exp \left(\pm z\sqrt{\mathrm{Var}\left(\log
\hat{S}(t)\right)}\right). $$]

Recommendation

When estimating the confidence interval for a survival function, use the
Kaplan–Meier estimator for the survival function, construct the
confidence interval in log-survival space using the Greenwood formula
and exponentiate the limits back into survival space [45].

One caveat is that the limits of the confidence interval can fall
outside the [0, 1] range for both the plain-scale and the log-scale.
Formulating the confidence interval on the complementary log–log scale,
i.e. log[−log S(t)], ensures that the limits are within the 0–1 range,
but offers little additional benefit.

Confidence Interval Through the Nelson–Aalen Estimator

Confidence intervals can also be constructed using the Nelson–Aalen
estimator of cumulative hazard. Since the Nelson–Aalen estimator has a
binomial likelihood, it yields the same confidence interval as above.

Alternatively, the connection to the Poisson likelihood can be
exploited, yielding a different (lower) variance for the Nelson–Aalen
estimator

[$$ \mathrm{Var}\left(\hat{H}(t)\right)={\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\frac{d_j}{n_j^2}. $$]

This variance can be directly used to construct a confidence interval
for the cumulative hazard, but using the log-cumulative hazard scale is
recommended. By the delta method,

[$$ \mathrm{Var}\left(\log
\hat{H}(t)\right)=\frac{\mathrm{Var}\left(\hat{H}(t)\right)}{\hat{H}{(t)}^2},
$$]

yielding a confidence interval of

[$$ \hat{H}(t)\exp \left(\pm
z\sqrt{\mathrm{Var}\left(\hat{H}(t)\right)/\hat{H}{(t)}^2}\right). $$]

Although the cumulative hazard and the survival function are tightly
linked, when the goal is to build a confidence interval for the survival
function, the recommended method is to use the Kaplan–Meier estimate
with Greenwood’s formula in log-survival scale; but when the goal is to
build a confidence interval for the cumulative hazard, the recommended
method is the Nelson–Aalen estimator of the cumulative hazard, its
Poisson-based variance estimator and using log-cumulative-hazard scale
[45].

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: Kaplan–Meier (KM) estimator of survival curves         |
+:===============================+:====================================+
| Main use                       |  – Estimate survival curves         |
|                                |                                     |
|                                |  – Visualization of survival curves |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Context of use                 |  – Non-parametric modeling          |
|                                |                                     |
|                                |  – Predict survival probability at  |
|                                | time t                              |
|                                |                                     |
|                                |  – The data does not meet the       |
|                                | assumptions of more sophisticated   |
|                                | (e.g., Cox regression) survival     |
|                                | modeling                            |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Secondary use                  |  – Checking the proportional        |
|                                | hazards assumptions                 |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                       | Pitfall A.1.1.1. Estimating the     |
|                                | effect of covariates is difficult.  |
|                                | A separate curve is computed for    |
|                                | each covariate combination. Does    |
|                                | not scale to more than a very small |
|                                | number of covariates                |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Principle of operation         |  – Non-parametric estimator         |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties         |  – In biomedicine is practically    |
|                                | expected and used in every          |
| and empirical evidence         | publication involving survival      |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Best practices                 | Best Practice A.1.1.1. Plotting the |
|                                | KM curve can reveal data problems.  |
|                                | Consider the complementary log–log  |
|                                | plot of the KM curve                |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| References                     | Recommended textbooks include [44,  |
|                                | 45, 47]                             |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+

Comparing Survival Curves

Comparing the Estimated Survival Curves from Two or More Populations

Two survival curves are considered statistically equivalent when the
data supports the hypothesis that the true survival curves of the
underlying populations are the same and any apparent difference between
them is merely due to random variations in the samples that were used to
estimate the curves. Testing for differences of survival curves is
essential in order to establish that any nominal or apparent differences
are not due to random sample variation.

Consider a group variable, which divides the population into G groups.
At each unique event time, j = 1,...,J, the association between grouping
and survival can be assessed. The null hypothesis is that the hazard at
time t_(j) is the same across all groups for all j. The alternative
hypothesis is that the hazard differs between the groups at least one j.

Let n_(gj) denote the number of subjects at risk in group g at time
t_(j) and let d_(gj) denote the number of failures in group g at time
t_(j). For simplicity, we concentrate on the two-sample test, where
G = 2. The expected number of failures in group 1 at time t_(j) is

[$$
{e}_{1j}=\frac{n_{1j}}{n_{1j}+{n}_{2j}}\left({d}_{1j}+{d}_{2j}\right).
$$]

The observed number of failures across time in group g is
O_(g) = ∑_(j)d_(gj) and the expected number of failures is
E_(g) = ∑_(j)e_(gj). The log-rank statistic becomes

[$$
Z=\frac{{\left({O}_g-{E}_g\right)}^2}{\mathrm{Var}\left({O}_g-{E}_g\right)},
$$]

and the variance can be estimated from the hypergeometric distribution.
Z follows a Χ² distribution with 1 degree of freedom and can be used as
test of curve equivalence.

Extensions of the Log-Rank Test

The log-rank test in its original form considers the difference between
the number of observed and expected events at the jth failure time with
equal weight for all j. By using different weights over time, one can
emphasize different parts of the survival curve. The test statistic with
weights w(t_(j)) is

[$$
Z=\frac{\left({\sum}_jw\left({t}_j\right){\left({d}_{gj}-{e}_{gj}\right)}^2\right)}{\mathrm{Var}\left({\sum}_jw\left({t}_j\right)\left({d}_{gj}-{e}_{gj}\right)\right)}.
$$]

Several weighing schemes have been devised and each provides a different
emphasis. Below we summarize some of the most common tests. In case of
the Wilcox test, the weight at each unique failure time is the number of
subjects at risk, w(t_(j)) = n_(j). Since usually there are more
patients at risk at the beginning, this weighing scheme emphasizes the
beginning of the survival curve, namely the early failures. The
Tarone–Ware test is similar, except it uses [$$
w\left({t}_j\right)=\sqrt{n_j}. $$] The Peto test uses [$$
w\left({t}_j\right)=\underline{S}(t) $$], where weights are proportional
to the survival probability and the Flemington–Harrington weight is a
more general version, assigning weights that depend on a weighted
product of the survival and failure probabilities [47].

Effect of Covariates on Survival

We use regression models to assess the effect of covariates on the
hazard. Models we consider fall into two categories: semi-parametric and
parametric models. The semi-parametric models are extensions of the Cox
proportional hazards regression. The Cox model is semi-parametric; it
models the hazard as a product of a non-parametric baseline hazard and a
multiplicative effect of the covariates. The covariates thus have a
proportional (multiplicative) effect on the baseline hazard, resulting
in the proportional hazards assumption. The second class of models are
fully parametric. They make a distributional assumption about the
cumulative hazard (as a function of time) and model the location
parameter of this distribution as a linear additive function of the
covariates. The location parameter shifts time, accelerates or
decelerates the passing of time, thus these models are referred to as
accelerated failure time models.

Cox Proportional Hazards Regression

The key idea behind the proportional hazards model is to model the
hazard through a regression model composed of a time-dependent baseline
hazard and a proportional (multiplicative) covariate effect.

Figure A.3 illustrates the proportional hazards assumption using the
diabetes example from [46]. The left panel shows the cumulative hazard
of diabetes as a function of years of follow-up time. The orange curve
in the plot corresponds to patients with impaired fasting glucose (IFG)
and the blue line corresponds to patients with healthy glucose. At all
time points, the ratio of cumulative hazard along the orange line versus
the blue line is constant, 6.37. In other words, having IFG (versus not
having IFG) confers a proportional, 6.37-time increase in diabetes risk
upon the patients, and it remains constant across time.

[]

Two line graphs. 1. A graph of cumulative hazard versus follow-up
denotes an increasing trend for I F G and baseline. I F G denotes a
higher value and steep increase. 2. A graph of survival function versus
follow-up denotes a decreasing trend for I F G and baseline. I F G has a
sharp decline.

Let X be the covariate matrix, and let X_(i) denote the covariate vector
for subject i. The hazard at time t is

[$$ {h}_i(t)={h}_0(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta \right), $$]

(A.1)

where h_(i)(t) is the hazard of the ith subject at time t, h₀(t) is the
baseline hazard (common across all subjects) at time t, and β are
regression coefficients. The cumulative hazards can be expressed as

[$$ {H}_i(t)={H}_0(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta \right)=\exp \left({X}_i\beta
\right)\;{\int}_0^t{h}_0\left(\tau \right) d\tau, $$]

showing that the covariates increase (or decrease) the cumulative hazard
proportionally relative to the baseline cumulative hazard.

In the diabetes example in Fig. A.3, the cumulative baseline hazard
H₀(t) is the blue curve in the left panel, X_(i) denotes whether the
patient presents with impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and the cumulative
hazard H_(i)(t) for patients with IFG is the orange curve.

Comparing the hazards of two subjects, i and j, we obtain

[$$ \frac{H_i(t)}{H_j(t)}=\frac{H_0(t)\exp\;\left({X}_i\beta
\right)\;}{H_0(t)\exp \left({X}_j\beta
\right)}=\frac{\exp\;\left({X}_i\beta \right)\;}{\exp \left({X}_j\beta
\right)}. $$]

The resulting quantity is the hazard ratio and is constant with respect
to time. The name proportional hazard reflects the fact that the hazards
of two patients are proportional to each other. Continuing with the
diabetes example, if patient i has IFG (X_(i) = 1) and patient j does
not (X_(j) = 0), with β = 1.85, the hazard ratio is exp(1.85) = 6.37.
Therefore, the ratio of the hazard between the orange and the blue
curves in Fig. A.3 is 6.37.

When fitting a proportional hazards regression model, the partial
likelihood is maximized in terms of the coefficients

[$$ {\prod}_i\;{\prod}_t{\left(\frac{R_i(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta
\right)\;}{\sum_j{R}_j(t)\exp\;\left({X}_j\beta
\right)\;}\right)}^{\delta_i(t)}, $$]

where i iterates over the subjects, t over the time points,
R_(i)(t) indicates whether subject i is in the risk set at time t, and
δ_(i)(t) indicates whether subject i had an event at time t. This
formula assumes no ties in event times. The likelihood is “partial” in
the sense that the baseline hazard remains unspecified.

From the fundamental equation of the proportional hazards model (formula
(A.1)) it follows that if the base hazard is known or can be estimated,
then the absolute hazard can be estimated by multiplying the base hazard
with the proportional estimate effect of the modeled covariates.

Assumptions

1.  (i)

    The proportional hazards assumption: the covariates have a
    proportional (multiplicative) effect on the hazard relative to the
    baseline hazard.

     

2.  (ii)

    Independence. Observations with an event are independent of each
    other. Only observations with an event are multiplied in the partial
    likelihood.

     

3.  (iii)

    The effect of the covariates is linear and additive on the log–log
    survival.

     

Testing the significance of the covariates

Generally, in regression, we have two ways to test the significance of a
coefficient. The first method is the likelihood ratio test and the
second one is the Wald test. Although the proportional hazards
regression maximizes a partial likelihood (as opposed to a full
likelihood) as it leaves the baseline hazard unspecified, this does not
affect the likelihood ratio test and both methods remain applicable.

Estimating the Baseline Hazard

Fitting a Cox proportional hazards model does not require the estimation
of the baseline hazard. After the model has been fitted, the baseline
hazard function is estimated using a variant of the Nelson–Aalen
estimator that incorporates effects of covariates

[$$ {\hat{H}}_0(t)={\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\frac{\delta_j}{\sum_k{R}_k\left({t}_j\right)\exp \left({X}_k\beta
\right)}, $$]

where R_(k)(t) indicates whether subject k is in the risk set at time
t_(j). Notice, that when β = 0, this reduces to the Nelson–Aalen
estimator from the earlier “Estimating the Survival Function” section.

The variance of the baseline hazard is also based on the Nelson–Aalen
estimator

[$$ Var\left({\hat{H}}_0(t)\right)={\sum}_{j:{t}_j\le
t}\frac{d_j}{{\left({\sum}_k{R}_k\left({t}_j\right)\exp \left({X}_k\beta
\right)\;\right)}^2}. $$]

Making Predictions

For an individual i, hazard can be estimated as

[$$ {\hat{H}}_i(t)={\hat{H}}_0(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta \right) $$]

and the corresponding survival can be computed using the Breslow
estimator

[$$ {\hat{S}}_i(t)=\exp \left(-{\hat{H}}_i(t)\right). $$]

Testing the Proportional Hazards Assumption

There are three methods for testing the proportional hazards assumption.

1.  (i)

    Visual Inspection

    The first method is visual inspection of the log–log survival plot.
    Since under the proportional hazards assumption,
    [$$ {\hat{S}}_i(t)=\exp \left(-{\hat{H}}_0(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta
    \right)\right), $$]

     

its log–log transform is

[$$ \log
\left(-\log\;{\hat{S}}_i(t)\right)=\left(\log\;{\hat{H}}_0(t)\right)+{X}_i\beta
. $$]

The log–log transform of two survival curves, corresponding to two
different values of X_(i), (say) X₁ and X₂, only differ in the X_(i)β
term, which is not a function of time t, thus the two curves should be
parallel with a distance of (X₂ − X₁)β between them.

To check the validity of the proportional hazards assumption, we plot
the log–log transform of the Kaplan–Meier survival curves for two
different values of X_(i) and expect these curves to be parallel.

A benefit of visual inspection is that we can see where (at what t) the
violation of the proportional hazards assumptions happens and we may
also see patterns that suggest the functional forms to correct the
violation. However, the decision whether the proportional hazards
assumption is violated is subjective, no test statistic or p-value is
provided to guide the visual comparison.

Figure A.4 shows the complementary log–log plot of the diabetes data
set. The blue line corresponds to patients without impaired fasting
glucose (IFG) while the orange line corresponds to patients with IFG.
Since the two lines, corresponding to the two levels of glucose status,
are parallel, the proportional hazards assumption appears to hold for
glucose status. Although a formal test reports significant departure
from the proportional hazards assumption, the lines look reasonably
parallel and it is safe to assume the reported violation is merely a
result of the large sample size (54,700 patients).

[]

A line graph of log-logistic survival versus the log of follow-up
denotes an increasing trend for I F G and baseline with multiple
fluctuations at the initial phase. The line for I F G denotes the
highest value.

Figure A.5 shows two synthetic examples where the proportional hazards
assumption is violated. In both examples, the blue line represents the
baseline hazard and the orange line corresponds to some exposure. In the
left panel, the effect of the exposure changes from beneficial to
harmful at about 2 years. In the right panel, the effect of the exposure
(orange line) is quadratically related to (log) time.

1.  (ii)

    Time-Dependent Covariates

    The second method is based on time-dependent covariates. Under the
    proportional hazards assumption, adding regression terms involving
    interactions between the covariates and functions of time should not
    improve the fit. To check the validity of the proportional hazards
    assumption, we fit models of the form
    [$$ h(t)={h}_0(t)\exp \left( X\beta +\left(X\times g(t)\right)\gamma
    \right), $$]

     

where g(t) are vectors of function of time, X × g(t) are covariate-time
interactions and γ is the coefficient vector of the covariate-time
interaction terms. Under the proportional hazards assumption, we expect
γ = 0.

[]

Two line graphs of the log-logistic survival versus the log of follow-up
denote an increasing trend for I F G and baseline with multiple
fluctuations at the initial phase. The line for I F G denotes a higher
value in both.

A benefit of this method is that a statistical test is performed, a
p-value is obtained, and thus the decision is objective. A weakness is
the need for choosing an appropriate function g(t). Different choices of
g() can lead to different conclusions. Common choices include the
identity:g(t) = t; the log transform of time: g(t) = log t ; and the
heaviside function, where g(t) = 1 if t exceeds a threshold τ and
g(t) = 0 otherwise.

1.  (iii)

    Schoenfeld Residuals

    The third method is based on the Schoenfeld residuals. The Shoenfeld
    residual at the jth event (which occurred at time t_(j)) is defined
    as

     

[$$ {s}_j={\sum}_i\left[{X}_i-{X}_i\frac{R_i\left({t}_j\right)\exp
\left({X}_i\beta \right)\;}{\sum_k{R}_k\left({t}_j\right)\exp
\left({X}_k\beta \right)\;}\right]{\delta}_i\left({t}_j\right). $$]

The notation is the same as before: R_(i)(t_(j)) denotes whether patient
i is in the risk set at time t_(j), and δ_(i)(t_(j)) denotes whether
patient i had an event at time t_(j).

Typically, in regression, we estimate some outcome y using predictors X.
We can use the resulting regression model to predict [$$ \hat{y} $$]
based on the predictors X. The residual is the difference between the
predicted and actual outcomes, [$$ \hat{y}-y $$].

The Schoenfeld residual turns this process on its head. At a particular
value of y, we predict X, and the residual is the difference between the
predicted and actual X.

In the context of Cox models, the residual at time t_(j), measures the
difference between X_(i) and its expectation given the model and the
outcome (at time t_(j)). To see this, consider that [$$
\frac{R_i\left({t}_j\right)\exp \kern0.36em \exp\;\left({X}_i\beta
\right)\;}{\sum_k{R}_k\left({t}_j\right)\exp \kern0.36em
\exp\;\left({X}_k\beta \right)\;} $$] is the probability of an event
given the risk set at t_(j) and the sum [$$
{\sum}_i{X}_i\frac{R_i\left({t}_j\right)\exp \kern0.36em
\exp\;\left({X}_i\beta \right)\;}{\sum_k{R}_k\left({t}_j\right)\exp
\kern0.36em \exp\;\left({X}_k\beta \right)\;} $$] is the expectation of
X_(i). The Schoenfeld residual can thus be thought of as an
observed-expected residual.

There is a Schoenfeld residual for each covariate at each event time.
The Schoenfeld residuals can be combined into a D × p matrix, where D is
the total number of events and p is the number of predictors.

Consider a model for hazard with time-varying coefficients

[$$ h(t)={h}_0(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta (t)\right). $$]

This model allows for the coefficient β to change over time. This
formulation can account for example for a treatment to have a burn-in
period before it reaches its full efficacy or for the treatment to lose
efficacy over time. The proportional hazards assumption states that
β(t) = β for all t.

Therneau and Grambsch showed that

[$$
E\left({s}_{jk}^{\ast}\right)+{\hat{\beta}}_k={\beta}_{k\left({t}_j\right)},
$$]

where [$$ \hat{\beta} $$] is obtained from a Cox model, [$$
{\hat{\beta}}_k $$] is its kth component, and [$$ {s}_{jk}^{\ast } $$]
is the scaled Schoenfeld residual (for the jth event and the kth
covariate). The scaling factor is the variance of X_(k). Recall that
X_(k) is being “predicted” based on the outcome and thus it has variance
[45].

The model fit can be visualized by plotting the Schoenfeld residual as a
function of t (or some function g(t) of t). Under the proportional
hazards assumption, β_(k)(t_(j)) = β_(k) and thus [$$
E\left({s}_{jk}^{\ast}\right)+{\hat{\beta}}_k $$] should be independent
of time or a function thereof, so the line should be horizontal.
Deviations both in terms of the location (which t) and the extent can be
seen from the graph.

A formal test for the violation of the proportional hazards assumption
can be obtained by fitting a regression line to the plot of form

[$$ {\beta}_k(t)={\beta}_k+\gamma \left(g(t)-\underline{g}\right), $$]

where [$$ \underline{g} $$] is the mean value of the transformed time.
Under the proportional hazards assumption, γ should be 0.

Addressing the Violations of the Proportional Hazards Assumption

The consequences of violating the proportional hazards assumption are
usually not dire. Violations do not usually affect the predictions, they
mostly affect the error estimates. Workarounds for the violations exist,
however, they end up answering a question that is different from the
original research question. When the data set is large, violations are
almost unavoidable. Thus depending on the extent of the violation and
purpose of the study, we may opt to ignore the violation.

Accordingly, when a test reports a proportional hazards violation, we
start by verifying that the non-proportionality is substantial. Not all
non-proportionalities are substantial. Statistically significant
non-proportionality can arise from large sample sizes, where even small
deviations from proportionality can become significant; or violation can
arise also from influential points. The former can be ignored, the
latter can be removed. To assess whether a non-proportionality is
substantial, the key method is visualization. Not only can visualization
show whether the non-proportionality is substantial, but it can also
suggest a functional form to correct it. Once we verified that the
violation is substantial and decided to address it, we have several
options.

The first option is stratified Cox models. If the covariate with the
non-proportionality is a factor with relatively few levels, it can be
used as a stratification factor in a stratified Cox model. The
non-proportional effect now becomes part of the baseline hazard. If the
covariate is a quantitative variable, stratified Cox models can still be
constructed, but the variable needs to be categorized (into a few
categories) before it can be used as a stratification factor.

If the non-proportionality is present in a relatively short timeframe
and not in the entire timeline, the timeline can be partitioned into
segments in which the proportional hazards assumption holds and separate
Cox models can be constructed in each time segment.

Finally, if the non-proportionality was detected through methods (2) or
(3), using time or a transformation of time, g(t), adding an interaction
term with the appropriate time-transformation can resolve the
non-proportionality.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: Cox proportional hazards regression                   |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main use                         |  – Regression models for         |
|                                  | time-to-event outcomes           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  – Right-censored data           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Interest is the effect of     |
|                                  | covariates and making            |
|                                  | predictions                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Same interpretability as      |
|                                  | classical regression models for  |
|                                  | other outcome types              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    | N/A                              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall A.1.3.1. The key         |
|                                  | assumption is the proportional   |
|                                  | hazards assumption. Often,       |
|                                  | violation of the proportional    |
|                                  | hazards assumption is a          |
|                                  | non-issue, occasionally it can   |
|                                  | lead to problems                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall A.1.3.2. The models      |
|                                  | assume linearity and additivity. |
|                                  | Not appropriate if these         |
|                                  | assumptions are violated         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall A.1.3.3. High            |
|                                  | dimensionality is a problem for  |
|                                  | the unregularized model          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  – It is a semi-parametric       |
|                                  | regression model                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – The effect of covariates is a |
|                                  | proportional (multiplicative)    |
|                                  | increase/decrease relative to a  |
|                                  | time-dependent baseline hazard   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Coefficient estimates are     |
|                                  | obtained from maximizing a       |
|                                  | partial likelihood               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  – Although a partial likelihood |
| empirical evidence               | is maximized, the favorable      |
|                                  | properties of maximum likelihood |
|                                  | estimation are preserved:        |
|                                  | estimates are consistent,        |
|                                  | efficient and asymptotically     |
|                                  | normally distributed             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Partial likelihood is convex  |
|                                  | and thus easy to solve           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best Practice A.1.3.1.           |
|                                  | First-choice model for           |
|                                  | time-to-event data               |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best Practice A.1.3.2. Consider, |
|                                  | additionally, whether the        |
|                                  | problem can be solved as a       |
|                                  | classification problem, or using |
|                                  | survival modeling versions of ML |
|                                  | predictive models                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best Practice A.1.3.3. In the    |
|                                  | presence of substantial          |
|                                  | violations, different models,    |
|                                  | including extensions of the Cox  |
|                                  | PH, may be more appropriate      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best Practice A.1.3.4. Consider  |
|                                  | the Markov Boundary feature      |
|                                  | selector for survival analysis   |
|                                  | that results from using Cox      |
|                                  | proportional hazards models as   |
|                                  | conditional independence testing |
|                                  | within the Markov Boundary       |
|                                  | algorithm                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best Practice A.1.3.5. For       |
|                                  | high-dimensional data, consider  |
|                                  | regularized Cox proportional     |
|                                  | hazards models. Also consider    |
|                                  | the Cox Markov Boundary method   |
|                                  | described above                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       | Kleinbaum DG, Klein M. Survival  |
|                                  | Analysis. A Self-Learning Text.  |
|                                  | 2020, Springer                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Therneau T, Grambsch P. Modeling |
|                                  | Survival Data. Extending the Cox |
|                                  | Model. 2000, Springer            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Extensions of the Cox Proportional Hazards Regression

Several extensions to the Cox PH model have been proposed [45]. In this
section, we review some of them.

1.  1.

    Stratified Cox Model

    Stratified Cox models allow the population to be divided into
    different non-overlapping groups, called “strata”. Each stratum has
    its own baseline hazard and each group may also have its own
    coefficient vector. The standard form of a stratified Cox models is
    [$$ {h}_i(t)={h}_{0k}(t)\exp \left({X}_i\beta \right), $$]

     

which assumes a common covariate effect across all strata that is
proportional to the stratum-specific baseline hazard, h_(0k)(t) for the
kth stratum. The coefficients represent an “average” hazard ratio across
the population (regardless of strata). This is the most flexible way of
incorporating effects that violate the proportional hazards assumption,
but stratified cox models offer no direct way of assessing the
significance of the stratifying factor. An alternative form of the
stratified Cox models considers the possibility of some covariates in a
stratum (or some of the strata) having an effect that differs from its
effect in other strata. Such effects are incorporated as interaction
effects between the covariate and the stratum. If all covariates have
interactions with the strata, then the resulting Cox model is the same
as fitting separate Cox models for each stratum. Naturally, having to
estimate separate baseline hazards and interaction terms requires
sufficient sample size.

1.  2.

     Recurring Events and Counting Process Cox Model

    So far, time-event data was described by the triplet {T_(i), δ_(i),
    X_(i)}, where T_(i) denotes the time to event, δ_(i) the event type
    (event or censoring), and X_(i) is the covariate vector.
    Alternatively, each subject’s timeline can be divided into multiple
    segments and each segment can be described by a quartet {start_(i),
    end_(i), δ_(i), X_(i)}, where start_(i) and end_(i) are the two end
    points of the time segment, δ_(i) denotes whether an event occured
    in the time segment, and X_(i) is the covariate vector. This format
    is called the counting process format. Many applications of the
    counting process format exist, here we highlight a few.

    The first application is the change of the time scale. The term time
    scale refers to the way time is measured. The triplet format
    measures time on the study scale, and, specifically, time 0 is when
    subjects entered the study. The counting process format allows for
    different time scales. For example, time can be measured as
    patients’ age, where start_(i) is the age when they entered the
    study and end_(i) is the age when they experienced an event. We
    discuss different time scales in more detail later.

    Another commonly used application of the counting process format is
    time-dependent covariate Cox models. Time-dependent covariate Cox
    models allow for modeling under the assumption that the covariates
    can change over time. The time scale is divided into multiple
    segments and each segment can have its own covariate vector. As long
    as the subjects experience at most one event, the time-dependent
    covariate Cox model does not cause any complications, even though
    each subject can contribute multiple observations (rows). This
    stands in contrast to longitudinal data analysis (Section
    “Longitudinal Data Analysis” in Chapter “An Appraisal and Operating
    Characteristics of Major ML Methods Applicable in Healthcare &
    Health Science”), where observations from the same subject are
    correlated and this causes estimation issues. The key assumption to
    avoid such estimation problems is that the subjects have at most one
    event.

    A third application of the counting process format is when subjects
    can experience multiple events. The timeline can be divided into
    multiple segments when subjects experience an event. Now, each
    subject can enter the partial likelihood function multiple times,
    every time they have an event. Several remedies exist. First, we can
    consider only the first even of all patients. Second, we can use
    longitudinal data analysis techniques. Analogues of both GEEs and
    mixed effect models exist for time to event outcomes. A third,
    commonly used option is to initially fit a model ignoring the
    correlation due to the possibly multiple observations per subject
    (with event) and then re-computing the error estimates, taking the
    correlation into account. Chapter 8.2.2 of [45] describes three
    popular variations of this option in detail.

     

2.  3.

    Age-Scale Models

    The term time scale refers to the way time is measured for a
    time-to-event outcome. Typically, time is measured from a particular
    event, e.g. enrollment into the study, to the end of study. This is
    the study time scale. An alternative is calendar scale, where time
    is measured based on a calendar, e.g. the age of the participant.

    Changing the time scale has two important effects. First, the risk
    sets are different. At first sight it may appear that age scale can
    be easily converted into a study-scale by
    T_(i) = end_(i) − start_(i), however, the risk sets are different.
    Consider two patients. The first one enters the study at the age of
    40 and suffers a heart attack (event of interest) at the age of 51.
    The second one enters the study at 55 and suffers a heart attack
    5 years later at the age of 50. On the study-time scale, we have two
    events, one at 5 and one at 11 years. At the time of the first
    event, at year 5, we have a risk set of two patients. In contrast,
    on the age scale, we have two events, one at 51 and one at 60. At
    both events, the risk set contains only one patient. Since the risk
    sets are different, the survival estimates (or equivalently the
    hazard estimates) are different, as well. These two time-scales
    yield different results and admit different interpretations.

    The second effect of age-scale relates to how age is entered into
    the model. One option is to use study-scale and add a covariate that
    represents age; and the other option is to use age-scale. In case of
    using age scale, age is modeled completely non-parametrically; the
    baseline hazard is a function of age. As such, the statistical
    significance of the age effect is difficult to assess. Conversely,
    when age is added as a covariate, the usual assumptions (linear,
    additive effect) apply and the baseline hazard is based on time in
    the study. Whether we use age-scale or study-time scale can also be
    determined based on whether the model assumptions about age as a
    covariate are reasonable.

     

Parametric Survival Models

In this section, we model the time-to-event variable T using parametric
distributions. Consider X, a covariate matrix and β the regression
coefficients. Rather than modeling T directly, we model its natural
logarithm as

[$$ \log\;T=\mu + X\beta +\sigma W. $$]

Terminology

In this model, μ is called a location parameter, σ is called the scale
parameter and W is the error term. Similarly to linear regression, we
assume a distribution for the error term W which implies a distribution
for log T. The distribution of W is assumed to be a location-scale
distribution. Location-scale distributions have two parameters, a
location and a scale. For example, the normal (Gaussian) distribution is
a location-scale distribution, with the mean μ being the location and σ
the scale. When W follows a location-scale distribution, log T, as
defined above, follows the same distribution as W, but with different
location and scale parameters. The distribution of T is typically
different, but related.

This shift in location μ accelerates or decelerates the passing of time
and thus this class of models is referred to as accelerated failure time
(AFT) models. Let S₀(t) denote the survival time distribution when all
covariates are 0. The survival time distribution for a subject with
covariates X is

[$$ {\displaystyle \begin{array}{c}S(t)=\kern1em \Pr
\left(T&gt;t\right)=\Pr \left(\log T&gt;\log t\right)\\ {}\kern0.5em
=\Pr \kern0.75em \left(\mu + X\beta +\sigma W&gt;\log t\right)\\
{}\kern0.5em =\Pr \left(\mu +\sigma W&gt;\log t- X\beta \right)\\
{}\kern0.5em =\Pr\;\left(\exp \left(\mu +\sigma W\right)&gt;t\exp
\left(- X\beta \right)\right)\\ {}\kern0.5em ={S}_0(t)\left(t\exp \left(
X\beta \right)\right)\end{array}} $$]

The covariates, depending on the sign of Xβ, accelerate or decelerate
the passing of time by a factor of exp(−Xβ).

Figure A.6 shows an AFT model fitted to the diabetes dataset. The
outcome is diabetes-free survival, the horizontal axis is follow-up
years. The orange line represents patients with impaired fasting glucose
(IFG) and the blue represents patients with normal fasting glucose.
Patients with normal fasting glucose have higher diabetes-free survival
probability. If we draw a horizontal line at a particular
(diabetes-free) survival probability, and compute the ratio of the time
it takes to get to that probability along the blue line versus the
orange line, we would find that this ratio is constant, exp(−2.08) = .12
in this example. In other words, the time it takes for the diabetes-free
survival to drop to a probability P is much shorter (takes 0.12 times as
long) for patients with IFG than without.

[]

A line graph of survival versus follow-up denotes a decreasing trend for
baseline and I F G starting from the same point. The line for I F G has
a sharper decline.

Different AFT models differ in the distribution of W and T. In what
follows, we will describe some of the most commonly used AFT models and
their specific assumptions and conclude the section by describing how to
select the most appropriate model based on the assumptions.

Log-Normal Survival Model

Suppose that we assume a standard normal distribution for the noise,
W~N(0, 1). The log of survival time (log T) is then distributed as
N(μ + Xβ, σ²) and T itself follows a log normal distribution. The
survival function is

[$$ S(t)=1-F(t)=1-\varPhi \left(\frac{\log\;T-\mu -
X\beta}{\sigma}\right), $$]

where Φ is the cumulative density of the standard normal distribution.

Exponential Survival Model

One commonly used survival time distribution is the exponential
distribution. The exponential distribution yields a survival function

[$$ S(t)=\exp \left(-\lambda t\right),\kern1.12em \lambda &gt;0, $$]

where λ is a location parameter, often called the rate parameter. The
exponential distribution does not have a scale parameter. Figure A.7
shows exponential survival curves corresponding to different rate
parameters.

[]

A line graph of survival versus time denotes a decreasing trend of 3
lines representing 0.5, 1, and 2. All lines start and end nearly at the
same point, while the line denoting 2 has a shear decline.

If T follows an exponential distribution, log T and thus W follows an
extreme value distribution. The extreme value distribution can be
re-parameterized to become a location-scale distribution, yielding a
density of

[$$ {f}_{EV}\left(x;\mu; \sigma \right)=\frac{1}{\sigma}\exp
\left(\frac{x-\mu }{\sigma }-{e}^{\frac{x-\mu }{\sigma }}\right), $$]

where μ is the location and σ is the scale parameter. If T follows an
exponential distribution, the scale is set to 1.

In the exponential survival model, we assume that the error term W
follows extreme value distribution with location 0 and scale 1, W ~
EV(0, 1). Then log T = μ + Xβ + σW follows EV(μ + Xβ, σ). If σ = 1, T
follows exponential distribution with λ =  exp (μ + Xβ), yielding an
exponential survival function of

[$$ S(t)=\exp \left(-\lambda t\right)=\exp \left(-\exp \left( X\beta
\right)t\right). $$]

This leads to the following assumptions:

1.  (i)

     The exponential survival model is an accelerated failure time
    model.
    - This follows from the model construction log T = μ + Xβ + σW and
      it also implies that for fixed quantile of the survival
      (S(t) = q), changing a covariate X scales the survival time by a
      fixed ratio, exp(Xβ).

     

2.  (ii)

    The exponential survival model is a constant hazard model:
    [$$ h(t)=\frac{f(t)}{S(t)}=\lambda . $$]

    The hazard does not depend on time.

     

3.  (ii)

    The exponential survival model is a proportional hazard model,
    because the hazard ratio of two observations, X₁ and X₂, is
    [$$ \frac{h_1(t)}{h_2(t)}=\frac{\lambda_1}{\lambda_2}=\frac{\exp
    \left(\mu \right)\;\exp \left({X}_1\beta \right)}{\exp \left(\mu
    \right)\;\exp \left({X}_2\beta \right)}=\frac{\exp \left({X}_1\beta
    \right)}{\exp \left({X}_2\beta \right)} $$]

    and is a constant with respect to time.

     

4.  (iv)

    Assumptions of the linear regression model continue to apply:
    observations are assumed independent, and the effects of the
    covariates on the hazard are linear and additive. This also means
    that log–log of the survival function should be linear, allowing for
    graphical checking of the model suitability.

     

Weibull Survival Model

The Weibull distribution is a generalization of the exponential
distribution. Its survival function is

[$$ S\left(t;\lambda, \alpha \right)=\exp \left(-\lambda
{t}^{\alpha}\right),\kern1.6em \alpha &gt;0,\lambda &gt;0, $$]

where α is called the shape parameter. If time T follows a Weibull
distribution, log T follows an extreme value distribution. Figure A.8
shows Weibull distributions with various parametrizations.

[]

Two line graphs of survival versus time denote a decreasing trend of 3
lines. The lines in the left graph represent the values of 0.5, 1, and
2. The right graph denotes the trends for 0.25, 1, and 4. The lines
start from the same point and follow different patterns.

Similar to the exponential distribution, we assume that the error term W
follows standard extreme value distribution W ~ EV(0, 1). The log
survival time then follows EV(μ + Xβ, σ) and the survival time itself
follows Weibull with

[$$ \lambda =\exp \left(-\frac{\mu + X\beta}{\sigma}\right),\kern0.75em
\alpha =\frac{1}{\sigma }. $$]

This yields a survival function

[$$ S(t)=\exp \left(-\lambda {t}^{\alpha}\right)=\exp \left(-\exp
\left(-\frac{\mu + X\beta}{\sigma}\right)\;{t}^{\frac{1}{\sigma
}}\right). $$]

From this, the following assumptions follow.

1.  (i)

     By construction, the Weibull model is an AFT model.

     

2.  (ii)

    The Weibull model is a proportional hazards model. The hazard
    function is
    [$$ h(t)=\lambda \alpha {t}^{\alpha -1}=\alpha {t}^{\alpha -1}\exp
    \left(-\frac{\mu }{\sigma}\right)\;\exp
    \left(-\frac{X\beta}{\sigma}\right)={h}_0(t)\exp
    \left(-\frac{X\beta}{\sigma}\right), $$]

    where h₀(t) is the hazard when all covariates are 0. The hazard
    ratio of two observations i and j is
    [$$ \frac{h_i(t)}{h_j(t)}=\frac{\exp \left(-\frac{X_i\beta
    }{\sigma}\right)}{\exp \left(-\frac{X_j\beta }{\sigma}\right)}, $$]

    which does not depend on time.

     

3.  (iii)

     The covariates are linear and additive in terms of log–log
    survival.

     

Log-Logistic Survival Model

Another commonly used distribution for survival time is the log-logistic
distribution. Its survival function takes the form

[$$ S(t)=\frac{1}{1+\lambda {t}^{\alpha }},\kern1.12em \lambda
&gt;0,\kern0.36em \alpha &gt;0. $$]

Figure A.9 shows examples of log-logistic survival curves. The
log-logistic distribution has two parameters. Changing λ (left panel)
accelerates/decelerates the passing of time and changing α, the “shape”
parameter, (right panel) changes the shape of the survival curves. For
reference, a survival curve following the exponential distribution is
included as a dashed gray line.

[]

Two line graphs of survival versus time denote a decreasing trend of 4
lines. The left graph represents the values of 0.5, 1, 2, and
exponential distribution. The right one denotes the trends for 0.25, 1,
4, and exponential distribution.

In the log-logistic survival models, the error term W follows the
standard logistic distribution. The logistic distribution can be
re-parameterized into a location-scale distribution with density

[$$ f\left(x;\mu; \sigma \right)=\frac{\exp\;\left(\frac{x-\mu
}{\sigma}\right)\;}{1+\exp\;\left(\frac{x-\mu }{\sigma}\right)}. $$]

When we model survival time as a log-logistic distribution, the error
term is assumed to follow standard logistic (μ = 0, σ = 1). Log survival
time (log T) then follows logistic with location μ + Xβ and scale σ.

Time itself follows log-logistic distribution with parameters

[$$ \lambda =\exp \left(-\frac{\mu + X\beta}{\sigma}\right),\kern1.6em
\alpha =\frac{1}{\sigma }. $$]

The survival function then becomes

[$$ S(t)=\frac{1}{1+\exp \left(\lambda
{t}^{\alpha}\right)}=\frac{1}{1+\exp \left({t}^{1/\sigma}\exp
\left(-\frac{\mu + X\beta}{\sigma}\right)\;\right)}. $$]

This leads to the following assumptions.

1.  (i)

    The log-logistic survival model is an accelerated failure time
    model, which follows from its method of construction.

     

2.  (ii)

    It is a proportional odds model. The odds of survival is
    [$$ O(t)=\frac{S(t)}{1-S(t)}=\frac{1}{\lambda {t}^{\alpha}\exp
    \left(\frac{X\beta}{\sigma}\right)}=\frac{1}{\lambda {t}^{\alpha
    }}\exp \left(-\frac{X\beta}{\sigma}\right). $$]

     

Consider two observations, i and j. Their odds ratio is

[$$ \frac{O_i(t)}{O_j(t)}=\frac{\exp \left(-\frac{X_i\beta
}{\sigma}\right)\;}{\exp \left(-\frac{X_j\beta }{\sigma}\right)}, $$]

which is constant over time.

It is worth noting that the log-logistic model is not a proportional
hazard model.

The usual assumptions about the linear and additive effect of the
covariates on the hazard remain.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: accelerated failure time (AFT) models                 |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main use                         |  – Regression models for         |
|                                  | time-to-event outcomes           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  – Right-censored data           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Interest is the effect of     |
|                                  | covariates and making            |
|                                  | predictions                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Same interpretability as      |
|                                  | regression models for other      |
|                                  | outcome types                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Non-recommended uses and         | Pitfall A.1.4.1. The key         |
| pitfalls                         | assumption is the accelerated    |
|                                  | failure time (AFT) assumption.   |
|                                  | Not appropriate if this          |
|                                  | assumption is violated           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall A.1.4.2. The models      |
|                                  | assume linearity and additivity. |
|                                  | Not appropriate if these         |
|                                  | assumptions are violated         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall A.1.4.3. High            |
|                                  | dimensionality is a problem      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  – Fully parametric model that   |
|                                  | specifies the full likelihood    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – The error term is assumed to  |
|                                  | have a location-scale            |
|                                  | distribution. This ensures that  |
|                                  | the log survival time has the    |
|                                  | same distribution. Covariates    |
|                                  | change the location parameter,   |
|                                  | accelerating/decelerating the    |
|                                  | passing of time                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  – Parameter estimates are       |
| empirical evidence               | obtained using maximum           |
|                                  | likelihood estimation. They are  |
|                                  | consistent, unbiased, efficient  |
|                                  | and asymptotically normally      |
|                                  | distributed                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – AFT is a family of            |
|                                  | distribution with different      |
|                                  | properties                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |    Exponential survival          |
|                                  | model—constant hazard assumption |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |    Weibull survival model—AFT    |
|                                  | and PH                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |    Log-logistic survival         |
|                                  | model—AFT and proportional odds  |
|                                  | assumption                       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best Practice A.1.4.1. Use AFT   |
|                                  | if the assumptions are met       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best Practice A.1.4.2. Use Cox   |
|                                  | PH if only the PH assumption is  |
|                                  | met                              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       | Klein JP, Moeschberger ML.       |
|                                  | SURVIVAL ANALYSIS Techniques for |
|                                  | Censored and Truncated Data.     |
|                                  | 2003, Springer                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Kleinbaum DG, Klein M. Survival  |
|                                  | Analysis. A Self-Learning Text.  |
|                                  | 2020, Springer                   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Parametric Survival Models Versus Cox PH Models

If the model assumptions of the parametric models are met, the
parametric models are more efficient. If the assumptions are not met or
if we are in doubt, the semi-parametric model is more robust to model
misspecification and only requires the proportional hazards assumption.
Below we look at methods to determine whether a particular parametric
model is appropriate.

Weibull model. If the survival times follow a Weibull distribution, they
form a straight line on the complementary log–log plot. The
complementary log–log plot plots the log–log survival function
log(−log(S(t)) against the log of time. The slope of this line is the
shape (α) parameter of the Weibull distribution. If the slope is one,
then the survival times follow an Exponential distribution.

If for a covariate, two lines, corresponding to two different values of
the covariate, are straight and parallel, then we meet both the AFT and
the proportional hazards (PH) assumptions. For the Weibull distribution,
if either the AFTor PH assumptions is met, the other is assumption is
automatically met.

Figure A.10 shows the complementary log–log plot of a synthetic Weibull
distributed survival data set. The orange and blue lines correspond to
two different values of a covariate. Both lines are straight and
parallel, indicating that the Weibull distribution is appropriate for
modeling the data and that both the AFT and PH assumptions are met.

[]

A line graph of log-logistic survival versus log time denotes an
increasing trend of 2 lines with initial fluctuations.

The left panel in Fig. A.11 shows the complementary log–log plot of the
diabetes data set. We continue to use impaired fasting glucose (IFG) as
the sole covariate and the two survival curves were computed using the
Kaplan–Meier estimator. The two lines corresponding to the two values of
this covariate, IFG in orange and non-IFG in blue, are reasonably
straight and parallel for the first 6 years. Beyond 6 years, the curves
turn and become horizontal. They remain parallel but they no longer
continue to have the same slope. The turn signals a violation of the AFT
assumption, however, they remain parallel, indicating that the PH
assumption is still met. This appears to be a small violation, however,
a large portion of the population have a follow-up time in excess of
6 years.

[]

Two line graphs. 1. The graph of log-logistic survival versus log of
follow-up denotes an increasing trend of 2 lines. 2. The graph of
survival versus follow-up denotes a decreasing trend of 4 lines
representing no I F G, I F G, Kaplan-Meier, and Weibull.

The right panel in Fig. A.11 shows the Weibull fit (in dashed lines) and
the Kaplan–Meier survival curve (in solid line) for the IFG patients
(orange) and non-IFG patients (blue). We can see that the lack of events
beyond 6 years caused a substantial bias in the Weibull estimates. We
expected this bias based on the violation of the AFT assumption. Since
the PH assumption is still met, a Cox model would be a better fit for
this data.

Log-logistic model. The assumption underlying the log logistic model is
the proportional odds assumption. If the event time distribution follows
a log logistic distribution, the log(time) versus log odds of failure
curve should be straight. For two values of a covariate, if the model
follows the proportional odds assumption, the lines should be parallel.

Figure A.12 shows a synthetic data set that has log-logistically
distributed event times. The two colors represent log-odds-failure
curves corresponding to two values of the sole covariate. Except for the
very early follow-up times (time < 1e−1), where data is sparse, the
lines are reasonably straight and parallel.

[]

A line graph of log odds of failure versus log of time denotes an
increasing trend of 2 lines. The lines have larger fluctuations at the
initial stage.

Figure A.13 shows the log-odds-of-failure plot of the diabetes data set.
Up to 6 years, the lines representing IFG and non-IFG patients are
straight and parallel, however after 6 years, the lines turn horizontal.
This indicates that the log logistic model is not appropriate for this
data set.

[]

A line graph of log-logistic survival versus log of follow-up denotes an
increasing trend for baseline and I F G. The lines have larger
fluctuations at the initial stage. I F G denotes a higher value than the
baseline.

Non-linear Survival Models

The regression models in the previous sections all assume that the
covariates have an additive linear relationship with the log hazard or
log survival time. To overcome this limitation, the original features X
can be transformed through a non-linear non-additive transformation to
serve as the input to the partial or full likelihood function of the
above models. Deep-learning based survival models and the Gradient
Boosting Machine (GBM) for time-to-event outcome have taken this
approach. The Xβ term in the Cox partial likelihood is replaced by a
non-linear non-additive function f(X). This function is an ANN for deep
learning and a GBM for Cox GBM.

A Random Survival Forest (RSF) consists of a collection of B trees. This
collection does not directly maximize a likelihood function like the
previously discussed methods, so RSF works slightly differently. In RSF,
each of the B trees models the cumulative hazard of a patient using the
Nelson–Aalen estimator. The cumulative hazard estimates from the B trees
are then averaged to obtain an overall prediction for the cumulative
hazard [49].

One key in time-to-event modeling is censoring. The partial likelihood
automatically takes censoring into account, but the full likelihood may
not. Deep learning models based on the full likelihood, assuming a
Weibull distributed survival time, have been proposed. An alternative to
the partial likelihood in the presence of censoring is the censoring
unbiased loss (CUL), which is a general method for bias-correcting the
unobservable loss. Censoring unbiased deep learning (CUDL) follows this
strategy [50, 51].

High-dimensional data. Similar to non-survival regression models, high
dimensionality, when the number of predictor variables is large relative
to the number of observations, poses a challenge. In non-survival
regression, regularizing the likelihood function was one of the
solutions. Analogous solutions by regularizing the partial likelihood
function of the survival models has been proposed in the form of an
elastic-net style Cox model.

Survival models for longitudinal data. When we have longitudinal data,
the covariates and the outcome can change over time. We have already
discussed extensions to the Cox model that allow for changing predictors
(time-dependent covariates) and recurring events. In the general
regression setting, longitudinal data is handled through marginal models
or through mixed effect models, because the observations become
correlated. We have also discussed that in the Cox model, as long as we
only have one event per patient, marginal or mixed effect models are not
required [45].

Apart from providing the correct error estimates in the longitudinal
setting, mixed effect models are also used for separating
subject-specific and population effects. Frailty models are the
time-to-event outcome analogues of the mixed effect regression models
and allow for modeling subject-specific effects.

References

The references are the same as in Chapter 3.

Appendix B: Models for Longitudinal Data

Gyorgy Simon and Constantin Aliferis

Longitudinal Data Analysis

Longitudinal data is generated when measurements are taken for the same
subjects on multiple occasions. For example, EHR data of patients is
longitudinal as the same measurements, e.g. vitals, are taken at
multiple encounters. Longitudinal data stands in contrast with single
cross-sectional data, where measurements are taken (or aggregated) at a
single particular time point. It also contrasts with time series data,
where measurements are taken for a single subject (or for few subjects)
for a long period of time and inference is conducted within the subject.

Using longitudinal data offers several advantages. (1) It can provide
more information about each subject than data from a single
cross-section since we observe the subject over a time span. (2) It also
allows for a crossover study design, where a patient can be a control
patient for himself: When a subject experiences an exposure during the
study period, he/she is a “control” subject before the exposure and is
an “exposed” patient after the exposure. (3) it also allows for
separating aging effects from intervention effects. Finally, (4) it
allows for separating subject-specific effects from population effects
[5, 53].

Figure B.1 shows an illustrative synthetic data set. Five subjects are
followed over 10 time periods and a measurement is taken in each time
period. The left panel shows a plot of the data set. The horizontal axis
represents time, and the vertical axis is the measurement. We can see an
overall upward trend: as time increases the measured values increase. We
fitted a linear regression model to the entire data, which is shown as
the bold black line. This model is a population-level model and it
confirms this increasing trend. We also fitted a regression line, shown
as dashed gray lines, to each individual subject. These are called
individual-level lines. We can see that most (all five in this sample)
subjects also exhibit an increasing trend, but their initial points
(y-intercepts) vary, and their slopes also vary. Some methods allow for
modeling individual effects such as the per-subject intercept and
per-subject slope.

[]

Two different graphs. 1. A line graph of outcome versus time denotes an
increasing trend. 2. A scatterplot of error versus index denotes the
distribution of the dots in different shades.

These advantages of longitudinal data analysis, however, come at a
price. The multiple observations of the same patients are correlated
with each other, which violates the i.i.d. (independent, identically
distributed) assumption that most analytic methods make.

The right panel in Fig. B.1 shows the error relative to the
population-level regression model (the bold black line in the left
panel). The horizontal axis is simply an observation index and the
vertical axis is the (signed) error (residual). Observations from the
five subjects are grouped together along the horizontal axis in
increasing order of time: index 1–10 corresponds to the ten time points
of the first subjects, etc. Different subjects are depicted in different
colors. We can see that the errors of each subject (errors depicted in
the same color) tend to form clusters. Within a subject, once we know
the error of one observation, errors of the other observations will
typically not differ as much as errors from a different subject. This
means that errors of the same subject are correlated with each other.
There is also a trend within each subject: as time increases, the errors
tend to increase or decrease. This is due to the differences in the
growth rates of the different subjects (the differences across the
slopes of the gray lines in the left panel).

When we assume that the errors in the right panel are generated from 50
independent observations, we would estimate the variance of the outcome
to be about 1 (ranging between −2 and 2). Once we account for the fact
that the observations came from 5 different subjects, the spread of the
error becomes the range covered by the same color, and the variance
becomes approximately 0.57; and after accounting for the differences in
individual growth rates, the error variance drops to (approx.) 0.1. Such
reduction in the noise variance leads to much improved error estimates
and is very beneficial for detecting significant effects from exposures.

The data is balanced when measurements for all subjects are taken at the
same time points. When the data is balanced, coefficient estimates,
whether they are computed using methods for longitudinal data or for
cross-sectional data, will be similar albeit with substantially
different errors. If the purpose of the analysis is prediction for
previously unseen subjects, no individual effect estimates will be
available, thus the results obtained from the regular regression models
will be very similar to those obtained from the longitudinal models.

Conversely, methods designed for longitudinal data should be used when
the design is not balanced, the significance of the coefficients needs
to be estimated, estimating errors is important, individual
(within-subject) effects are of interest, or if predictions are to be
made for previously seen patients (whose individual effect sizes are
already estimated).

All methods in this section can address the correlation in the errors
among observations of the same subject by assuming a variance–covariance
structure within a subject. As a result, they provide more statistical
power and reduced errors as compared to methods that assume that the
observations are independent. Additionally, the error can be decomposed
into subject-level errors, including a subject-level intercept and a
subject-level growth rate (slope). Linear mixed models (LMMs) in
“Regression Models for Longitudinal Data” and generalized LMMs in
“Generalized Linear Mixed Effect Models (GLMM)” have this ability.

Terminology and Notation

The sampling unit of the analysis is a subject or a patient and we index
the sampling units i = 1, . . , N. The analytic units are observations.
Each patient can have multiple observations, indexed by j = 1, …, n_(i),
taken at n_(j) different occasions (time points). The time of these
occasions are denoted by t_(ij), the time of the jth occasion for the
ith patient. The design is balanced, if all subjects share the same time
points.

Let y_(ij) denote the response variable (of patient i at occasion j) and
let X be covariates. The covariates for subject i can be time-invariant
(constant across time) or it can vary across time. The vector of
time-invariant covariates for subject i are denoted by X_(i) and the
vector of time-varying covariates form subject i at occasion j is
denoted by X_(ij).

The questions we ask about longitudinal data are similar to and are a
superset of the questions we ask about cross-sectional data. These
questions include:

1.  (i)

    Are two sets of observations (y_(i1), y_(i2), …, y_(in) and y_(k1),
    y_(k2), …, y_(kn)), one for patient i and the other one for patient
    k, different?

     

2.  (ii)

    Are observations at different time points j and k different
    (y_(⋅j)=^(?)y_(⋅k))? Or more broadly, describe the changes in
    observations over time.

     

3.  (iii)

    Making predictions. We may wish to predict the value of the
    observation at a particular time point for a subject we have
    observed before; or we may want to predict the value of an
    observation for a subject that we have not seen before.

     

4.  (iv)

    Estimate the effect of exposures.

     

5.  (v)

    Estimate subject-specific effects.

     

ANOVA and MANOVA for Repeated Measures

Consider a cohort of patients. For each patient, we measure some aspect
of their health, e.g. their blood glucose level, at multiple occasions.
These patients are subject to an intervention, e.g. blood glucose
control, at three different levels: standard of care, aggressive and
very aggressive. Methods in this section aim to answer the following
kind of questions:

1.  (i)

    Does the blood glucose level in patients change over time? Namely,
    does the set of blood glucose measurements taken from the cohort at
    one time point differ from the set of blood glucose measurements
    taken from the same cohort at a different time point?

     

2.  (ii)

    Does different levels of glucose control result in different glucose
    levels? Does the average glucose measurement in the “standard of
    care” group differ from the glucose measurement in the (say)
    “aggressive” group?

     

We can approach this analysis in two ways, which we can illustrate
through describing how we would organize the data for the analysis. The
first organization is the person-period (PP) organization, where each
row in our data table corresponds to the outcome (blood glucose)
measured at a particular time point. The second organization is a
person-level (PL) organization, where there is one row for each person
and this one row contains the entire measurement vector for that person.
ANOVA assumes the PP format and MANOVA assumes the PL format [52].

If the sole interest is the change of the outcome over time, we only
have a time effect. This corresponds to a single-sample analysis. If we
are also interested in the treatment effect, we have a multiple-sample
analysis: each treatment level corresponds to a “sample”. Both ANOVA and
MANOVA can be single or multiple-sample.

ANOVA

ANOVA models the person-period observations y_(ij). We start our
discussion with the one-sample ANOVA, where the sole interest is the
effect of time. The model is

[$$ {y}_{ij}=\mu +{\pi}_i+{\tau}_j+{\varepsilon}_{ij}, $$]

where μ is the grand mean, π_(i) is the subject-effect and τ_(j) is the
time effect. The time effect τ_(j), the effect of interest, is a fixed
effect and the subject-effect π_(i) is a random effect, and is modelled
as [$$ {\pi}_i\sim N\left(0,{\sigma}_{\pi}^2\right), $$] where [$$
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2 $$] is the between-subject variance.

Random effects are effect estimates that are computed for observation
units that are thought of as a random sample from a population. In
contrast, fixed effects are effect estimates computed for specific
observation units. The subject effects π_(i) are random effects, because
the corresponding units, namely the patients, are thought of as a
(hopefully) representative random sample (the study cohort) from a
population of patients. We could have conducted our study with a
different random sample from the same population and we would expect
similar results. Conversely, the time effects τ_(j) are fixed effects,
because we wish to know the effect of time period j on the outcome. The
time points are not a representative random sample from a population of
time points, they represent periods of exposure to the intervention. If
we conducted our study using different time periods, say 2 months
exposures as opposed to 2 days, we would certainly expect to get
different results.

Model assumptions

1.  (i)

    The subject effect is assumed homogeneous over time and the time
    effect is assumed homogeneous over the subjects.

     

2.  (ii)

    The within-subject error ε_(ij) is normally distributed with mean 0
    and variance [$$ {\sigma}_e^2 $$]. Neither the mean nor the variance
    depends on the subject i or occasion j.

     

3.  (iii)

    The time effects sum to 0 over time.

     

4.  (iv)

    E(y_(ij)) = μ + τ_(j)

     

5.  (v)

    [$$ Var\left({y}_{ij}\right)={\sigma}_{\pi}^2+{\sigma}_e^2 $$]

     

6.  (vi)

    Subjects are independent, Cov(y_(ij), y_(kj)) = 0 for all patients
    i ≠ k on all occasions j.

     

7.  (vii)

    Covariance among the observations of the same subject is constant,
    [$$ {\sigma}_{\pi}^2, $$]over time.

     

This set of assumptions lead to a variance–covariance matrix of

[$$
{\Sigma}_i=\left[\begin{array}{cc}\begin{array}{ccc}{\sigma}_{\pi}^2+{\sigma}_e^2&amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\\ {}{\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2+{\sigma}_e^2&amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\\
{}{\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2+{\sigma}_e^2\end{array}&amp; \begin{array}{cc}\cdots
&amp; \kern1.25em {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\kern1.25em \\ {}\cdots &amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2\\ {}\cdots &amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\end{array}\\
{}\begin{array}{ccc}\vdots \kern2.75em &amp; \vdots &amp; \kern3.25em
\vdots \\ {}{\sigma}_{\pi}^2\kern2.25em &amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp;
\kern2.5em {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\end{array}&amp; \begin{array}{cc}\ddots
&amp; \vdots \\ {}\cdots &amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2+{\sigma}_e^2\end{array}\end{array}\right], $$]

which is referred to as compound symmetry.

The importance of the compound symmetry structure is the assumption that
the covariance (and correlation) among the observations from the same
patient is constant. Typically, this assumption is unrealistic,
observations closer together in time tend to be more correlated than
observations further apart in time.

Under this model, we can test the hypothesis that

[$$ H0:{\tau}_1={\tau}_2=\cdots ={\tau}_n=0. $$]

By using contrasts, more detailed tests of the time effect can be
derived. The interested reader is referred to Chapter 2 in [52] for
details.

Multiple-Sample ANOVA

Assume that a treatment is applied to groups of patients, one group per
treatment level. The model now needs to be extended to accommodate group
effects

[$$ {y}_{ij}=\mu +{\pi}_{i(k)}+{\tau}_j+{\gamma}_k+{\left(\gamma \tau
\right)}_{kj}+{\varepsilon}_{ij k}. $$]

The group effects are γ_(k) and group-specific time effects (γτ)_(kj)
are also included. The i(k) notation signals that subject i is nested in
group k and ε_(ijk) is now a within-group, within-subject variance.
Additional assumptions are that (1) the group effects must sum to 0,
∑_(k) γ_(k) = 0,, and that (2) group-specific time effects must also sum
to 0, ∑_(k) ∑_(j)(γτ)_(jk) = 0. The group effect and its interaction
with time are fixed effects, so the variance–covariance matrix remains
unchanged.

With this model, we can test whether time effects exist, whether group
(treatment) effects exist and whether their interaction effects exist.
The interested reader is referred to [52] for the details of these
tests.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: repeated measures ANOVA                               |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main use                         |  – ANOVA for repeated measures   |
|                                  | data                             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  – Single-sample or              |
|                                  | multiple-sample ANOVA            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Assumes the data to be in the |
|                                  | PP (person-period) format        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Assessing the significance of |
|                                  | time effects and treatment       |
|                                  | effects                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall A.2.2.1. Repeated        |
|                                  | Measures ANOVA is not a          |
|                                  | predictive model                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall A.2.2.2. Repeated        |
|                                  | Measures ANOVA assumes compound  |
|                                  | symmetry; not appropriate when   |
|                                  | this assumption is violated      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  – Operates on the same          |
|                                  | principle as most ANOVA methods  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – See the text for detailed     |
|                                  | models                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  – Requires balanced design      |
| empirical evidence               |                                  |
|                                  |  – Assumes the compound symmetry |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Performs statistical tests of |
|                                  | time effect and treatment        |
|                                  | effects                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Contrasts can be used to      |
|                                  | perform specific tests (e.g.     |
|                                  | difference between two treatment |
|                                  | levels)                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best Practice A.2.2.1. Also      |
|                                  | consider the random intercept    |
|                                  | LMM. The LMM is more flexible    |
|                                  | and contains the ANOVA           |
|                                  | specification as a special case  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       | Hedeker D, Gibbons RD.           |
|                                  | Longitudinal Data Analsyis.      |
|                                  | Wiley, 2006. Chapter 2           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

MANOVA

Multivariate ANOVA (MANOVA) treats the observations of a subject over
time as a single outcome vector. The model then becomes

[$$ {y}_i=\mu +{\varepsilon}_i, $$]

where y_(i), μ, and ε_(i) are vectors of length n (the number of time
points). Var(y_(i)) = Σ is an arbitrary variance–covariance matrix—no
assumption about its structure is made. The lack of assumptions about
the structure of the variance–covariance matrix is the main benefit of
MANOVA, however, its disadvantage is that the study design has to be
balanced and no missing values are allowed.

Similarly to the multivariate ANOVA, MANOVA can be used when multiple
treatment groups are compared. For each group k, an observation vector
y_(ik) is produced and the single-sample model is extended to

[$$ {y}_{ik}=\mu +{\gamma}_k+{\varepsilon}_{ik}. $$]

The γ_(k) vector (of length n) is the treatment effect of treatment
level k across the n time points. The variance–covariance matrix Σ is
shared by all groups.

MANOVA allows for testing the same hypothesis as ANOVA.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: repeated measures MANOVA                              |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main use                         |  – MANOVA for repeated measures  |
|                                  | data                             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  – Single-sample or              |
|                                  | multiple-sample MANOVA           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Assumes the data to be in the |
|                                  | PL (person-level) format         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Assessing the significance of |
|                                  | time effects and treatment       |
|                                  | effects                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall A.2.2.3. Repeated        |
|                                  | Measures MANOVA is not a         |
|                                  | predictive model                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Pitfall A.2.2.3. Repeated        |
|                                  | Measures MANOVA in its original  |
|                                  | form, does not allow for missing |
|                                  | observations                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  – Operates on the same          |
|                                  | principle as most ANOVA/MANOVA   |
|                                  | methods                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – See the text for detailed     |
|                                  | models                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  – Requires balanced design      |
| empirical evidence               |                                  |
|                                  |  – In contrast to ANOVA, it does |
|                                  | not make the compound symmetry   |
|                                  | assumption, but it does not      |
|                                  | allow missing values             |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Performs statistical tests of |
|                                  | time effect and treatment        |
|                                  | effects                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Contrasts can be used to      |
|                                  | perform specific tests (e.g.     |
|                                  | difference between two treatment |
|                                  | levels)                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best Practice A.2.2.2. Also      |
|                                  | consider LMMs                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  – Hedeker D, Gibbons RD.        |
|                                  | Longitudinal Data Analysis.      |
|                                  | Wiley, 2006. Chapter 3           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Regression Models for Longitudinal Data

The key difference between methods developed for longitudinal data and
for cross-sectional data lies in the ability to take within-subject
correlations into account. The methods described in this section take
two approaches to account for the within-subject correlation. First,
Linear Mixed Effect Models (LMM) aim to partition the
variance–covariance matrix into within-subject and between-subject
variances. If the source of variance is of interest, then the Mixed
Effect Models should be used. The second approach, Generalized
Estimating Equations (GEE) [69], assumes a parametric form for the
variance–covariance matrix. It treats this as a nuisance parameter and
marginalizes it out. As such, this method is more computationally
efficient than the LMM, but does not distinguish between the
within-subject and between-subject effects.

Mixed Effects Regression Models for Longitudinal Data

Regular regression models model the outcome as a combination of
deterministic “fixed” effects and a random noise

[$$ {y}_i={\beta}_0+{X}_i\beta +{\varepsilon}_i, $$]

where β₀ is an intercept, β is a vector of coefficients for the fixed
effects imparted by the covariates X_(i) and ε is a normally distributed
noise term with mean 0 and variance σ².

Mixed effects regression models, similarly to regular regression models,
allow for fixed effects, but they further partition the “noise” into
different anticipated random effects. Different types of LMM models
differ in the random effects they anticipate, which in turn, confers
different structures on the variance–covariance matrix.

Let the subscript i correspond to the subject and j to the (index of)
the occasion when the subject was observed. Let X_(ij) denote the
covariate vector and y_(ij) the response of subject i at occasion j. The
time point of this occasion is t_(ij).

Mixed effect models are often expressed in the hierarchical format. The
first-level model is on the level of the population

[$$ {y}_{ij}={\beta}_{0i}+{X}_{ij}\beta
+{t}_{ij}{\beta}_{ti}+{\varepsilon}_{ij}, $$]

and the second-level (subject-level) models define the models for the
intercept β_(0i), the (time) trend β_(ti)for subject i. Mixed effect
models are a family of models that chiefly differ in the way β_(0i) and
β_(ti) are defined. Different definitions lead to different
variance–covariance matrices based on different assumptions, however,
all mixed effect models share some common assumptions.

First, as in all linear models, the fixed effects, X_(ij), are assumed
to have a linear additive relationship with y_(ij). This assumption can
be relaxed by including a priori known interactions and nonlinearities.

Second, time enters the mixed effect models explicitly (t_(ij)). This
allows for observation times to vary across subjects. In many models,
time has a linear additive effect on the response, however, models with
curvilinear relationships will be discussed later.

Third, the structure of the variance–covariance matrix is specified
through a random intercept and/or trend. This allows for the dimension
of the variance–covariance matrix to vary across patients, which in
turn, allows for a differing number of observations across subjects. The
second and third properties combined make mixed effect models
appropriate for the analysis of longitudinal data that is not of
repeated measures design (observation times vary) or for repeated
measures design with missing observations.

Fourth, models in this chapter assume an outcome with Gaussian
distribution, but mixed effect models have been extended to the
exponential family outcomes through a linkage function that linearizes
these outcomes. These models, Generalized Mixed Effect Models, are the
mixed-effect analogues of GLMs.

In the following sections, we describe specific mixed effect models,
their assumptions, relationships between covariates, time and outcome
they can represent, and the variance-covariance matrix forms these
assumptions yield.

Random Intercept Models

Random intercept models are mixed effect models with a subject-specific
random intercept effect but only with a population average trend effect.
The second level models are thus

[$$ {\beta}_{0i}={\beta}_0+{\upsilon}_i $$]

[$$ {\beta}_{ti}={\beta}_t. $$]

The subject-specific intercept β_(0i) is decomposed into a population
average effect β₀ and a subject-specific random effect υ_(i). The time
effect β_(ti) is simply the population average trend (slope) β_(t)
(without a subject-specific random effect). Thus the random intercept
model decomposes the “noise” into a subject-specific random effect υ_(i)
and the actual noise at the jth occasion ε_(ij).

It is further assumed that

[$$ {\upsilon}_i\sim N\left(0,{\sigma}_{\upsilon}^2\right) $$]

[$$ {\varepsilon}_i\sim N\left(0,{\sigma}_e^2\right). $$]

This yields a block-diagonal variance–covariance matrix. Each block
corresponds to a subject and is of the form

[$$
{\Sigma}_i=\left[\begin{array}{cc}\begin{array}{ccc}{\sigma}_{\pi}^2+{\sigma}_e^2&amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\\ {}{\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2+{\sigma}_e^2&amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\\
{}{\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2+{\sigma}_e^2\end{array}&amp; \begin{array}{cc}\cdots
&amp; \kern1.25em {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\kern1.25em \\ {}\cdots &amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2\\ {}\cdots &amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\end{array}\\
{}\begin{array}{ccc}\vdots \kern2.75em &amp; \vdots &amp; \kern3.25em
\vdots \\ {}{\sigma}_{\pi}^2\kern2.25em &amp; {\sigma}_{\pi}^2&amp;
\kern2.5em {\sigma}_{\pi}^2\end{array}&amp; \begin{array}{cc}\ddots
&amp; \vdots \\ {}\cdots &amp;
{\sigma}_{\pi}^2+{\sigma}_e^2\end{array}\end{array}\right]. $$]

This form of variance–covariance matrix is referred to as compound
symmetry. It assumes that the covariance between observations of the
same subject are constant over time. This is often unrealistic:
observations closer to each other in time are typically more correlated
than observations further away in time.

Random Growth Models

Random growth models, in addition to the subject-specific random
intercept, also have a random slope for time. This allows (1) for
changes (slopes) to vary across subjects and (2) for time to enter the
variance–covariance matrix. The second-level model is

[$$ {\beta}_{0i}={\beta}_0+{\upsilon}_{0i} $$]

[$$ {\beta}_{ti}={\beta}_t+{\upsilon}_{ti}. $$]

Similarly to the way the intercept was decomposed into a
subject-specific effect υ_(0i) and a population-level effect β₀ in the
random intercept model, in the random growth model the time effect is
also decomposed into a subject-specific effect υ_(ti) and a
population-level time effect β_(t). It is assumed that

[$$ {\upsilon}_{0i}\sim
N\left(0,{\sigma}_{\upsilon_0}^2\right),{\upsilon}_{ti}\sim
N\left(0,{\sigma}_{\upsilon_t}^2\right) $$]

[$$ {\varepsilon}_i\sim N\left(0,{\sigma}_e^2\right). $$]

With subjects i and k being independent, the variance–covariance matrix
is block-diagonal, with each block representing a patient and taking a
form of

[$$ {\varSigma}_i={\sigma}_e^2I+{T}_i{\varSigma}_{\upsilon }{T}_i^T, $$]

where

[$$ {T}_i^T=\left[\begin{array}{l}1\kern0.9em 1\kern0.8em \cdots
\kern0.7em 1\\ {}{t}_1\kern0.7em {t}_2\kern0.4em \cdots \kern0.7em
{t}_{n_i}\end{array}\right], $$]

and

[$$ {\varsigma}_i=\left[\begin{array}{l}{\sigma}_{\upsilon_0}^2\kern1em
{\sigma}_{\upsilon_0{\upsilon}_t}\\
{}{\sigma}_{\upsilon_0{\upsilon}_t}\kern0.5em
{\sigma}_{\upsilon_t}^2\end{array}\right]. $$]

With time entering the covariance matrix, the covariance among the
observations of the same patient can change over time.

Polynomial Growth Model

To model non-linear time effects, the level-1 model can be extended with
polynomials of time.

Specifically, in vector notation, it becomes

[$$ {y}_i={\beta}_{0i}+{X}_i\beta +{T}_i{\upsilon}_i+{\varepsilon}_i,
$$]

where T_(i) contains polynomial of t_(i). To be able to model a
quadratic time effect, T_(i) would be (Fig. B.2)

[$$ {T}_i=\left[\begin{array}{c}1\kern0.75em {t}_1\kern0.75em
{t}_1^2\kern0.5em \\ {}1\kern0.75em {t}_2\kern0.75em {t}_2^2\kern0.5em
\\ {}1\kern0.75em \vdots \kern1.5em \vdots \kern0.75em \\ {}1\kern0.75em
{t}_{n_i}\kern0.5em {t}_{n_i}^2\ \end{array}\right]. $$]

[]

A set of 4 line graphs arranged in 2 rows. The graphs in the upper row
denote an increasing trend. The graphs in the bottom row have a
decreasing trend.

Comparison of the Various Model Assumptions

Figure B.3 illustrates the difference among the three model types. Four
synthetic data sets were generated using four different assumptions. In
all four data sets, five subjects were observed at 10 time points. The
four data sets are plotted in the four panels. For all four panels, the
horizontal axis is the index j of the observations, grouped by subject.
The vertical axis is the error relative to a population-level model.

[]

A set of 4 scatterplots of error versus index denote the trends under
random intercept, growth model, quadratic-time random intercept, and
quadratic growth. The plots denote the distribution of dots in different
shades.

The first assumption is the random intercept. This causes errors to
cluster by subject. The mean of the error in each subject is the
subject’s random intercept β_(oi). No other structure can be observed:
the scale of the errors remains the same over time.

The second assumption corresponds to the growth model. In addition to
clustering due to the random intercept, the plot also shows that the
errors consistently increase over time, at a rate that differs across
patients. This growth rate is the random slope υ_(it). Observations of
the same subject closer together in time have more similar errors (and
thus observations) than observations of the same subject further apart
in time. This is a violation of the compound symmetry structure, but the
random growth model can handle this situation correctly.

The third assumption is quadratic time, random intercept. The data has
both linear and quadratic population-level time effect but only a random
intercept. We only removed the linear time effect, thus the errors
(residuals) form a per-subject parabola, indicative of a quadratic
effect. The parabolas have similar shape across patients (although
different parts of the same parabola are visible), which suggests that
this is a (quadratic) population-level effect, but the parabolas have
different foci along the y axis, suggesting a subject-level random
intercept.

Finally, the quadratic growth model has both population-level as well as
a subject-level quadratic time effect. The quadratic structure is
apparent in the parabolic shapes of the within-subject errors, however,
the shape of the parabolas change across the patients, suggesting a
subject-level effect. Because of the strong population-level quadratic
time-effect, it is difficult to see whether the subject-level time
effect is only linear or quadratic. The parabolas are located at
different positions along the vertical axis, which indicates a
subject-level random intercept.

Generalized Linear Mixed Effect Models (GLMM)

Generalized Linear Mixed Effect Models related to LMMs the same way as
Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) relate to linear regression models.
GLMMs allow for a link function to link the expectation of the outcome
with the linear predictor. Similarly to GLMs, GLMMs can thus be used to
solve regression problems with non-Gaussian dependent variables, such as
classification problems (logistic outcome), counting problems (Poisson
outcome), etc.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: linear mixed effect models (LMM)                      |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main use                         |  – Regression models for         |
|                                  | longitudinal data                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  – Longitudinal data with        |
|                                  | balanced or unbalanced design    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Separates subject-level       |
|                                  | effects from population-level    |
|                                  | effects                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Predictive modeling with      |
|                                  | within-subject predictions       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Accurate error estimates are  |
|                                  | required or the interest is the  |
|                                  | statistical significance of      |
|                                  | covariates                       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |  – Generalized LMM has been      |
|                                  | developed for non-Gaussian       |
|                                  | response variables               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall A.2.3.2. GEEs can be     |
|                                  | computationally more efficient   |
|                                  | and may produce better           |
|                                  | predictive models. Use LMM when  |
|                                  | the goal is to identify          |
|                                  | subject-level effects            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  – Partitions the error into     |
|                                  | subject-level and                |
|                                  | population-level components      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Random intercept model:       |
|                                  | assumes a subject-specific       |
|                                  | intercept                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Random growth model: assumes  |
|                                  | a subject-specific intercept and |
|                                  | time-trend                       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Polynomial growth model:      |
|                                  | assumes a subject-specific       |
|                                  | curvilinear time effect          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  – See the text for the detailed |
| empirical evidence               | assumptions                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – ML estimator. Coefficient     |
|                                  | estimates are consistent,        |
|                                  | asymptotically normal            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best Practice A.2.3.1. Use LMM   |
|                                  | when the goal is to identify     |
|                                  | subject-level effects            |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best Practice A.2.3.2. If the    |
|                                  | main purpose is estimating the   |
|                                  | effect size of covariates or     |
|                                  | making predictions for           |
|                                  | previously unseen subjects, GEE  |
|                                  | can be more computationally      |
|                                  | effective                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  – Hedeker D, Gibbons RD.        |
|                                  | Longitudinal Data Analysis.      |
|                                  | Wiley, 2006. Chapter 4           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Generalized Estimating Equations

As discussed earlier, the key statistical challenge with longitudinal
data is the correlation among the observations of the same subject. This
challenge is addressed by assuming a variance–covariance matrix for the
error when the regression parameters are estimated. In “Mixed Effects
Regression Models for Longitudinal Data” section, we described a method
for constructing such a matrix by separating the error variation into a
set of subject-specific and a set of population-level effects. These
effects define the form of the variance–covariance matrix. An
alternative strategy is to assume a functional form for the
variance–covariance matrix. This second strategy is the subject of the
current section.

In this approach, the parameters that define the variance–covariance
matrix are treated as nuisance parameters and the main interest is the
coefficients of the covariates, including time. The variance–covariance
parameters are marginalized (integrated out) and hence this type of
models are referred to as marginal models.

The development of the generalized estimating equations models proceeds
similarly to the generalized linear models. Given a covariate matrix X,
the following components are defined.

1.  (i)

    Linear predictor: η_(ij) = X_(ij)β;

     

2.  (ii)

    Linkage function that links the mean of the linear predictor to the
    expectation of the outcome g(E(Y_(ij))) = μ_(ij);

     

3.  (iii)

    A variance function relating the mean of the outcome to its
    variance:

     

[$$ Var\left({y}_{ij}\right)=\phi V\left({\mu}_{ij}\right); $$]

1.  (iv)

    A working variance–covariance matrix parameterized by a: R(a)

     

The first three components are shared with the generalized linear
models; GEEs add the fourth component.

Several variance–covariance matrix forms are implemented by statistical
software packages and the most common matrices are described below.

1.  (i)

    Identity: R(a) = I. This assumes that the observations of a subject
    are independent of each other and thus it reduces a GEE to a regular
    GLM.

     

2.  (ii)

    Exchangeable: R(a) = ρ. Observations of the same subject have
    constant covariance ρ, which does not depend on time. This matrix
    form is the same as the compound symmetry in the random intercept
    models.

     

3.  (iii)

    Autoregressive: [$$ R(a)={\rho}^{\left|j-{j}^{\prime}\right|} $$].
    With j and j′ denoting two time steps, the covariance among
    observations of the same subject depends on time. If ρ < 1, then the
    further away the observations are in time, the smaller the
    covariance.

     

4.  (iv)

    Unstructured. Each element of the matrix is estimated from data.

     

Among the four matrices, we have already seen the identity and the
exchangeable structures and the unstructured matrix is straightforward
to imagine. The autoregressive matrix will take the following form

[$$ R\left(\rho \right)=\left[\begin{array}{ccc}1&amp; \rho &amp;
{\rho}^2\kern0.62em {\rho}^3\kern0.5em \cdots \\ {}\rho &amp; 1&amp;
\begin{array}{cc}\rho &amp; \begin{array}{cc}\;{\rho}^2&amp; \cdots
\end{array}\end{array}\\ {}\begin{array}{c}{\rho}^2\\ {}\vdots
\end{array}&amp; \begin{array}{c}\rho \\ {}\vdots \end{array}&amp;
\begin{array}{cc}1&amp; \begin{array}{cc}\;\rho &amp; \kern0.62em \cdots
\end{array}\\ {}\vdots &amp; \begin{array}{cc}1&amp; \kern0.62em \ddots
\end{array}\end{array}\end{array}\right]. $$]

When |ρ| < 1, increasing powers of ρ become smaller, thus the more
distant two observations are in time, the smaller their covariance.

Figure B.4 shows three types of error distributions. For 5 subjects, 10
observations were generated using independent error (left panel),
exchangeable error (middle panel) and autocorrelated error (right
panel). The 5 subjects are shown in different colors and their 10
observations are ordered by time along the horizontal axis. The noise
has standard normal distribution with σ = .1 in all three cases. The
error in the left panel is noise and all errors, regardless of which
subject they came from, are independent: knowing the error of an
observation for a patient does not provide any information about the
error of another observation of the same patient or about any
observation of any other subject. In the middle panel, the error has a
noise component and a random intercept component. Errors are correlated
within each subject and subjects are independent of each other. We have
seen this correlation structure earlier. Finally, in the right panel, we
have autocorrelated errors. Two errors of the same subject are more
similar to each other the closer they are to each other in time.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method label: generalized estimating equations (GEE)                |
+:=================================+:=================================+
| Main use                         |  – Regression models for         |
|                                  | longitudinal data                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – A linkage function can be     |
|                                  | specified                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Context of use                   |  – Longitudinal data with        |
|                                  | unbalanced design                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Most used when the focus is   |
|                                  | on coefficient estimates and     |
|                                  | making predictions for           |
|                                  | previously unseen patients       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Secondary use                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pitfalls                         | Pitfall A.2.4.1. No              |
|                                  | individualized effects are       |
|                                  | estimated. Consider the LMM if   |
|                                  | separation of the individual     |
|                                  | effects from the population      |
|                                  | effect is desired                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Principle of operation           |  – Uses estimating equations     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – It is a marginal model.       |
|                                  | Assumes a parametric form for    |
|                                  | the working variance/covariance  |
|                                  | matrix and marginalizes it out   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Theoretical properties and       |  – Uses M estimation.            |
| empirical evidence               | Specification of the likelihood  |
|                                  | is not required                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Solving estimating equations  |
|                                  | very computationally efficient   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Even if the structure of the  |
|                                  | variance/covariance matrix is    |
|                                  | misspecified, it yields good     |
|                                  | results                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Best practices                   | Best Practice A.2.4.1. Use GEE   |
|                                  | when predictions for previously  |
|                                  | unseen subjects is needed        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Best Practice A.2.4.2. Use LMM   |
|                                  | when subject-specific effects    |
|                                  | are of interest                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| References                       |  – Hardin, J.W. and Hilbe, J.M., |
|                                  | 2002. Generalized estimating     |
|                                  | equations. Chapman and Hall/CRC  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |  – Hedeker D, Gibbons RD.        |
|                                  | Longitudinal Data Analysis.      |
|                                  | Wiley, 2006. Chapter 3           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

[]

3 scatterplots of error versus observation denote the fluctuating trends
of dots in different shades. The y-axis ranges from negative 0.4 to 0.8
and the x-axis ranges from 0 to 50.

References

The references are the same as in Chapter 3.

Appendix C: Best Practices and Pitfalls

Constantin Aliferis and Gyorgy Simon

Chapter 2. Foundations of AI

+:----------------------------------------------+:-------+:------------+
| 2.1. Pursue development of AI/ML algorithms,  | Mature | High impact |
| programs or systems that have tractable       |        |             |
| complexity.                                   |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.2. Do not rely on parallelization to make   | Mature | High impact |
| intractable problems tractable. Pursue        |        |             |
| tractable algorithms and factor in the        |        |             |
| tractability analysis any parallelization.    |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.3. Do not rely on Moore’s law improvements  | Mature | High impact |
| to make an intractable problem algorithm or   |        |             |
| hard program practical. Pursue tractable      |        |             |
| algorithms and factor in the tractability     |        |             |
| analysis any gains from Moore’s law.          |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.4. When faced with intractable problems,    | Mature | High impact |
| consider using strategies for mitigating the  |        |             |
| computational intractability by trading off   |        |             |
| with less important characteristics of the    |        |             |
| desired solution                              |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.5. As much as possible use models and       | Mature | High impact |
| systems with established properties           |        |             |
| (theoretical + empirical).                    |        |             |
|                                               |        |             |
| Work within the maturation process starting   |        |             |
| from systems with unknown behaviors and no    |        |             |
| guarantees, to systems with guaranteed        |        |             |
| properties.                                   |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.6. When using Decision Analysis (DA) and    | Mature | High impact |
| Maximum Expected Utility (MEU)-based          |        |             |
| reasoning:                                    |        |             |
|                                               |        |             |
|  1. Ensure that the structure of the problem  |        |             |
| setting is completely/accurately described by |        |             |
| the DA tree. Omit known or obvious irrelevant |        |             |
| factors.                                      |        |             |
|                                               |        |             |
|  2. Elicit utility estimates in a way that    |        |             |
| captures patients’ true preferences using     |        |             |
| standard utility-elicitation methods.         |        |             |
|                                               |        |             |
|  3. Accurately calculate probabilities of     |        |             |
| action-dependent events and                   |        |             |
| action-independent events.                    |        |             |
|                                               |        |             |
|  4. In most conditions, and whenever          |        |             |
| applicable, data-driven approaches should be  |        |             |
| preferred to subjective probability           |        |             |
| estimates. Use probability-consistent         |        |             |
| statistical or ML algorithms to estimate the  |        |             |
| probabilities.                                |        |             |
|                                               |        |             |
|  5. Ensure that the decision analysis is      |        |             |
| applied to the correct population.            |        |             |
|                                               |        |             |
|  6. Conduct sensitivity analyses that reveal  |        |             |
| how much the estimated optimal decision is    |        |             |
| influenced by uncertainty in the              |        |             |
| specification of the model.                   |        |             |
|                                               |        |             |
|  7. Whenever possible, produce credible       |        |             |
| intervals/posterior probability distributions |        |             |
| for the utility expectations of decisions.    |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.7. Pursue ML solutions with the right       | Mature | High impact |
| inductive bias for the problem at hand.       |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.8. Create a data generating or data design  | Mature | High impact |
| procedure that matches well the requirements  |        |             |
| of the problem at hand and works with the     |        |             |
| inductive bias to achieve strong results.     |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.9. Do not misinterpret the No Free Lunch    | Mature | High impact |
| Theorem! Cross validation and independent     |        |             |
| data validation, as well as their cousin      |        |             |
| reproducibility, are robust pillars of good   |        |             |
| science and good ML practice and are not      |        |             |
| challenged by the NFLT.                       |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.10. Clustering should not be used for       | Mature | High impact |
| predictive modeling.                          |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.11. A very useful form of clustering is     | Mature | High impact |
| post-hoc extraction of subtypes from accurate |        |             |
| predictor models.                             |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+
| 2.12. The choice of generative vs             | Mature | High impact |
| discriminative modeling affects quality of    |        |             |
| modeling results and has to be carefully tied |        |             |
| to the problem domain characteristics. All    |        |             |
| else being equal discriminative models confer |        |             |
| efficiency (computational and sample)         |        |             |
| advantages.                                   |        |             |
+-----------------------------------------------+--------+-------------+

Chapter 3. Appraisal of ML Techniques

Chapter 3.2. Foundational Techniques

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------
  3.2.1.1. Unless a generalized linear model is more appropriate, OLS is a good baseline technique.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mature     Medium impact
  3.2.1.2. Building an OLS, even if it is known not to produce optimal predictive performance, can reveal data problems, biases, etc.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mature     Medium impact
  3.2.2.1. Use GLM as first pass, or main comparator classifier.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mature     Medium impact
  3.2.2.2. Building a GLM, even if it is known not to produce optimal predictive performance, can reveal data problems, biases, etc.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mature     Medium impact
  3.2.4.1. Deep learning is most recommended for predictive modeling in large imaging datasets. Other domains may also be good candidates. In all cases additional (alternative and comparator) methods should be explored at this time within the same error estimation protocols (see “The Development Process and Lifecycle of Clinical Grade and Other Safety and Performance-Sensitive AI/ML Mode”).   Evolving   High impact
  3.2.4.2. At this time, ANNs are not suitable for causal discovery and modeling. Formal causal methods should be preferred (see chapter “Foundations of Causal ML”).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Evolving   High impact
  3.2.4.3. ANNs are not suitable for problems where explainability and transparency are required, or when large reduction of the feature space is important to model application.                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Evolving   High impact
  3.2.5.1. SVMs are primary choice for omics, text classification, and combined clinical/molecular/text tasks.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Evolving   High impact
  3.2.5.2. SVMs are secondary choice for feature selection (with Markov Boundary methods being first choice). In very small sample situations where Markov Boundary methods may suffer, SVM feature selection can be first choice.                                                                                                                                                                          Mature     Medium impact
  3.2.5.3. SVM weights, features or models should not be interpreted causally.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mature     High impact
  3.2.5.4. Explain SVMs by converting them to interpretable models via meta-learning or other approaches; and convert scores to probabilities when needed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mature     High impact
  3.2.6.1. Naïve Bayes has limited utility in modern health applications and is not a recommended method in usual circumstances.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mature     High impact
  3.2.6.2. Use Bayes Networks when flexible classification is needed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mature     High impact
  3.2.6.3. Use causal network models when causal structure discovery and causal effect estimation are needed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mature     High impact
  3.2.6.4. Causal probabilistic graphs, and local causal and Markov Boundary methods have important equivalence class modeling capabilities not found in other methods.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Evolving   High impact
  3.2.6.5. Markov Boundary induction (identified via specialized algorithms) is typically the feature selection method of choice.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mature     High impact
  3.2.6.6. Use Causal Bayes Networks for modeling full joint distributions (e.g., for simulation or re-simulation purposes) while also preserving causal structure.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mature     High impact
  3.2.6.7. Use Causal BNs for guiding experiments in the presence of information equivalences.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Evolving   High impact
  3.2.7.1. Use k-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) as comparator not as primary predictive modeling methods.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mature     High impact
  3.2.7.2. In KNN predictive modeling, optimize k with model selection.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mature     High impact
  3.2.7.3. Use adaptive KNN for high dimensional data, and combine with strong feature selection.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mature     High impact
  3.2.7.4. For KNN, explore the right distance metric for the data at hand via model selection.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Evolving   Medium impact
  3.2.8.1. Use Decision Trees for interpretable modeling, alone or in conjunction with other methods.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mature     High impact
  3.2.8.2. Use Decision Trees for target variable-specific subpopulation discovery (alone or in conjunction with other methods).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mature     High impact
  3.2.8.3. Use Decision Trees as baseline comparator method for predictive modeling.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mature     Medium impact
  3.2.8.4. Use Decision Trees in ensembles (Boosting) or bagging (Random Forest) algorithms to improve predictivity.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mature     High impact
  3.2.9.1. Do no use clustering to discover causal structure.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mature     High impact
  3.2.9.2. Do not use clustering for predictive modeling.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mature     High impact
  3.2.9.3. Tailor the use of clustering algorithm and metric to the problem at hand.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mature     High impact
  3.2.9.4. Derive predictive subgroups from properly-built and validated classifiers (Decision Trees are particularly good candidates.)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mature     High impact
  3.2.9.5. Perform sensitivity analysis to study the impact of the choice of parameters, metrics and algorithms on clustering (and every other ML method).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mature     High impact
  3.2.9.6. Repeat and summarize multiple runs of randomized clustering algorithms.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mature     High impact
  3.2.9.7. Start from causal and predictive algorithms and use subgrouping and clustering to summarize, visualize, etc. their results.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mature     High impact
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------

Chapter 3.3. Ensemble Modeling

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ---------------
  3.3.1.1. Consider stacking as a high priority choice of algorithm when high performance is needed, when base algorithms do not have optimal inductive bias, and interpretability is not a strong requirement.                Mature   Medium impact
  3.3.3.1. Use random forests (RFs) as primary or high priority choice when high predictivity is required and interpretability is not of high importance.                                                                      Mature   High impact
  3.3.3.2. When using RF, do not rely on the internal error estimation but use an independent unbiased error estimator. Similarly, nest the RF inside a model selection protocol, in order to optimize its hyper parameters.   Mature   High impact
  3.3.3.3. When feature selection is important, combine RF with an external feature selection algorithm.                                                                                                                       Mature   High impact
  3.3.3.4. Control Decision Tree size in random forests by using the recommendations of the inventor in the original publication as the starting point.                                                                        Mature   High impact
  3.3.4.1. Use boosting (GBM) as a primary or high priority choice when high predictivity is required and interpretability is not of high importance.                                                                          Mature   High impact
  3.3.4.2. When feature selection is important, combine GBMs with an external feature selection algorithm.                                                                                                                     Mature   High impact
  3.3.4.3. Control overfitting by restricting the number of iterations in the GBM.                                                                                                                                             Mature   High impact
  3.3.4.4. If data is noisy, prefer noise-robust GMBs.                                                                                                                                                                         Mature   High impact
  3.3.4.5. Select an appropriate link function for exponential family outcomes in GBMs.                                                                                                                                        Mature   High impact
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ---------------

Chapter 3.4. Regularization

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- -------------
  3.4.1.1. Consider using penalized regression in high-dimensional datasets that classic regression cannot handle at all. Otherwise, feature selection or dimensionality reduction have to be applied.   Mature   High impact
  3.4.1.2. Use penalized regression as comparator method along with others as appropriate for the application domain.                                                                                    Mature   High impact
  3.4.1.3. Penalized regression may be useful for some types of feature selection, but not as first-choice feature selection method.                                                                     Mature   High impact
  3.4.1.4. When non-linear regularized models are needed, select an appropriate link function. Also consider alternatives such as kernel SVMs or Kernel Regression.                                      Mature   High impact
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- -------------

Chapter 3.5. Feature Selection

+:------------------------------------------+:---------+:--------------+
| 3.5.1.1. Markov Boundary procedures are   | Mature   | High impact   |
| first choice for feature selection (FS)   |          |               |
| when modest sample size (or more) is      |          |               |
| available, regardless of how high is the  |          |               |
| dimensionality. They are particularly     |          |               |
| appropriate when                          |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (1) causal interpretation of findings is |          |               |
| desired                                   |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (2) we wish to have consistent and       |          |               |
| coherent predictive and valid causal      |          |               |
| models                                    |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (3) we wish to find equivalence classes  |          |               |
| of optimal feature sets or optimal        |          |               |
| classifiers                               |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 3.5.1.2. SVM-RFE is a first choice in     | Mature   | High impact   |
| very small sample size and high           |          |               |
| dimensional settings when causal          |          |               |
| conclusions are not sought.               |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 3.5.1.3a. Do not over interpret features  | Mature   | High impact   |
| selected by UAF. Contrary to common       |          |               |
| over-interpretation in common genomics    |          |               |
| practice, the top-ranked variables are    |          |               |
| not strongly suggestive of biological,    |          |               |
| mechanistic, or causal importance, nor    |          |               |
| are they the strongest predictive         |          |               |
| factors.                                  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 3.5.1.3b. Use UAF when sample sizes are   | Mature   | High impact   |
| extremely small.                          |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 3.5.1.4. Generic wrapping and stepwise    | Evolving | High impact   |
| feature selection procedures should be    |          |               |
| (and are increasingly) retired from       |          |               |
| practice.                                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 3.5.2.1. When eliminating expensive,      | Mature   | High impact   |
| dangerous and/or unnecessary inputs by    |          |               |
| predictor models is beneficial, then use  |          |               |
| features selection instead of             |          |               |
| dimensionality reduction.                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 3.5.2.2. For prediction of specific       | Mature   | High impact   |
| outcomes, feature selection targeting     |          |               |
| these outcomes (as opposed to             |          |               |
| unsupervised dimensionality reduction)    |          |               |
| should be the method of choice.           |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 3.5.2.3. Using a data transform based on  | Mature   | Medium impact |
| the top-2 principal components is a       |          |               |
| staple of visualization of data for       |          |               |
| exploratory purposes.                     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 3.5.2.4. Neither principal component      | Mature   | High impact   |
| analysis (PCA) nor exploratory factor     |          |               |
| analysis (EFA) should be over-interpreted |          |               |
| causally, predictively, or otherwise.     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 3.5.2.5. PCA for classification can be    | Mature   | High impact   |
| overfitted, so it needs to be treated     |          |               |
| like any other data operation by the      |          |               |
| model selection and error estimation      |          |               |
| protocol.                                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+

Chapter 3.6. Time-to-Event Outcomes

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------
  3.6.1. When modeling time-to-event outcomes, specialized techniques (such as survival analysis) should be used. Generic predictive modeling methods should be used as comparators or supplemental models.        Mature     High impact
  3.6.1.1. Plot the Kaplan-Meier (KM) curve because it can reveal data problems. Consider the complementary log–log plot of the KM curve, as well (for checking modeling assumptions).                             Mature     High impact
  3.6.3.1. Cox PH is first-choice model for time-to-event data.                                                                                                                                                    Mature     High impact
  3.6.3.2. Consider, additionally, survival modeling versions of ML predictive models when they exist.                                                                                                             Mature     Medium impact
  3.6.3.3. In the presence of substantial violations, different models, including extensions of the Cox PH, may be more appropriate than the standard Cox model.                                                   Mature     High impact
  3.6.3.4. Consider the Markov Boundary feature selector for survival analysis that results from using Cox proportional hazards models as conditional independence testing within the Markov Boundary algorithm.   Evolving   Medium impact
  3.6.3.5. For high-dimensional data, consider regularized Cox proportional hazards models. Also consider the Cox Markov Boundary method (described above in 3.6.3.4) for feature selection.                       Mature     High impact
  3.6.3.6. If age is included in the model and has nonlinear relationship to a time-to-event response, consider an age-scale Cox PH model.                                                                         Mature     Medium impact
  3.6.4.1. Use an accelerated failure time AFT model over a Cox model if its assumptions are met.                                                                                                                  Mature     High impact
  3.6.4.2. Use Cox PH instead of AFT if the AFT assumptions are not met but the proportional hazards assumption is.                                                                                                Mature     High impact
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------

Chapter 3.7. Longitudinal Data

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------------
  3.7.2.1. When using ANOVA, also consider the random intercept LMM (linear mixed effect models). The LMM is more flexible and contains the ANOVA specification as a special case.                        Mature   High impact
  3.7.2.2. In general prefer LMMs instead of MANOVA.                                                                                                                                                      Mature   High impact
  3.7.3.1. Use LMM when the goal is to identify subject-level effects.                                                                                                                                    Mature   High impact
  3.7.3.2. If the main purpose is estimating the effect size of covariates or making predictions for previously unseen subjects, GEE (generalized estimating equations) can be more efficient than LMM.   Mature   High impact
  3.7.4.1. Use GEE when predictions for previously unseen subjects is needed.                                                                                                                             Mature   High impact
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------------

Chapter 4. Causal AI/ML

+:------------------------------------------+:---------+:--------------+
| 4.1. For predictive tasks (i.e., without  | Mature   | High impact   |
| interventions contemplated) use of        |          |               |
| Predictive ML is sufficient and first     |          |               |
| priority. For causal tasks (i.e., with    |          |               |
| interventions contemplated) use of Causal |          |               |
| ML is necessary.                          |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 4.2. In order to estimate unbiased causal | Mature   | High impact   |
| effects, control variables that are       |          |               |
| sufficient to block all confounding       |          |               |
| paths. These variables can be identified  |          |               |
| by causal structure ML algorithms.        |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 4.3. Often there is a choice of multiple  | Mature   | Medium impact |
| alternative variable sets that block      |          |               |
| confounding paths. An applicable choice   |          |               |
| is to control/condition on the set        |          |               |
| Parents (exposure) in order to block all  |          |               |
| confounding paths connecting A and T.     |          |               |
| However this sufficient confounding       |          |               |
| blocking variable set is not necessarily  |          |               |
| the minimal one and it is recommended to  |          |               |
| use the minimal blocking variable set in  |          |               |
| order to maximize statistical power and   |          |               |
| minimize uncertainty in the estimation of |          |               |
| the causal effect.                        |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 4.4. A protocol for health science causal | Evolving | High impact   |
| ML                                        |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  1. Define the goal of the analysis       |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  2. Preprocess the data                   |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  3. Conduct causal structure discovery    |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  4. Conduct causal effect estimation      |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  5. Assess the quality and reliability of |          |               |
| the results                               |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  6. Implementation and enhancement of     |          |               |
| results                                   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+

Chapter 5. Method Development and Evaluation

+:------------------------------------------+:---------+:--------------+
| 5.1. Methods developers should strive to  | Mature   | High impact   |
| characterize the new methods according to |          |               |
| the dimensions of theoretical and         |          |               |
| empirical properties.                     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.2. Methods developers should carefully  | Mature   | High impact   |
| disclose the known and unknown properties |          |               |
| of new methods at each stage of their     |          |               |
| development and provide full evidence for |          |               |
| how these properties were established.    |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.3. Methods adopters and evaluators      | Mature   | High impact   |
| (users, funding agencies, editorial       |          |               |
| boards etc.) should seek to obtain valid  |          |               |
| information according to the dimensions   |          |               |
| of theoretical and empirical properties   |          |               |
| for every method, tool, and system under  |          |               |
| consideration.                            |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.4. Methods adopters and evaluators      | Mature   | High impact   |
| should map the dimensions of theoretical  |          |               |
| and empirical properties for every        |          |               |
| method, tool, and system under            |          |               |
| consideration to the problem at hand and  |          |               |
| select methods based on best matching of  |          |               |
| method properties to problem needs.       |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.5. The properties of a ML algorithm can | Mature   | High impact   |
| be negatively or positively affected by   |          |               |
| the ML protocol to extreme degrees (see   |          |               |
| “Lessons Learned from Historical          |          |               |
| Failures, Limitations and Successes of    |          |               |
| AI/ML In Healthcare and the Health        |          |               |
| Sciences. Enduring Problems, and the Role |          |               |
| of BPs” for several important case        |          |               |
| studies that show the practical           |          |               |
| consequences). Similarly the data design  |          |               |
| can negatively or positively affect the   |          |               |
| ML protocol and its embedded algorithms   |          |               |
| to extreme degrees. Therefore, it is      |          |               |
| imperative to design AI/ML methods taking |          |               |
| into account any positive or negative     |          |               |
| interactions of data design with the      |          |               |
| protocols and embedded algorithms         |          |               |
| employed.                                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.6. The preferred design for validating  | Evolving | High impact   |
| AI/ML methods with real life data with    |          |               |
| known answers is the centralized          |          |               |
| benchmark design. Distributed benchmark   |          |               |
| designs, whenever feasible, add value by  |          |               |
| exploring natural variation in how        |          |               |
| methods are applied by experts.           |          |               |
| Competitions have several intrinsic       |          |               |
| limitations and can add value but have to |          |               |
| be interpreted carefully.                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.7. Develop and validate ML/AI methods   | Mature   | High impact   |
| using the following stages/steps:         |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| Step 1. Rigorous problem definition (in   |          |               |
| precise mathematical terms and            |          |               |
| establishing how the mathematical goals   |          |               |
| map to the healthcare or health science   |          |               |
| discovery goal)                           |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| Step 2. Theoretical analysis of problem   |          |               |
| (complexity, problem space                |          |               |
| characteristics, etc.)                    |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| Step 3. First-pass algorithms solving     |          |               |
| problem                                   |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| Step 4. Theoretical properties of first   |          |               |
| pass algorithms: focus on representation  |          |               |
| power, soundness and completeness,        |          |               |
| transparency, interpretability            |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| Step 5. Algorithm refinements and         |          |               |
| optimizations                             |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| Step 6. Empirically test algorithms in    |          |               |
| controlled conditions                     |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| Step 7. Empirically test algorithms in    |          |               |
| real life data with known                 |          |               |
| answers/solutions                         |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| Step 8. Empirically test algorithms in    |          |               |
| real life data without known              |          |               |
| answers/solutions but where future        |          |               |
| validation can take place                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.8. Avoid evaluating methods by          | Mature   | High impact   |
| employing persuasive expert narratives    |          |               |
| lacking validity.                         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.9. Do not reinvent the wheel. Verify    | Mature   | High impact   |
| that the problem solved by a new method   |          |               |
| has not been previously solved by a       |          |               |
| better performing method.                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.10. Create open box methods to the full | Mature   | Medium impact |
| extent possible. Do not pursue weak       |          |               |
| justifications that fail to translate the |          |               |
| models to accurate human readable         |          |               |
| representations.                          |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.11. Do not confuse “open source” for    | Mature   | Medium impact |
| “transparent” and “closed source” for     |          |               |
| black box”.                               |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 5.12. Interpret results of application of | Mature   | High impact   |
| a method at the level justified by its    |          |               |
| known properties.                         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+

Chapter 6. Model Development Lifecycle

+:------------------------------------------+:---------+:--------------+
| 6.1.1. Define the goals and process of    | Mature   | High impact   |
| AI/ML model building as either            |          |               |
| feasibility/exploratory or as             |          |               |
| clinical-grade/mission-critical and apply |          |               |
| appropriate quality and rigor criteria    |          |               |
| and best practices.                       |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.1.1. When pursuing risk and           | Mature   | High impact   |
| performance-sensitive model development,  |          |               |
| specify concrete model performance        |          |               |
| targets for well-defined care or          |          |               |
| discovery settings.                       |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.1.2. When pursuing risk and           | Mature   | High impact   |
| performance-sensitive model development,  |          |               |
| engage all appropriate stakeholders.      |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.1.3. When pursuing risk and           | Mature   | High impact   |
| performance-sensitive model development   |          |               |
| translate model accuracy to value,        |          |               |
| establish value targets and translate     |          |               |
| predictivity and other technical model    |          |               |
| characteristics into real-world value     |          |               |
| assessments.                              |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.1.4. When pursuing risk and           | Mature   | High impact   |
| performance-sensitive model development   |          |               |
| carefully consider and plan for           |          |               |
| system-level goals and interactions.      |          |               |
| Avoid too narrow (“tunnel vision”) model  |          |               |
| development.                              |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.1.5. When pursuing clinical-grade and | Mature   | High impact   |
| risk-sensitive model development,         |          |               |
| carefully consider ELSI and JEDI          |          |               |
| desiderata and consequences.              |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.1.6. When pursuing feasibility,       | Mature   | Medium impact |
| exploratory, or pre-clinical models relax |          |               |
| stringency of requirements applicable to  |          |               |
| clinical-grade models.                    |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.1.7. When pursuing clinical-grade and | Mature   | High impact   |
| risk-sensitive model development,         |          |               |
| interpret models and models’ decisions    |          |               |
| exactly as their known properties         |          |               |
| justify.                                  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.2.1. When pursuing risk and           | Mature   | High impact   |
| performance-sensitive model development,  |          |               |
| create a rigorous and powerful data       |          |               |
| design which facilitates modeling that    |          |               |
| will meet performance and safety          |          |               |
| requirements.                             |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.2.2. When pursuing risk and           | Mature   | High impact   |
| performance-sensitive model development,  |          |               |
| judiciously interpret the limitations of  |          |               |
| convenience data/data designs on the      |          |               |
| performance and meaning of feasibility    |          |               |
| and exploratory models.                   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.3.1. When moving from first pass      | Mature   | High impact   |
| modeling to optimized clinical grade      |          |               |
| models take into account: the problem     |          |               |
| space characteristics; data available for |          |               |
| development and testing; prior literature |          |               |
| on approaches and results previously      |          |               |
| explored both in terms of data design,    |          |               |
| algorithms and models; verification and   |          |               |
| reproducing prior literature              |          |               |
| findings/claims; and obtaining robust     |          |               |
| preliminary estimates of predictivity of  |          |               |
| the first pass models and whether they    |          |               |
| meet requirements.                        |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.3.2. Avoid overfitting caused by      | Mature   | High impact   |
| repeatedly analyzing same data from first |          |               |
| pass to optimized modeling stages.        |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.4.1. Everything else being equal,     | Mature   | Medium impact |
| prefer interpretable model families when  |          |               |
| interpretability is desired.              |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.4.2. Use standardized coefficients    | Mature   | High impact   |
| (if applicable) when comparing feature    |          |               |
| contributions in linear models.           |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.4.3. Very large models, even when     | Mature   | High impact   |
| produced with intrinsically interpretable |          |               |
| methods, may still be hard to interpret   |          |               |
| because of sheer scale. Isolating         |          |               |
| critical information from large models or |          |               |
| simplification are recommended.           |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.4.4. Apply feature selectors that     | Mature   | Medium impact |
| maximally reduce dimensionality without   |          |               |
| loss of predictivity. Compact models are  |          |               |
| always easier to explain. Combine with    |          |               |
| interpretable model families or surrogate |          |               |
| models as appropriate.                    |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.4.5. If accuracy is of paramount      | Evolving | High impact   |
| importance and if the black box models    |          |               |
| have significant accuracy advantage over  |          |               |
| the best interpretable models you can     |          |               |
| build, then use the black box model but   |          |               |
| apply explanation methods:                |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  • Global surrogate models aiming to have |          |               |
| high fidelity everywhere in the input     |          |               |
| space over all patterns that will be      |          |               |
| classified by the model. Verify           |          |               |
| generalizable fidelity of surrogate model |          |               |
| before using.                             |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  • Local surrogate models aiming to have  |          |               |
| high fidelity in the local input space    |          |               |
| for every pattern that will be classified |          |               |
| by the model. Verify generalizable        |          |               |
| fidelity of surrogate model before using. |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  • Human expert surrogate models which    |          |               |
| must be high fidelity everywhere in the   |          |               |
| input space and be over-fitting           |          |               |
| resistant. Verify generalizability and    |          |               |
| fidelity of human expert explanations of  |          |               |
| models.                                   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.4.6. Shapley values, Shapley value    | Evolving | High impact   |
| approximations and feature importance     |          |               |
| methods that try to summarize complex     |          |               |
| model behaviors in one or few values are  |          |               |
| not advised as general or routinely used  |          |               |
| methods for explaining ML models.         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.4.7.                                  | Evolving | High impact   |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (a) Use equivalence class modeling       |          |               |
| algorithms for discovering the            |          |               |
| equivalence class of optimally accurate   |          |               |
| and non-reducible predictive models. E.g. |          |               |
| TIE* instantiated with GLL-MB or other    |          |               |
| sound Markov boundary subroutines (see    |          |               |
| “Foundations and Properties of AI/ML      |          |               |
| Systems” and “An Appraisal and Operating  |          |               |
| Characteristics of Major ML Methods       |          |               |
| Applicable in Healthcare and Health       |          |               |
| Science”).                                |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (b) Use equivalence class modeling       |          |               |
| algorithms for discovering the            |          |               |
| equivalence class of direct causes. E.g.  |          |               |
| TIE* instantiated with GLL-PC or other    |          |               |
| sound local causal neighborhood           |          |               |
| subroutines (“Foundations and Properties  |          |               |
| of AI/ML Systems” and “An Appraisal and   |          |               |
| Operating Characteristics of Major ML     |          |               |
| Methods Applicable in Healthcare and      |          |               |
| Health Science”).                         |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (c) When experiments can be conducted,   |          |               |
| consider using ML-driven experimentation  |          |               |
| algorithms that model equivalence         |          |               |
| classes. Experimentation may be needed to |          |               |
| resolve the equivalence classes and       |          |               |
| unmeasured confounding. Such algorithms   |          |               |
| minimize the number of experiments        |          |               |
| needed. E.g., ODLP*.                      |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.4.8. When pursuing risk and           | Mature   | High impact   |
| performance-sensitive model development,  |          |               |
| optimize model performance verifying that |          |               |
| targets are met; otherwise, modify or     |          |               |
| enhance data design, algorithms, and      |          |               |
| protocols, or relax requirements; once    |          |               |
| modeling is complete, characterize error  |          |               |
| and other properties that are essential   |          |               |
| for safe and effective deployment and     |          |               |
| explain models and check their face       |          |               |
| validity.                                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.5.1. Do not establish and exercise IP | Evolving | Medium impact |
| rights in ways that undermine fundamental |          |               |
| principles of scientific reproducibility, |          |               |
| openness to model and method scrutiny,    |          |               |
| and validation.                           |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.5.2. Establish IP rights that are     | Evolving | Medium impact |
| conducive to successful dissemination,    |          |               |
| and patients and society benefit from     |          |               |
| AI/ML innovation.                         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.5.3. Protect IP rights from           | Evolving | High impact   |
| “bypassing” that exploit model            |          |               |
| equivalence classes.                      |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.6.1. When developing clinical-grade   | Mature   | High impact   |
| and mission-critical models address       |          |               |
| regulatory, legal, bias, ethical, social  |          |               |
| justice, and health equity issues.        |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.7.1. When developing clinical-grade   | Mature   | High impact   |
| and mission-critical models address       |          |               |
| critical issues of implementation         |          |               |
| including:                                |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (1) conversion to practical,             |          |               |
| inexpensive, objective production models; |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (2) ensuring sustainability via          |          |               |
| reimbursement, cost reductions etc.;      |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (3) demonstrating to stakeholders of     |          |               |
| meeting clinical or research needs and    |          |               |
| adding value;                             |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (4) providing user education and         |          |               |
| support;                                  |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (5) ensuring community and patient       |          |               |
| buy-in;                                   |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (6) sandboxing CDS while it is evaluated |          |               |
| in care environment;                      |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (7) ensuring scaling of CDS;             |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (8) integration into clinical, research  |          |               |
| and R&D workflows as appropriate.         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.8.1. When developing clinical-grade   | Mature   | High impact   |
| and mission-critical models ensure that   |          |               |
| the AI/ML models will stay within their   |          |               |
| knowledge boundaries by addressing:       |          |               |
| outliers, safe and unsafe decision        |          |               |
| regions, calibration and recalibration,   |          |               |
| incorporating patient preferences,        |          |               |
| managing data shifts and model            |          |               |
| performance shifts, address population    |          |               |
| mixture changes, seasonality and trends,  |          |               |
| epidemic dynamics, various interventional |          |               |
| externalities (e.g., changes in standards |          |               |
| of care, new vaccines, new populations,   |          |               |
| new treatments).                          |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| Carefully consider how models can         |          |               |
| successfully generalize from the original |          |               |
| data/populations used for model           |          |               |
| development and validation to other       |          |               |
| populations and settings and address      |          |               |
| pristine vs noisy inputs, model input     |          |               |
| mapping and harmonization, missing input  |          |               |
| values and rebuilding models.             |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.9.1. When developing clinical-grade   | Evolving | Medium impact |
| and mission-critical models ensure that   |          |               |
| ancillary and secondary objectives,       |          |               |
| benefits and work products are managed    |          |               |
| and preserved                             |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 6.2.9.2. Documentation. Throughout the    | Mature   | High impact   |
| model development process complete and    |          |               |
| thorough documentation must be            |          |               |
| maintained. Key elements of this          |          |               |
| documentation include:                    |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (1) Model goals                          |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (2) Risk assessments                     |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (3) Key interactions and input from      |          |               |
| stakeholders                              |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (4) AI/ML governance and oversight       |          |               |
| committee deliberations                   |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (5) Software documentation               |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (6) Data design documentation            |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (7) Data documentation                   |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (8) IP documentation                     |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (9) Legal and compliance documentation   |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (10) User guides and training            |          |               |
| documentation                             |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (11) Ancillary work products             |          |               |
| documentation                             |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (12) Checklists and worksheets (e.g.,    |          |               |
| ones provided in this book to keep track  |          |               |
| of following relevant best practices)     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+

Chapter 7. Data Design

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ---------------
  7.1.1. The ML data design needs to take the operative setting of the ML models into account.                                                                                          Mature   High impact
  7.2.1. Seek to ensure validity and generalizability with good data design first. Resort to analytic corrections of biases only to the extent that optimal design is not attainable.   Mature   High impact
  7.2.2. Ensure that the accessible population is representative of the target population.                                                                                              Mature   High impact
  7.2.3. Ensure that the discovery sample is representative of the accessible (and target) populations.                                                                                 Mature   High impact
  7.3.1. A cross-sectional study suffices if one can answer the analytic question with the prevalence of the outcome in the exposed and unexposed groups.                               Mature   High impact
  7.3.2. Use the easiest/most economical data design that can solve the problem. The mapping of the problem to a problem type can help find the best design.                            Mature   High impact
  7.3.3. Use cohort studies if the time gap between the index date and the outcome is important and the outcome is not very rare.                                                       Mature   High impact
  7.3.4. Use cohort studies if you need to estimate the prevalence and/or incidence of outcomes, separately for exposed and unexposed patients (if an intervention is considered).      Mature   High impact
  7.3.5. Whenever possible, the use of clinical trial data is recommended as a replacement for case/control studies.                                                                    Mature   Medium impact
  7.3.6. Case/control design is best suited when the outcome is rare, but the exposures are relatively frequent.                                                                        Mature   High impact
  7.4.1. If you see an unexpected effect direction, always consider the possibility of Simpson’s paradox and Berkson bias.                                                              Mature   High impact
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ---------------

Chapter 8. Data Management, Transformation, Quality

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------
  8.2.1. Create and use a data dictionary in which each data element in the dataset that we are working with, is defined.                                                                                                                                                                   Mature     High impact
  8.4.1. Whether the data need to be pivoted or not depends on the software that will be used for modeling. Almost always, the software will expect pivoted (wide) data.                                                                                                                    Evolving   Medium impact
  8.4.2. The choice between person-level and person-event format is driven by the analytic need and the analytic software (model) that is chosen accordingly.                                                                                                                               Mature     Medium impact
  8.4.3. If categorical variables with sematic relationships among their levels need to be converted into a set of indicator variables, design an encoding scheme (if possible) that makes this semantic relationship explicit to the learning algorithm.                                   Mature     Medium impact
  8.5.1. EHR data can be used for discovery, but be aware of the quality issues and select modeling methods that can correct for the relevant and potentially consequential issues.                                                                                                         Mature     High impact
  8.5.2. Provide a minimal set of data quality metrics for Completeness, Plausibility and Conformance.                                                                                                                                                                                      Mature     High impact
  8.7.1. It is a best practice to document all data transformations so that the entire process can be reproduced from scratch if necessary.                                                                                                                                                 Mature     High impact
  8.7.2. A minimum sufficient set of tools for learners: a common data model, at least one of the data science programming languages, and data access using SQL.                                                                                                                            Evolving   Medium impact
  8.7.3. Every project should create and maintain a data pipeline, which is a repeatable process that performs all of the steps required to transform data from the source data to the final analytic fact table that is used as input for the analytic and modeling part of the project.   Mature     High impact
  8.7.4. Ensure that meta-data associated with phenotypes and variables contains enough information to allow for the re-creation of the phenotypes/variables from source data.                                                                                                              Mature     High impact
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------

Chapter 9. Model Evaluation Methods and Metrics

+:------------------------------------------+:---------+:--------------+
| 9.1.1. Use evaluation metrics appropriate | Mature   | High impact   |
| for the outcome type.                     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.2. Multiple metrics are needed to     | Mature   | High impact   |
| cover different aspects of model          |          |               |
| performance. Use sets of measures that    |          |               |
| provide complementary information.        |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.3. Common complementary pairs of      | Mature   | High impact   |
| classifier performance evaluation metrics |          |               |
| include: (1) precision/recall; (2)        |          |               |
| specificity/sensitivity; (3)              |          |               |
| bias/discrimination.                      |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.4. The ROC is much more commonly used | Mature   | High impact   |
| than the Lorenz curve and is more         |          |               |
| familiar to many readers.                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.5. Consider showing the Lorenz curve  | Mature   | Medium impact |
| (possibly in combination with the ROC)    |          |               |
| when low-risk patients are of particular  |          |               |
| interest.                                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.6. All of the measures in Table 9.1.6 | Mature   | Medium impact |
| (MSE, MAE, MAD, Pearson residual, R²,     |          |               |
| adjusted R²) are appropriate for Gaussian |          |               |
| data.                                     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.7. MSE is more sensitive to outliers  | Mature   | High impact   |
| than MAD.                                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.8. When evaluating predictive models  | Mature   | High impact   |
| with continuous outcomes that are         |          |               |
| heteroscedastic, consider using a         |          |               |
| residual that normalizes the expected     |          |               |
| variance (such as the Pearson residual    |          |               |
| for counts) or at least for the predicted |          |               |
| value.                                    |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.9. When the relationship between the  | Mature   | High impact   |
| predicted and actual values is not        |          |               |
| linear, consider using a rank-based       |          |               |
| measure such as Spearman or Kendall       |          |               |
| correlation.                              |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.10. The most common evaluation metric | Mature   | Medium impact |
| of a time-to-event model is Harrell’s C   |          |               |
| statistic (survival concordance).         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.11. Time-dependent predictions can be | Mature   | Medium impact |
| summarized into a single value as (1)     |          |               |
| survival probability at the end of the    |          |               |
| study, (2) survival probability at the    |          |               |
| median survival time, (3) or survival     |          |               |
| probability at some clinically relevant   |          |               |
| time.                                     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.1.12. If an ROC is desired,             | Mature   | Medium impact |
| time-to-event prediction can be converted |          |               |
| into classification outcomes at a         |          |               |
| specific (clinically relevant) time point |          |               |
| using the C/D strategy to plot the ROC.   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.2.1. For case/control designs, use OR.  | Mature   | High impact   |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.2.2. Absolute and relative risk         | Mature   | High impact   |
| measures provide complementary            |          |               |
| information, so whenever possible, both   |          |               |
| should be reported.                       |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.2.3. Absolute risk reduction (ARR) and  | Mature   | Medium impact |
| number needed to treat (NNT) convey the   |          |               |
| same information and differ in            |          |               |
| interpretation. ARR is dimensionless,     |          |               |
| while NNT is measured in number of        |          |               |
| patients and is preferred in clinical     |          |               |
| practice. Choose between the two based on |          |               |
| the target audience.                      |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.3.1. Include all alternative            | Mature   | High impact   |
| interventions in a health economic        |          |               |
| evaluation.                               |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.3.2. Include the opportunity cost as    | Mature   | High impact   |
| cost of intervention/program in a health  |          |               |
| economic evaluation.                      |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.3.3 Do not use intermediate end-points  | Mature   | High impact   |
| unless they are very strongly linked to   |          |               |
| the outcome of interest.                  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.1. In model evaluation and/or         | Mature   | High impact   |
| validation, consider the sampling unit    |          |               |
| carefully.                                |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.2. A typical leave-out validation     | Mature   | Medium impact |
| size is 30% of the sample.                |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.3. For cross validation, a typically  | Mature   | Medium impact |
| number of folds is 10 in moderate sample  |          |               |
| size and 5 in large sample sizes.         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.4. When using the bootstrap estimator | Mature   | Medium impact |
| select a number of repetitions that is    |          |               |
| sufficient for the problem based on       |          |               |
| related literature. Reported minimum      |          |               |
| repetitions generally range from 100 to   |          |               |
| >500.                                     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.5. When using the bootstrap, estimate | Mature   | High impact   |
| the bias and correct for it unless it is  |          |               |
| negligible. If the bias is unknown or     |          |               |
| cannot be corrected, then a different     |          |               |
| estimator must be used.                   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.6. Use the least computationally      | Mature   | High impact   |
| expensive estimator that yields small     |          |               |
| enough bias and variance in the problem   |          |               |
| at hand.                                  |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| For very small sample size, consider as   |          |               |
| first choice Leave One Out Cross          |          |               |
| Validation (LOOCV).                       |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| For small sample size, using a            |          |               |
| less-flexible classifier, the .632        |          |               |
| bootstrap can offer the best performance  |          |               |
| but it can be biased.                     |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| For medium sample sizes, repeated         |          |               |
| balanced ten-fold cross validation is     |          |               |
| recommended.                              |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
| For large samples sizes, holdout or       |          |               |
| five-fold Cross Validation or corrected   |          |               |
| bootstrap is recommended.                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.7. Applying data imputation           | Mature   | High impact   |
| procedures on training data and using the |          |               |
| imputation model on the test data (in     |          |               |
| cross validation estimators):             |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (a) Ensures that bias is avoided         |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (b) Mimics practical implementation of   |          |               |
| the final model (which has to be          |          |               |
| eventually deployed without the benefit   |          |               |
| of seeing a large number of the           |          |               |
| application population).                  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.8. Tune the parameters of an          | Mature   | High impact   |
| algorithm separately on each              |          |               |
| fold/resample.                            |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.9. After error estimation has been    | Mature   | High impact   |
| accomplished and an optimal               |          |               |
| hyperparameter value assignment has been  |          |               |
| identified, the final model has to be     |          |               |
| built on the entire data set, with the    |          |               |
| hyperparameter values, that were found to |          |               |
| be best on average, and without           |          |               |
| conducting further internal error         |          |               |
| estimation.                               |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.10. If the sample size allows,        | Evolving | Medium impact |
| pseudo-prospective (temporal) validation  |          |               |
| is recommended in addition to the         |          |               |
| internal validation and other planned     |          |               |
| external validations.                     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 9.4.11. If your model was developed using | Mature   | High impact   |
| public data, registry data, or other      |          |               |
| external data, always make sure that it   |          |               |
| is valid on the target institution’s      |          |               |
| internal data.                            |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+

Chapter 10. Overfitting, Overconfidence, Under Performance

+:------------------------------------------+:---------+:--------------+
| 10.1. Deploy procedures that prevent,     | Mature   | High impact   |
| diagnose and remedy errors of             |          |               |
| overconfidence in, or overfitting of      |          |               |
| models.                                   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.1. Manage model complexity with      | Mature   | High impact   |
| respect to data generating function       |          |               |
| complexity and to available sample size   |          |               |
| using:                                    |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (1) Regularization                       |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (2) Dimensionality reduction             |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (3) Feature selection                    |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (4) Bayesian Priors and Bayesian         |          |               |
| ensembles                                 |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (5) Algorithm-embedded capacity control  |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (6) Statistical model/data complexity    |          |               |
| measures                                  |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (7) Model selection                      |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (8) Combination approaches               |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.2. Characterize and manage           | Mature   | High impact   |
| statistical uncertainty.                  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.3. Use unbiased estimators of model  | Mature   | High impact   |
| performance or correct bias of biased     |          |               |
| estimates.                                |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.4. Lock models at predefined stages  | Mature   | Medium impact |
| in the modeling process and not allow     |          |               |
| further tampering with locked models.     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.5. Correct multiple statistical      | Mature   | High impact   |
| hypotheses tests (explicitly or           |          |               |
| implicitly).                              |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.6. Thoroughly specify and report the | Mature   | High impact   |
| entirety of procedures used to obtain     |          |               |
| models so that independent verification   |          |               |
| of generalizability is possible.          |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.7. Conduct iterative or sequential   | Mature   | High impact   |
| modeling via unbiased protocols.          |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.8. Use representative datasets,      | Mature   | High impact   |
| appropriate populations and make          |          |               |
| generalizability claims from appropriate  |          |               |
| datasets.                                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.9. Coordinate analysis over many     | Mature   | High impact   |
| teams and same data via appropriate       |          |               |
| unbiased protocols.                       |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.10. Use reproducible, standardized   | Mature   | High impact   |
| data input steps.                         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.11. Employ normalization/data        | Mature   | High impact   |
| transforms that do not require entirety   |          |               |
| of sample (or confine such transforms     |          |               |
| within discovery and validation datasets  |          |               |
| independently).                           |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.12. Prevent learners from learning   | Mature   | High impact   |
| the wrong patterns via spurious           |          |               |
| co-occurrence; control structural         |          |               |
| relations and biased sampling; and        |          |               |
| incorporate domain knowledge-based review |          |               |
| that reveals spurious learning.           |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.13. Control via nested model         | Mature   | High impact   |
| selection all (and not just a few)        |          |               |
| factors that can lead to overconfidence.  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.14. If possible combine modelling of | Evolve   | High impact   |
| individual patients with population       |          |               |
| modeling.                                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.15. Do not over-interpret the        | Mature   | High impact   |
| generalizability of bespoke hand-created  |          |               |
| AI models unless sufficient number of     |          |               |
| validation datasets can be obtained to    |          |               |
| support such claims. Consider creating    |          |               |
| computable versions of model              |          |               |
| hand-crafting modeling when possible.     |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.16. Use label reshuffling testing    | Evolving | High impact   |
| for evaluating the                        |          |               |
| overfitting/overconfidence bias of the    |          |               |
| whole analysis protocol.                  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.17. Apply with appropriate caution   | Mature   | High impact   |
| independent dataset validation and be     |          |               |
| mindful of dangers of over interpretation |          |               |
| of positive and negative results.         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.18. Instead of pursuing strict and   | Evolving | High impact   |
| exact reproducibility across datasets,    |          |               |
| study the variant and invariant findings  |          |               |
| from these datasets.                      |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.19. Whenever possible, use           | Mature   | High impact   |
| reanalysis (with both original and        |          |               |
| unbiased or otherwise improved protocols, |          |               |
| including single coordinated protocols as |          |               |
| needed) when verifying the validity of    |          |               |
| models produced by third parties.         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.20. Use domain knowledge and related | Mature   | High impact   |
| face-validity tests by experts to flag    |          |               |
| potential model errors. The experts       |          |               |
| themselves may be prone to biases or      |          |               |
| domain theory may not cover models’ new   |          |               |
| findings so do not over-interpret         |          |               |
| experts’ objections.                      |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.21. Apply “safety net” measures for  | Mature   | High impact   |
| ensuring that a model is not applied to   |          |               |
| the wrong person or population.           |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.1.22. Examine stability of models,     | Evolving | High impact   |
| parameters and other findings and examine |          |               |
| more deeply unstable findings. Be aware   |          |               |
| that it is possible for unstable models   |          |               |
| to be perfectly valid.                    |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.2. Deploy procedures that prevent,     | Mature   | High impact   |
| diagnose and remedy errors of model       |          |               |
| under-performance or underfitting.        |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.2.1. To maximize predictivity deploy   | Mature   | High impact   |
| and explore all relevant learning method  |          |               |
| families during model selection.          |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.2.2. To maximize predictivity and      | Mature   | Medium impact |
| generalizability deploy and explore all   |          |               |
| relevant data preparation steps to the    |          |               |
| domain and task at hand.                  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.2.3. To maximize predictivity          | Mature   | High impact   |
| systematically and sufficiently explore   |          |               |
| the hyper parameter space.                |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.2.4. Anticipate several preliminary    | Mature   | High impact   |
| and refinement modeling stages and        |          |               |
| incorporate them into sequential nested   |          |               |
| designs to avoid overfitting and          |          |               |
| overconfidence.                           |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.2.5. Inform analyses by methods        | Mature   | High impact   |
| literature so that best known methods for |          |               |
| task and data at hand are always explored |          |               |
| along with novel methods.                 |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.2.6. Follow theoretically and          | Mature   | High impact   |
| empirically proven specifications of      |          |               |
| reference prototypical or official use of |          |               |
| employed methods.                         |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.5.7. In models for individual          | Evolving | Medium impact |
| patients: use dense time series data,     |          |               |
| leverage population models, search for    |          |               |
| and model abrupt distribution shifts of   |          |               |
| the individual (including learning and    |          |               |
| modeling shifts at the population level). |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 10.5.8. Conduct power sample analysis and | Evolving | High impact   |
| more generally characterize the effects   |          |               |
| of sample size on modeling. In the        |          |               |
| absence of knowledge of learning curves,  |          |               |
| use:                                      |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (1) dynamic sampling schemes whenever    |          |               |
| appropriate                               |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (2) sensitivity analysis for results     |          |               |
| using convenience samples by iteratively  |          |               |
| reducing available sample size            |          |               |
| (sub-sampling on a convenience sample)    |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (3) simulations                          |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (4) domain knowledge                     |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (5) network-scientific knowledge         |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (6) reference to robust results in very  |          |               |
| similar domains                           |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (7) dynamic sampling schemes             |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+

Chapter 11. From ‘Human vs Machine’ to ‘Human with Machine’

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------
  11.1. Consider the possibility that a hybrid, “human in the loop” system may outperform human or computer decisions.             Mature     Medium impact
  11.2. Examine the topology of errors in human and computer models.                                                               Evolving   High impact
  11.3. Explore ensemble learning as a strategy for building hybrid decision models.                                               Evolving   High impact
  11.4. Work with implementation experts for bringing complex human/AI decision making into the clinical or scientific settings.   Mature     High impact
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------

Chapter 12. Case Studies (Pitfalls, Successes)

+:------------------------------------------+:---------+:--------------+
| 12.7.1. Follow the Institute of           | Mature   | High impact   |
| Medicine’s (IOM’s) recommendations and    |          |               |
| best practices to enhance development,    |          |               |
| evaluation, and translation of            |          |               |
| omics-based tests before they are used to |          |               |
| guide patient treatment in clinical       |          |               |
| trials. These aim to ensure that progress |          |               |
| in omics test development is grounded in  |          |               |
| sound scientific practice and is          |          |               |
| reproducible, resulting not only in       |          |               |
| improved health care but also in          |          |               |
| continued public trust.                   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 12.9.1. Literature limitations imply      | Evolving | High impact   |
| (among other things) that readers should  |          |               |
| seek, read and interpret health AI/ML     |          |               |
| papers taking the following factors into  |          |               |
| consideration: disjointed expertise,      |          |               |
| publication bias, limited                 |          |               |
| self-correction, level of risk of bias,   |          |               |
| literature disconnected across fields,    |          |               |
| Matthew effect, compounding of            |          |               |
| publication bias with Matthew effect,     |          |               |
| amplification of errors.                  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 12.11.1. Taken at face value, comparative | Evolving | High impact   |
| studies of deep learning and ML vs simple |          |               |
| statistical baselines, collectively       |          |               |
| support the following:                    |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (1) ML is not guaranteed to outperform   |          |               |
| classical simpler tools (like LR). In     |          |               |
| many applications simpler models          |          |               |
| outperform “fancier” (more expressive,    |          |               |
| more complicated) ones because of a       |          |               |
| variety of factors, including having      |          |               |
| properties that match health domain       |          |               |
| characteristics better, having extensive  |          |               |
| guidelines for proper use, protocols and  |          |               |
| designs overpowering algorithms, and that |          |               |
| restricted learners being superior in low |          |               |
| sample situations.                        |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (2) It is an excellent idea to always    |          |               |
| include baseline comparators such as LR   |          |               |
| and other methods in model building.      |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  (3) A significant portion of nominally   |          |               |
| very high DL performance is linked to     |          |               |
| highly-biased research designs            |          |               |
| (incomplete cross validation, possible    |          |               |
| overfitting and error estimation bias,    |          |               |
| and other methodological issues that lead |          |               |
| to over confidence in models). In         |          |               |
| clinical studies with strong methodology  |          |               |
| and lower risk for bias, the DL does not  |          |               |
| seem to perform as well.                  |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 12.11.2. In the foreseeable future, and   | Evolving | Medium impact |
| especially for clinical-grade             |          |               |
| applications and expensive commercial     |          |               |
| solutions, consideration of hybrid        |          |               |
| symbolic-connectionist approaches may be  |          |               |
| worthwhile in many problem domains.       |          |               |
| Possible advantages include: faster path  |          |               |
| to design, faster validation and          |          |               |
| implementation, and exceeding the         |          |               |
| performances of its components.           |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 12.11.3. Large-scope systems are          | Evolving | Medium impact |
| particularly suitable for human–computer  |          |               |
| hybrids and the corresponding practices   |          |               |
| described in ‘From “Human Versus Machine” |          |               |
| to “Human with Machine” ’, should be      |          |               |
| taken into account.                       |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 12.12.1. Ten important principles to      | Evolving | High impact   |
| guide the responsible, ethically          |          |               |
| appropriate, and practical use and        |          |               |
| sharing of clinical data for the purposes |          |               |
| of care and discovery                     |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  1. Mission-driven. Data sharing with     |          |               |
| external parties must be consistent with  |          |               |
| the organization’s core missions of       |          |               |
| patient care, education, and research for |          |               |
| the purpose of generalizable knowledge    |          |               |
| and the advancement of health             |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  2. Payment for academic work. Financial  |          |               |
| compensation should be based on the value |          |               |
| of the contribution (e.g., academic       |          |               |
| research, expertise, or invention)        |          |               |
| provided by the mission-driven            |          |               |
| organization; data alone and financial    |          |               |
| gain should not be primary drivers        |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  3. Minimum necessary. Data sharing will  |          |               |
| be limited to the minimum data elements   |          |               |
| needed for the project                    |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  4. Limited agreements. Data sharing      |          |               |
| agreements should be nonexclusive, have   |          |               |
| defined time limits, and permission for   |          |               |
| data use should be revocable at any time  |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  5. No transfer of ownership. Data        |          |               |
| sharing agreements confer stewardship;    |          |               |
| data ownership cannot be transferred and, |          |               |
| as such, recipients cannot redistribute   |          |               |
| or sell the data                          |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  6. No reidentification. Data recipients  |          |               |
| should not attempt to reidentify          |          |               |
| deidentified data                         |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  7. Limited data association. Data cannot |          |               |
| be associated with other data sets        |          |               |
| without explicit permission               |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  8. Transparency. The key purpose of data |          |               |
| sharing activities and engagements should |          |               |
| be transparent to all stakeholders,       |          |               |
| including patients and study participants |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  9. Conflicts. Conflicts of interest must |          |               |
| be transparent with appropriate           |          |               |
| governance of both employee and           |          |               |
| organization-level conflicts              |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  10. Oversight. All decisions about data  |          |               |
| sharing should be overseen by appropriate |          |               |
| representative stakeholders—much like an  |          |               |
| institutional review board overseeing     |          |               |
| human subjects research                   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 12.13.1. Equivalence classes should be    | Evolving | High impact   |
| modeled and considered in the             |          |               |
| interpretation of models                  |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  1. Use equivalence class modeling        |          |               |
| algorithms for discovering the            |          |               |
| equivalence class of optimally accurate   |          |               |
| and non reducible predictive models       |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  2. Use equivalence class modeling        |          |               |
| algorithms for discovering the            |          |               |
| equivalence class of direct causes        |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  3. When experiments can be conducted,    |          |               |
| consider using ML-driven experimentation  |          |               |
| algorithms that model equivalence         |          |               |
| classes. Experimentation may be needed to |          |               |
| resolve the equivalence classes and       |          |               |
| unmeasured confounding                    |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+

Chapter 13. Managing AI Prediction Error Risk

+:------------------------------------------+:---------+:--------------+
| 13.1. Measure calibration and recalibrate | Mature   | High impact   |
| as needed.                                |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 13.2. Convert scores to probabilities     | Mature   | Medium impact |
| when needed.                              |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 13.3. Test models for difference from     | Mature   | High impact   |
| null model.                               |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 13.4. Identify models’ reliable and       | Mature   | High impact   |
| unreliable decision regions.              |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 13.5. Measure stability and flag unstable | Evolving | Medium impact |
| models.                                   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 13.6. Extract and report model            | Mature   | High impact   |
| equivalence classes.                      |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 13.7. Apply strategies for ML debugging:  | Evolving | High impact   |
|                                           |          |               |
|  1. Start from conventional debugging of  |          |               |
| ML algorithm implementation               |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  2. Debug with real data                  |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  3. Debug simulations and resimulations   |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  4. Know well the behavior of algorithms  |          |               |
| so that strange behaviors (for better or  |          |               |
| worse) are immediately apparent in        |          |               |
| complex analyses. Investigate unusual     |          |               |
| behaviors (with respect to each           |          |               |
| algorithm’s expected behavior)            |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  5. Build or acquire and use a set of     |          |               |
| benchmark datasets                        |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  6. Compare the implementation or         |          |               |
| instantiation and tuning of a ML          |          |               |
| algorithm to the literature               |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  7. Examine the interactions of           |          |               |
| algorithms with embedding protocols and   |          |               |
| systems                                   |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  8. Understand and accommodate mitigation |          |               |
| factors                                   |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+
| 13.8. Use safe model deployment toolkit:  | Evolving | High impact   |
|                                           |          |               |
|  1. Detect and manage outliers            |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  2. Detect and manage falling outside     |          |               |
| model’s region of reliable operation      |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  3. Detect and manage distribution shifts |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  4. Report Credible Intervals for         |          |               |
| relevant loss function estimates          |          |               |
| applicable to the input region for every  |          |               |
| model decision                            |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  5. Flag, report and explain unstable and |          |               |
| uncertain model characteristics           |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  6. Apply continuous QC metrics as        |          |               |
| predictions and decisions are             |          |               |
| prospectively validated. Alert deployment |          |               |
| team for possible need to rectify or      |          |               |
| rebuilt the model                         |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  7. Make the above safety functions       |          |               |
| parametric so that model operators can    |          |               |
| adapt the model deployment better to      |          |               |
| local application conditions              |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  8. When more than one model is           |          |               |
| available, choose the model that has best |          |               |
| performance and safety profile for each   |          |               |
| application case                          |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  9. Safely transfer models developed from |          |               |
| population P1 to population P2, or        |          |               |
| rebuild models from P2 data               |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  10. Address missing inputs at the        |          |               |
| design, fitting and validation stages. Do |          |               |
| not apply models with partial or imputed  |          |               |
| inputs unless this is part of the models’ |          |               |
| design and validation                     |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  11. Manage drops in the quality of model |          |               |
| data inputs from the development and      |          |               |
| validation data to the application phase  |          |               |
|                                           |          |               |
|  12. Develop and deploy ancillary         |          |               |
| alerting DSS (geared to the model users   |          |               |
| and developers) that are designed to flag |          |               |
| deviations from the conditions that       |          |               |
| guarantee safe and effective model        |          |               |
| performance                               |          |               |
+-------------------------------------------+----------+---------------+

Chapter 14. NLP

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------------
  14.1. Always test multiple preprocessing pipelines to find what works best for the desired goals.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mature   High impact
  14.2. Document rationale for design decisions. Provide performance metrics (speed and measures of accuracy) where possible.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mature   High impact
  14.3. Use a grid search over a reasonable set of hyper-parameters to produce the best model possible. This in combination with k-fold cross validation can increase the likelihood that the resulting model will be the strongest and most likely to generalize to unseen data.                                                                                                           Mature   High impact
  14.4. Apply appropriate rigor in analyzing the performance of machine learning models. Permutation tests, covariance analysis, etc. can be invaluable for diagnosing issues before deploying models.                                                                                                                                                                                      Mature   High impact
  14.5. When using machine learning models, including deep learning models, always use a simple baseline for comparison. This can be as simple as some rules, a linear regression model, or as complex as a “vanilla” BERT model depending on the task at hand. It may be the case where a random forest will provide adequate performance and be faster at inference than a transformer.   Mature   High impact
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------------

Chapter 15. Computer Vision

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------
  15.1. Always start with a known state-of-the-art network architecture rather than designing your own. EfficientNet is often a (relatively) fast way to see if your dataset has an extractable signal.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Evolving   High impact
  15.2. Use transfer learning any time you can find a dataset similar enough to yours.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Evolving   High impact
  15.3. Be alert to data differences in photographs acquired by patients vs those acquired by medical photographers or informed providers. If you mix them, be certain to check that there is balance among outcomes by origin.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mature     High impact
  15.4. Weakly supervised learning may be a promising future direction to alleviate the burden of acquiring costly and time-consuming pixel level annotations.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Evolving   Medium impact
  15.5. A common paradigm for deep learning on pathology slides is to first divide the slide into small patches of tissue. Then one trains a tissue-level classifier, typically a deep neural network. This predicts the type of tissue in the patch using labels from pixel-level annotations. Afterwards, a slide-level classifier can be trained to predict using the tissue-level predictions as input and the slide labels as output. The slide-level classifier is typically a model such as logistic regression, often chosen to avoid overfitting.   Evolving   High impact
  15.6. Keep an up-to-date list of publicly available datasets so that you can use them when appropriate.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mature     High impact
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------- ---------------

Chapter 16. Regulatory and Ethical, Legal, Social Implications

+:--------------------------------------------+:---------+:------------+
| 16.1. Consider all relevant risks in        | Mature   | High impact |
| different phases of the AI/ML life cycle.   |          |             |
| Risks can change over time, e.g., the       |          |             |
| probability or severity of risk can change  |          |             |
| due to advancements in treatments or due to |          |             |
| patient population drift.                   |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| 16.2. The rationale for the risk management | Mature   | High impact |
| plan is that having a plan produced ahead   |          |             |
| of time makes it less likely that a risk    |          |             |
| management step is overlooked or            |          |             |
| accidentally skipped. Have a risk           |          |             |
| management plan.                            |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| 16.3. Health AI/ML should strive to always  | Mature   | High impact |
| benefit and never cause harm to any         |          |             |
| individual or group of individuals. Do not  |          |             |
| design, develop or deploy models that make  |          |             |
| unnecessary and avoidable errors, or are    |          |             |
| grossly inefficient, or harmful in any way  |          |             |
| to any individual or group of individuals.  |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| 16.4. AI should strive to decrease, and     | Mature   | High impact |
| ensure that it does not increase health     |          |             |
| disparities. Do not design, develop or      |          |             |
| deploy models that may increase health      |          |             |
| disparities or systematically benefit or    |          |             |
| harm specific groups over others. Whenever  |          |             |
| possible seek to design, develop or deploy  |          |             |
| models that increase health equity.         |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| 16.5. Importance of an ethical, equity and  | Mature   | High impact |
| social justice—sensitive culture of health  |          |             |
| AI/ML:                                      |          |             |
|                                             |          |             |
|  1. Cultivate a culture that promotes       |          |             |
| health equity values and is broadly         |          |             |
| ethics-sensitive within the data science    |          |             |
| team.                                       |          |             |
|                                             |          |             |
|  2. Ensure proper training in health equity |          |             |
| and overall biomedical ethics of all data   |          |             |
| scientists working on a project.            |          |             |
|                                             |          |             |
|  3. Participate in organizational efforts   |          |             |
| to build and sustain a broader              |          |             |
| organizational culture promoting strong     |          |             |
| biomedical ethics values.                   |          |             |
|                                             |          |             |
|  4. Seek advice and active involvement from |          |             |
| ethics experts, patients, patient           |          |             |
| advocates, and community representatives    |          |             |
| regarding possible harm of the contemplated |          |             |
| AI/ML work to individuals, and threats to   |          |             |
| health equity. Seek to obtain insights,     |          |             |
| guidance and community support on how the   |          |             |
| AI/ML work can lead to reduction of         |          |             |
| disparities.                                |          |             |
|                                             |          |             |
|  5. Hold yourself and others accountable to |          |             |
| the above principles and aims.              |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| 16.6. Data Design must support health       | Mature   | High impact |
| equity. Always collect data on health       |          |             |
| determinants especially those intertwined   |          |             |
| with health disparities and use them in     |          |             |
| modeling along with all other data relevant |          |             |
| to the problem at hand. Ensure that         |          |             |
| representation of underserved,              |          |             |
| marginalized, and minority groups is        |          |             |
| adequate and well-aligned with ethical and  |          |             |
| health justice principles.                  |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| 16.7. Model development and evaluation must | Mature   | High impact |
| support health equity.                      |          |             |
|                                             |          |             |
|  1. Always, during problem formulation,     |          |             |
| data design, and model development,         |          |             |
| validation and deployment stages, consider  |          |             |
| and actively pursue modeling that does not  |          |             |
| compromise (and ideally benefits) equity.   |          |             |
|                                             |          |             |
|  2. Analyze the model decisions with        |          |             |
| respect to health determinant variables.    |          |             |
| Use interpretable/explainable models,       |          |             |
| causal modeling, and equivalence class      |          |             |
| modeling in order to develop a robust       |          |             |
| understanding of how the model’s output may |          |             |
| affect health equity and what related       |          |             |
| biases the model may exhibit. Fix problems  |          |             |
| related to bias.                            |          |             |
|                                             |          |             |
|  3. If medical outcomes are not part of the |          |             |
| model, and only intermediate proxies are    |          |             |
| modeled, examine their suitability. Also    |          |             |
| examine how model decisions affect outcomes |          |             |
| post model deployment. Study how health     |          |             |
| determinants affect outcomes via the        |          |             |
| model’s function.                           |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| 16.8. Revealing racial bias and             | Evolving | High impact |
| discriminatory practices. Use AI/ML to      |          |             |
| reveal harmful biases in health care, and   |          |             |
| health science practices (in aggregate and  |          |             |
| individually). Use the models to flag such  |          |             |
| biases and suggest ways to remove them.     |          |             |
| Models that reveal biases (in order to      |          |             |
| correct them), by necessity capture the     |          |             |
| bias variables, their effects and           |          |             |
| interactions. “Sterilizing” these models    |          |             |
| from the bias they model, defeats the       |          |             |
| purpose of their existence and their value. |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| 16.8b. The “Causal-Path-to-Outcomes         | Evolving | High impact |
| Principle of Bias Detection”. If there are  |          |             |
| one or more causal paths from race or other |          |             |
| minority population indicator variables, to |          |             |
| outcomes and they are not medically         |          |             |
| justified, this indicates an ethical bias   |          |             |
| that should be addressed (either in the     |          |             |
| modeling, or in the practice that the model |          |             |
| captures).                                  |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| Best Practice 16.9. Equitable access to     | Mature   | High impact |
| beneficial AI. Ensure that all who would    |          |             |
| benefit from an AI/ML model have access to  |          |             |
| it.                                         |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+
| Best Practice 16.10. System-level           | Evolving | High impact |
| interactions and their ethical              |          |             |
| implications. AI/ML models, when deployed,  |          |             |
| will not operate in a vacuum. Different     |          |             |
| models designed for different populations   |          |             |
| when optimized separately for the           |          |             |
| individual populations, may be              |          |             |
| non-enforceable because they may “hit a     |          |             |
| wall” of limited resources. In such cases,  |          |             |
| system-level planning, goal-setting, and    |          |             |
| technical solutions must be brought to bear |          |             |
| to optimize multi-objective functions and   |          |             |
| systems of local AI/ML respecting ethical   |          |             |
| principles and factors.                     |          |             |
+---------------------------------------------+----------+-------------+

Chapter 17. Reporting Standards

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- -------------
  17.1. Document the model, its development, validation and deployment process.                                                                                                                                                                                            Mature   High impact
  17.2. Document AI/ML models using reporting standards and extent with problem and technology-specific necessary information even if not part of the standard. Such extensions can be based on the various development stages and Best Practices in the present volume.   Mature   High impact
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- -------------

Index

A

A*

Absolute error

See also Residual

Absolute risk (AR)

See also Measures of effectiveness

Absolute Risk Reduction (ARR)

See also Measures of effectiveness

Accelerated failure time (AFT)

See also Regression

Accelerated failure time (AFT) assumption

See also Parametric survival models

Accessible population

Accreditation

Accuracy

Action models

Activation functions

Active learning

Acyclic directed mixed graph (ADMG)

AdaBoost

Adaptation model of analytic maturity (AMAM)

Adaptive lasso

See also Adaptive lasso

Adjacent

Adjacent nodes, edges

Adjusted R2

See also R2

Admissibility rules for instantiation of a general algorithm family (so
that properties are guaranteed)

Age-scale Cox model

See also Cox proportional hazards model

AHRQ

AI Act (AIA) of the EU

AI/ML-Assisted Decision Making (i.e., computer + human)

AI/ML (or data science) Stack

AI search

AI winters

Algorithm-embedded complexity control

AllOfUs project

ALPHA-BETA search

A model for a KB

See also Propositional logic

“Analysis creep” and uncontrolled iterative modeling

Analytic bias

See also Bias

Analytic bias CHILD_OF Bias

Analytic maturity model

Anchor bias

Anchors

See also Model explanation & interpretation

AND/OR graphs

ANOVA

See also Repeated measures

Ant colony optimization (ACO)

AO search

Aracne algorithm

Architecture of a ML method

Area under the ROC, AUC, AUROC

Arrowsmith system

Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI/ML)

COVID models

definition

languages

model

model lifecycle

Pipelines

Artificial neural networks (ANN)

Ascertainment bias, see Bias

Ascertainment bias CHILD_OF Bias

Asymmetrical costs

Asymptotic complexity

Attributes

See also Ontology

Attribution biases

Autoencoders

Automated feature engineering

See also Feature engineering

Aeromodellers

Autonomous AI/ML Decision Making (i.e., computer only)

Autonomous Human Decision Making (i.e., human only)

Autonomous robot

Autoregressive

See also GEE Covariance structures

Availability bias

Average hazard rate

Average survival time

Average treatment effect (ATE)

Average treatment effect in the treated (ATT)

Avoiding regret

B

Back propagation algorithm

Backward-Chaining

Bagging for feature selection

See also Heuristic feature selection algorithms

Bag-of-words (BoW)

See also Embedding

Balanced design

Base learner

Baseline hazard

See also Cox proportional hazards model

Bayesian classifiers

Bayesian networks (BNs)

Bayesian priors and Bayesian ensembles

Bayes networks (BNs)

Beneficiary

See also Trust and acceptance

Benefit, definition

Benefits of interpretable machine learning methods

Benjamini- Hochberg method

Berkson bias

See also Bias

Berkson bias CHILD_OF Bias

Bespoke and hand-created AI models

“Best” First Search (BeFS) family and variants

Best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE)

Best practices, sources of

Between-subject effects

Bias

Biased estimators of error

Biased resubstitution

Bias-variance decomposition of model error (BVDE)

Bi-directional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT)

Bidirectional LSTM (biLSTM)

Big data

“Big O” notation

Big science designs

Binary, binomial

See also Variable, feature

Binary classification

See also Classification

Binning

Biomarker discovery

See also Problem classes

Biomedical AI & ML

Biomedical concept

Biomedical informatics (health informatics)

Biometrics branch of the NCI

Black box

Black box AI/ML methods and/or model

Bonferroni correction

Boolean networks

Boosting

Bootstrap

.632 bootstrap

See also Bootstrap

.632+ bootstrap

See also Bootstrap

Bootstrap aggregation, bagging

.632+ bootstrap CHILD_OF Bootstrap

.632 bootstrap CHILD_OF Bootstrap

Branches

See also Decision trees

Breadth first search

Breslow formula

Brier score

Brute force Bayes

Bypassing regulations by claiming exploratory intent

C

Calibration

See also Technology acceptance models

Calibration biases

Calibration intercept

See also Calibration model

Calibration intercept CHILD_OF calibration model

Calibration model

Calibration slope

See also Calibration model

Case-control design

Cases vs controls

Categorical

See also Variable, feature

Causal Bayes Network (CBNs)

See also Bayes Network

Causal Bayes Network CHILD_OF Bayes Network

Causal chain

Causal Discovery Guided Experimentation

Causal effect estimation

Causal inference

Causal Markov Boundary

Causal Markov Condition (CMC)

Causal modeling

Causal Models Versus Predictive Models

Causal-Path-to-Outcomes, Principle of Bias Detection

Causal Probabilistic Graphical Models (CPGMs)

Causal semantics

Causal sparsity (i.e., density or complexity) of the causal process that
generates the data

Causal structure discovery

Causal Structure Discovery Algorithms

Cause-and-effect relationships

CDS Connect

Cell ontology (CL)

Censoring

Censoring Unbiased Deep Learning (CUDL)

Censoring Unbiased Loss (CUL)

Centralized benchmark design

Certainty effects

Certification

ChaLearn

Characteristic Path Length

CHARMS

See also Reporting standards

ChatGPT

Checklist

See also Reporting standards

Chemical entities of biological interest (ChEBI)

Chi square test

Chunked algorithms

Classic causal discovery algorithms

Classification

“1-class” SVMs

Cleaning

See also NLP preprocessing

Clinical algorithm

Clinical best practice guidelines

Clinical data repository (CDR)

See also Data repository

Clinical decision support (CDS)

Clinical-grade models

Clinical informatics subspecialty

Clinical order sets

Clinical photographs

Clinical setting

See also Problem setting

Clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction System (cTAKES)

Closed source (or proprietary) software

Cluster(ing)

Co-adaptation

Coefficients

Cognitive biases

See also Bias

Cognitive bias CHILD_OF Bias

Cohen’s kappa

Cohort design

Collider

Combining theoretical analysis with empirical studies

Commission on Accreditation for Health Informatics and Information
Management Education (CAHIIM)

Common causes of over confidence in models

Common causes of underperforming models

Common data model (CDM)

See also Data model

Common properties of AI/ML algorithms, programs

Comparative and absolute empirical performance in simulation studies

See also Empirical performance properties

Comparative and absolute performance in real data

See also Empirical performance properties

Comparisons of AI/Ml versus human experts

Competing risks

Complementariness of errors made by humans and AI/ML

Complementary pairs of measures

Complete data analysis

Completeness

See also Common properties of AI/ML algorithms, programs; Data quality

Complex adaptive systems (CAS)

Complexity

Complexity class of a problem

Compound symmetry

Computable functions

Computable languages

Computational complexity

of an algorithm

of executing problem-solving models

for learning models

of a problem

of a program

of producing problem-solving models

for using models

See also Common properties of AI/ML algorithms, programs

Computational Learning Theory (COLT)

Computer-aided detection (CADe) systems

Computer algorithm

definition

distinguishing characteristics from computer programs

Computer program definition

Computer science (CS)

Computer system definition

Computerized provider order entry systems (CPOE)

Concept normalization

See also NLP Tasks

Concordance, C statistic

Conditions that guarantee properties

Confidence interval

of the survival function

Conformance

See also Data quality

Confounders

Confounding bias

See also Bias

Confounding bias CHILD_OF Bias

Confounding by indication

See also Bias

Confounding by indication CHILD_OF Bias

Confounding paths

Confusion matrix

Confusion of the inverse

Consistent estimator

CONSORT

See also Reporting standards

Constant hazard assumption

See also Exponential survival model

Constant imputation

Constraint-based algorithms

See also Causal structure discovery algorithms

Context of use

See also Method label

Contingency matrix

Continuous

See also Variable, feature

Contrast coding

Contrasts

Controls

Convenience

Converting model scores to probabilities

Converting time-to-event to binomial

Convolutional neural network (CNN)

See also Artificial Neural Networks (ANN); Neural Networks (NN)

Corpus

Correlation does not imply causation

Correlation network

Cost benefit analysis (CBA)

See also Health economic analyses

Cost effective

Cost effectiveness analysis (CEA)

See also Health economic analyses

Cost-effectiveness requirements

Cost minimization analysis (CMA)

See also Health economic analyses

Cost utility analysis (CUA)

See also Health economic analyses

Counting process

COVID

Cox proportional hazards (Cox PH)

See also Regression

CPG-on-FHIR

Credible interval

Credible region of the posterior probability density function

Cross-sectional design

Cross-validation, N-fold Cross-validation (NFCV)

cTAKEs, see Clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction System

Culture of ethical AI/ML

Culture of performant AI/ML

Cumulative/dynamic (C/D)

See also Converting time-to-event to binomial

Cumulative hazard

Cumulative logits

See also Regression

Curse of dimensionality

D

Data

collection

design

design features

SeeFeatures

dictionary

dredging

ecosystems

formats

hubris

mart

model

pipeline

privacy

processing stack

provenance/lineage

quality

repository

security

structure

warehouse

Data-driven versus expert-knowledge-driven AI

Data science, definition

Dataset

Debugging ML

Debugging strategies for ML

Decision analysis (DA)

Decision curve

Decision fatigue

Decision tree induction

See also Decision trees

Decision trees (DTs)

Declarative approach to programming, advantages of

Deep, AI representation (of the problem solving domain)

Deep feature synthesis

Deep learning (DL), deep ANNs

Degree Distribution, see Shortest Path Distribution

Degree Distribution, CHILD_OF Shortest Path Distribution

Degree of a node

Delivery and operator

See also Trust and acceptance

Density estimation

Depth first search

Depth-limited, iterative deepening and simplified memory-bounded
versions of A*

Dermatology

Dermoscopic photographs

Design and analysis of algorithms

Design matrix

Deterministic relationships

Diagnosis Related Groups (DRG)

Diagnostics

See also Problem classes

Dimensionality reduction

Direct causes of a variable

Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)

Direct effects of a variable

Directed graph

Directed path

Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALY)

Disconnect between AI systems and real-world needs and workflows

Discovery sample

Discrimination

Distance metric learning

Distributed benchmark designs

Distributed/federated algorithms

do(.) notation

Document

Drift

Drivers of business value in healthcare

Dropout

D-separation

Due to data design

Due to error estimation

Due to poor choice of model

E

EBSCO

Edge classification

Effects of causal manipulations

Efficient estimator

EfficientNet

Elastic net

Elsevier

Embedded feature selection

Embedded methods

See also Heuristic feature selection algorithms

Embedding

eMerge

See also Data model

Empirical performance properties

Encoding layers

See also Layer

Ensemble

Epic

Epic Sepsis Model (ESM)

Epistemology

EQUATOR

See also Reporting standards

Equivalence class

ignoring

Equivalency-augmented feature selection problem

Error bounds

Error estimator procedure

Estimated generalization error of a model

Estimation

Estimation bias

Estimation bias CHILD_OF Bias

Estimators

Ethical

See also Trust and acceptance

Ethical implications of equivalence class modeling for racial and other
bias

Ethical implications of system-level thinking

Ethical, Legal, Social Implications (ELSI)

Evaluation

Evaluation bias

See also Bias

Evaluation bias CHILD_OF Bias

Event

Evolving best practices

Exact complexity

Exchangeable

See also GEE Covariance structures

Exclusion criteria

Existential operator

Experimental data

Expert systems

Explaining human decision making

Explanation of a method or model (and their outputs) by functional
translation

Exploratory analysis

Exploratory factor analysis (EFA)

Exploratory models

Exponential survival model

Exposed group

Ex post facto narratives

Exposure/intervention

External validation

External validity

See also Valid solution

F

F1 measure

Face validity

Factored joint distribution

Factor, factor matrix

See also Exploratory factor analysis

Failure (time-to-event modeling)

Failure function

Faithful distributions

Fallacy of using unsupervised clustering for predictive modeling

False discovery rate

False negatives

False omission rate (FOR)

False positives

Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR)

see also Data model

Fast reduction

FCI algorithm

FDA Regulation of AI/ML Use

FDA’s “Good ML Practice”

Feasibility model

Feature

engineering

selection

File drawer bias

Filter

Findable Accessible Interoperable and Reusable (FAIR) principles for
scientific data and software

First-mover advantage in scientific publication

First order logic (FOL)

First-pass analysis and modeling

Fishing expeditions

Fixed effects

Fleming-Harrington weights

See also Log-rank test extensions

Flexible causal modeling

Flexible inference with bayes networks

Flexible predictive models

Follow-up period

Foreseeable misuse

See also Medical device

Formalized

Formal properties

Forward chaining

Forward imputation

Foundational methods

Framing

Full cross validation

See also Biased resubstitution

Full cross validation CHILD_OF Biased resubstitution

Functional

Functions

Fundamental asymmetry between under fitting and over fitting

Fundamental principle of operation of causal ML methods

Fundamental theorem of informatics

Fuzzy goals and results

Fuzzy logic

G

Gambler’s fallacy

Gartner Hype cycle

Gaussian

See also Likelihood

GEE Covariance structures

Gene ontology (GO)

Generalizability

Generalized algorithm frameworks

Generalized conditions for performance guarantees

Generalized estimating equations (GEE)

See also Regression

Generalized family of algorithms

Generalized linear

See also Regression

Generalized linear mixed effect models (GLMM)

See also Linear mixed effect models

Generalized linear models (GLM)

See also Regression

Generalized Modus Ponens

General-purpose AI/ML

General template statement of an algorithm family

Generative models

Generative vs. discriminative models

Genetic algorithms (GAs)

Genetic risks prediction (GRIPS)

See also Reporting standards

Geographic validation

GES algorithm

GFCI algorithms

Global surrogate models

Global vector (GloVe)

See also Embedding

Global vs. local interpretability

Goal/merit function (GM)

Goedel’s incompleteness theorem

Google Flu Trends (GFT)

Google Prediction API

GPT-3

Gradient boosting

Gradient boosting machines (GBM)

Granger causality

Graph embeddings

Graphical lasso

See also Lasso

Graphical Markov Boundary

Graph neural networks (GNN)

See also Artificial Neural Networks (ANN); Neural Networks (NN)

Greedy Search

Greenwood’s formula

See also Confidence interval of the Survival function

Group lasso

See also Lasso

H

Happy accidents

Hard AI

“Hard” technical properties vs “softer” properties

HARKing

Harm, definition

Harrell’s C

Harrell’s E

Hazard

Hazard ratio

Health apps

Health determinants, definition

Health disparity (HD), definition

Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS)

Health economic analyses

Health equity and AI/ML, principles of

Health equity bias, see Bias

Health equity bias CHILD_OF Bias

Health outcomes

Health-related Quality of Life (HRQoL)

See also Quality of Life (QoL)

Health Sciences Research

See also Problem Setting

Health system

See also Trust and acceptance

Health systems improvement

Healthy years equivalent (HYE)

Heatmaps

See also Visualization

Heuristic AI/ML methods or systems

Heuristic causality rules

Heuristic feature selection algorithms

Heuristics in decision making (and related cognitive biases)

Hidden variable

See also Confounders

Higher order logics

High impact best practices

Hill climbing search

Hill’s criteria

See also Heuristic causality rules

HIPAA compliance

HITON, HITON-PC, HITON-MB algorithms

HL7

See also Data model

HL7 FHIR

Hosmer-Lemeshow test

Human-AI/ML Hybrid Decision Making

Human biases

Human memory

Humans explaining models

Human understandable language

Hybrid symbolic-statistical AI

Hyperparameters

Hypothesis testing

I

IAMB algorithm

IBM SPPS Modeler

IBM Watson health

ICD-9 CHILD_OF ICD

ICD-10 CHILD_OF ICD

ICD-10-CT CHILD_OF ICD

ICD-10-PCS CHILD_OF ICD

ICU

ID3 algorithm

Identity

See also GEE Covariance structures

Image classification

Image segmentation

I-map

Implementation science

Implementing an algorithm

Importance of theoretical and empirical properties

Incidence

Incident/dynamic (I/D)

See also Converting time-to-event to binomial

Incident/static (I/S)

See also Converting time-to-event to binomial

Inclusion criteria

Incomplete system

Inconsistent system

Incremental cost

Incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER)

Incremental health benefit

In-degree

See also Degree of a node; Degree of a variable (or node) in a casual
graph

In-degree CHILD_OF Degree of a node

Independent censoring

Independent data validation

Independent variable

Index date/index time

Indicator variables

Individual conditional expectation (ICE)

See also Model explanation & interpretation

Individual-level effects

Individual-level model

Individual trends

Inductive bias

See also Bias

Inductive bias CHILD_OF Bias

Inference

Inference rules eg as Modus Ponens, And-elimination, And-introduction,
Resolution, etc.

See also Propositional logic (PL)

Informatics for integrating biology and the bedside (i2b2)

See also Data model

Information bias

See also Bias

Information bias CHILD_OF Bias

Information contamination of cross validation

Informative missingness

Informed presence bias, see Bias

Informed presence bias CHILD_OF Bias

Inherently interpretable vs. post hoc

Input data drifts

See also Drifts

Input layer

See also Layer

Input resolution

See also Resolution Refutation search strategies

Instantiations of general BeFS AI search

Integrated absolute error (IAE)

Integrated AUROC (iAUROC)

See also Time-dependent ROC

Integrated Calibration Index (ICI)

Integrated Squared Error (ISE)

Intellectual property (IP)

Intelligent systems

Intended use

See also Medical device

Interactions of algorithms with data design

Internal nodes

See also Decision trees

Internal validation

Internal validity

See also Valid solution

International Classification of Diseases (ICD)

INTERNIST-I expert system

Interval censoring

Intervals

See also Censoring; Variable, feature

Intractable problems, algorithms, programs and systems

Inverse document frequency (IDF)

IOM’s recommendations and best practices for omics-based tests

Irrelevant features

See also Kohavi-John framework of relevancy

ISO 14971 standard

J

Joint probability distribution (JPD)

Social Justice, health Equity, Diversity, Inclusion (JEDI)

Justification of a method or a model (and their outputs)

K

Kaplan-Meier Estimator, Product Limit Estimator

Kendall correlation

Kernel projection

Kernel regression

See also Regression

K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN)

regression

See alsoRegression

Knowledge acquisition

See also Knowledge engineering

Knowledge base (KB)

See also Propositional logic

Knowledge-based feature engineering

See also Feature engineering

“Knowledge cliff” of an AI system

Knowledge distillation

Knowledge engineering

Knowledge representation

Koch’s postulates

See also Heuristic causality rules

Kohavi-John framework

See also Standard predictive feature selection problem

K-year survival time

L

Label-reshuffled data

LaMDA

Large language models

Lasso

Lately t-SNe

See also Visualization

Latent projection

Latent variables

Layer

Leaf

See also Decision trees

Learning curve of a ML algorithm

Learning health systems

Learning idiosyncratic characteristics/patterns of the data

Learning “statistical noise”

Least Squares Estimation

See also Likelihood

Leave One Out Cross validation (LOOCV), Jackknife

See also Cross-validation, N-fold Cross-validation, NFCV

Leave-out validation, holdout

Leaves

See also Decision trees

Left

See also Censoring

Lemmatization

Likelihood

Likelihood ratio test

See also Likelihood

Limited scope/focused systems

Linear, see Regression

Linear dimensionality reduction

See also Dimensionality reduction

Linear mixed effect models (LMM)

See also Regression

Linear predictor

Linear regression

Linear resolution

See also Resolution Refutation search strategies

LiNGAM algorithm

Link function

Link prediction

LISP

See also Main ai /ml languages

Listwise deletion

Literature Limitations of self-correction

Loading, loadings matrix

See also Exploratory Factor Analysis

Local causally augmented feature selection problem

Local causal structure around a variable

Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME)

See also Model explanation & interpretation

Local causal structure around a variable

Local to Global causal discovery (LGL)-Generalized Local Learning (GLL)
algorithms

Location parameter

See also Parametric survival models

Locking models

Logical connectives

See also Propositional logic

Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC)

Logic-based interpretation

See also Decision trees

Logic-based programming

Logic-derivative formalisms

Log-logistic survival model

Log-log-scale

See also Confidence Interval of the Survival Function

Log-normal survival model

Log rank test

Log-scale

See also Confidence Interval of the Survival Function

Long

See also Data format

Longitudinal data

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)

See also Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Neural Networks (NN)

Loose integration

See also Workflow integration

Lorenz curve

Low of small numbers

M

Machine learning (ML), definition

Machine learning theory

Macro level guidance

Main business goals

Main use

Manipulation (of a variable)

MANOVA

See also Repeated measures

Marginal models

Markov boundary equivalence class

Markov boundary framework

Markov boundary framework of relevancy

Markov condition (MC)

Markov equivalent causal structures

Mathematical statistics

Matlab

See also AI/ML languages

Matthew correlation coefficient

Matthew effect in the literature

Mature best practices

Maximum expected utility (MEU)-based reasoning

Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE)

Mean Absolute Error (MAE)

Mean, calibration-in-the-large

Measurement bias

Measures of effectiveness

Median Absolute Deviation (MAD)

Median survival time

Medical device

Medium impact best practices

MeSH terms (PubMed searches, with)

Meso level guidance

Meta learner

Meta-analysis(es)

Meta-learners

Metathesaurus

Method Label

Methodological validation

Micro level guidance

Microarray Quality Consortium (MAQC-II)

MINIMAX search

Misaligned sentiment and technical reality

Missing at random (MAR)

Missing completely at random (MCAR)

Missing data

Missing not at random (MNAR)

Missingness indicators

Mission-critical models

Mitigating factors

ML as geometrical construction and function optimization

ML features

ML framed as AI search

ML model space

ML protocol

MMHC algorithm

MMPC algorithm

Model drifts

See also Drifts

Model explanation & interpretation

Model fitting procedure

Model monitoring & safeguards

Model performance

Model selection procedure

Model space

Model stability

Model stacking

Model-agnostic vs. model-specific interpretation

Modeling language

Models for understanding

Moderate

See also Calibration

Molecular profiling for precision medicine

Moore’s law

Multi-class classification

See also Classification

Multinomial

See also Variable, feature

Multi-objective context of model use

Multiple imputation

Multiple-sample analysis

MYCIN

N

N3C

Naïve Bayes (NB)

Naïve Bayes assumption

Naïve Bayesian Classifier (NBC)

Named Entity Recognition (NER)

National Science Foundation (NSF)

Natural Language Generation (NLG)

Natural Language Processing (NLP)

NDF-RT

Necessary conditions

Need for survival analysis

Nelson-Aalen estimator

Nested algorithms

Nested designs

Net benefit

Network Diameter

Network Medicine, see Network science

Network science

Neural Networks (NN)

NFLT for ML

N-grams

NIST Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0)

NLP Preprocessing

NLP tasks

No Free Lunch Theorem (NFLT)

Nobel prize

Nodes

Nominal

See also Variable, feature

Non-computable functions

Non-contemporaneous control bias

Nonlinear

Non-monotonic logic

Non-NLP tasks

Non-provable statements

Non-symbolic AI

NOTEARS

NP complexity class

NP hard complexity class

Number needed to treat (NNT)

O

Objects

Observational data

Observational data designs

Observational data there

“Ocam’s Razor”

Odds

Odds ratio (OR)

See also Measures of effectiveness

ODLP algorithm

Of model performance

See also Estimators

OHDSI

Omics (data)

OMOP

One-hot-encoding

One-vs-All

See also Multiclass classification

One-vs-one

Ontologies and Declarative representations

Ontology

See also Knowledge engineering

Ontology for Biomedical Investigations (OBI)

Open box

Open Science practices including open access, open data, open source,
and open standards for software, data and scientific findings

Open source software

Open-box

Operational problem solving

Operational settings

See also Problem Setting

Operationalizable

Operations research

Opportunity cost

Optimal Bayes classifier (OBC)

Oracle data mining

Ordinal Regression

See also Regression

Orinary Least Squares (OLS) regression

See also Regression

Outlier (or novelty) detection

Outlier detection

Out-of-bag, OOB, see Bootstrap

Output layer

Over and undertraining ANNs

Over-confidence in a model

Over-confidence/ under-performance

Over-engineering and over-regulating

Overfitting a model to data

Over-fitting avoidance protocols

Overfitting ML/AI method, system, stack, or protocol

Over-interpreting results

Over-performance of a model

P

P complexity class

PAC (probabilistically approximately correct) learning

Parallel algorithms

Parallelization

Parametric survival models

Parents, children, ancestors, and descendants

Partial cross-validation

See also Biased resubstitution

Partial Dependence Plots

Partial likelihood

Path

Pathology slide

Pathway reverse engineering discovery methods

Patient-specific modeling

Pattern-based modeling

PC algorithm

PCA-based visualization

See also Visualization

PCORnet

See also Data model

PDP (parallel distributed programming) group

Pearl’s Do-Calculous

Pearson residual

Penalized regression

Penalty+loss learners

Perceptron

Performance optimizations

Performance requirements

Performance targets

Permutation feature importance

Person-level

Person-period

Pervasive applicability of ML and AI

p-hacking

Phenotype

Phenotyping algorithm

PheWAS design

Pillars of causal AI

Plain-scale

See also Confidence Interval of the Survival Function

Planning systems

Plausibility

Plug-in estimate

Polynomial growth model

Population trend

Population-level effects

Population-level model

Post-production monitoring

Post-production phase in device lifecycle

Power-sample calculation for ML vs statistical power-sample analysis

Power-sample requirements

Practical significance of asymptotic computational complexity

Precision and personalized medicine

Precision clinical trials

Precision-Recall (PR) Curve and AUC-PR

Pre-clinical models

Predictive modeling

Predictor

Predictor variable

Preferential attachment

Preregistering ML studies and models

Prescriptive decision making

Prevalence

Preventing, detecting, and managing over confidence and under
performance

Primary

Primary and dual formulation of SVMs

Primary use

Principal component (PC)

Principal component analysis (PCA)

Principle of operation

See also Method label

Principle of recursive partitioning

Principled strategies for efficient algorithms

Prior knowledge

Probabilistic markov boundary

Probabilistic, and temporal logics

Probability (of outcome event)

Probability and decision theoretic consistency

Probability distributions and density functions

Probability of compound events

PROBAST

See also Reporting standards

Problem classes

Problem setting

Problem space

Problem statement

Problem statement, elements of

Production-level models

Prolog

See also AI/ML languages

Propensity score-based methods and matching

Properties of interpretation methods

Properties of objects

Proportion

Proportional Hazards (PH) assumption

See also Cox proportional hazards model, Cox PH model

Proportional odds regression

Propositional logic (PL)

Propositions

Pros and cons of transparent vs. Black Box technology

Prospect theory

Protocol for health science causal ML

Provable statements

Pseudo-code

Pseudo-prospective validation

Public challenge design

Publication bias

Pyramid of evidence

Python

See also AI/ML languages

Q

QMR-BN

Quadratic program

Quality Adjusted Life Years (QUALYs)

Quality of life (QoL)

Quasi-likelihood

See also Likelihood

Question answering

R

R²

Racial bias

See also Bias

Racial bias and AI/ML

Racial bias CHILD_OF Bias

Radiology

Ramsey Theory

Random biomarker selection

Random effect

Random forest

Random growth model

Random intercept model

Random survival forest

Randomized causal experiments

Randomized clinical trials

Rate

Ratio

Rational decision maker

Real-world problem

Reanalysis

Recalibration

Recall, sensitivity, True positive rate

Receiver operating curve (ROC)

Recommended level of understanding for professional data scientists

Rectified Linear Units (RELUs)

Recurrent neural network (RNN)

See also Artificial Neural Networks (ANN); Neural Networks (NN)

Recursive partitioning

Regression modeling

Regularization

Regularization and Bias Variance Decomposition of Error

See also Regularization

Regularized

Regularized Maximum Likelihood

See also Likelihood

Regularized regression

See also Regression

Regularizing partial correlations

See also Regularization

Regulatory

See also Trust and acceptance

Re-inventing the wheel

Relation Extraction (RelEx)

See also NLP Tasks

Relations among objects and terms

Relationship

Relationships

See also Ontology

Relative risk

Relative risk reduction (RRR)

Relative risks

Relaxing requirements

Repeated Cross-validation

Repeated holdout

Repeated measures

Repeated Nested Balanced N-fold Cross Validation (RNBNFCV) protocol

Reporting standards

Representation power

See also Common properties of AI/ML algorithms, programs

Representativeness heuristic

Reproducibility

Reproducibility studies

Research Data Warehouse

Residual

Residuals

Re-simulated data

Resolution refutation

Resolution Refutation search strategies

Resubstitution error

Reverse causation

Ridge

Right

See also Censoring

Rights

Rigorous problem definition

RISE criteria

Risk

control

definition

evaluation

factor discovery

Risk management, definition

Risk of Bias

ROC convex hull

Root

See also Decision Tree (DT)

Root mean squared error (RMSE)

Round-robin analysis

Rule based systems

Rule set interpretation

See also Decision Tree

Rule sets

Rule-based system

RxNorm

S

Safety requirements

Sample complexity

Sample complexity, learning curves, power-sample requirements

Sampling bias

See also Bias

Sampling distribution

Sandboxing

Scale parameter

See also Parametric survival models

Scale parameters

Scaling of CDS

Schoenfeld residuals

Science, self-correcting

Scientific and technical

See also Trust and acceptance

Scientific Apophenia

Score based algorithms

See also Causal Structure Discovery Algorithms

Scores

SCOTUS

Screening

See also Problem classes

Search procedure

Secondary

See also Observational data design; Outcome

Secondary analysis of many pre-existing datasets

Secondary CHILD_OF Outcome

Secondary use

See also Method label

Selection bias

See also Bias

Selection bias CHILD_OF Bias

Selective reporting of results

Semantic clarity and transparency

See also Common properties of AI/ML algorithms, programs

Semantic network

Semantic networks/“slot-and-filler” representations, semantic WWW, and
taxonomies

Semantic relationships

Semantics

See also Propositional Logic (PL)

Semi-parametric model

SemMedDB

SemRep

Sepset

Sequential algorithms

Set of support identification

See also Resolution Refutation search strategies

Shallow AI

Shallow rule-based decision support

Shapley values

See also Model explanation & interpretation

Shareable and standardized terminologies and common data models (e.g.,
RxNorm, ICD9, ICD10, SNOMED CT, CPT, LOINC, HL7, OMOP, PCORnet CDM,
i2b2, OBI, GO, VariO, PRO, GO, CL, etc

“Shielded”, see Collider

Shortest path distribution

Sigmoid filter mapping function

Similarity function

Simple and complex surfaces

Simpson’s paradox

Simpson’s paradox CHILD_OF Bias

Simulated annealing

Simulated data

Single imputation

Single-cell transcriptomics

Single-sample analysis

Size of a problem instance

SNOMED CT

Social bias, see Bias

Social bias CHILD_OF Bias

Social Justice, health Equity, Diversity, Inclusion (JEDI)

“Soft margin” formulation of the learning problem in SVMs

Soundness

See also Common properties of AI/ML algorithms, programs

Space complexity

of executing problem-solving models

for learning models

of producing problem-solving models

for storing and using models

See also Common properties of AI/ML algorithms, programs

Spark

Sparse group lasso

See also Lasso

Spearman correlation

SPECIALIST

Specificity of Measurements

Specificity, True Negative Rate (TNR)

Spectrum validation

Spouse

Spouses of a variable

Spurious co-occurrence

SQL

Squared residual

Stability of causal discovery

Stage-gate development process

Stakeholder engagement

Standard feature selection problem

Standardized data models

STARD

See also Reporting standards

Statistical model/data complexity measures, AIC, BIC

Stemming

Steps in developing and validating new AI/ML methods

Steps in evaluating existing AI/ML methods

Stepwise regression

Stochastic regression

Stopword

See also NLP Preprocessing

Stratified Cox model

See also Cox proportional hazards model, Cox PH model)

STROBE

See also Reporting standards

Strong

Strongly relevant features

See also Kohavi-John framework of relevancy

Structural equation models (SEMs)

Structured Query Language (SQL)

Study at risk of bias

Study time scale

Subpopulation discovery

See also Decision Tree (DT), Problem classes

Subpopulation discovery/clustering interpretation

See also Decision Tree

Subsumption

See also Resolution Refutation search strategies

Subtree replication

See also Decision Tree

Sufficient and necessary conditions

Sufficient conditions

Super utilizer patients

Supervised

See also Dimensionality reduction)

Support vector machines (SVMs)

Survival analysis, time-to-event modeling

Survival concordance

Survival data

Survival function

SVM Regression

See also Regression

SVM regularization

See also Regularization

SVM-RFE

See also Heuristic feature selection algorithms

Swapping train and test sets

Swarm intelligence

Symbolic AI

Symbolic NLP

Syntax of FOL

Systematic review

System-level goals and interactions

System-of-science

See also Trust and acceptance

T

Table normalization

Table pivoting

Tampering with validated codes

Target Information Equivalency (TIE)

Target population

Task

Taxonomy of AI/ML interpretability

Taxonomy of progressively harder feature selection problems

Technology acceptance models (TAMs)

Temporal validation

Term frequency (TF)

Terminology

Test sample

Testable theoretical conditions

Text classification

See also NLP Tasks

TF-IDF

Theoretical properties

Theory Ladeness

Theory of Algorithmic Causal Discovery

Theory of feature selection (FS)

TIE algorithm

TIE distributions

Tight integration

Time complexity

Time frame

Time-dependent covariate Cox model

See also Cox proportional hazards model, Cox PH model

Time-dependent ROC

Time-frame

Time-series data

Time-to-event

Time-to-event outcome

Time-varying covariates

Tokenization

See also NLP Preprocessing

Tokens

Toolkit for ensuring safe model application

Training data error of a model

Training sample

Transfer learning

Transformer

See also Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Neural Networks (NN)

Translational science spectrum

Transparency

Transparent (aka open, or white, or clear box)

Treatment coding

Treatment effect estimation

Treatment efficacy

Treatment group

Trek

TRIPOD

See also Reporting standards

True generalization error of a model

True negative

True positive

Trust and acceptance dimensions

TRUST data principles (Transparency, Responsibility, User focus,
Sustainability, and Technology)

Truth tables

See also Propositional Logic (PL)

Turing award

Turing-Church thesis

Types of missingness

U

Ugly Duckling Theorem (UDT)

Unbalanced design

Unbiased causal effect estimates

Unbiased error estimation

Unbiased or “hypothesis free” discovery

Uncorrected multiple statistical hypotheses tests

Under confidence in a model

Under performance of a model

Underfitting a model to data

Underfitting ML/AI method, system, stack, or protocol

Under-interpreting results

Unexposed group

Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)

Uniform cost search (aka Branch and Bound)

Unit preference

See also Resolution Refutation search strategies )

UnitedHealth Group's Optum model

Univariate variable screening (aka Univariate Association Screening, UAS
or univariate association filtering, UAF)

Universal Function Approximators (UFAs)

Universal operator

Unlimited scope/unfocused systems

Unperturbed distribution

Unshielded

Unshielded colliders

Unstructured

Unstructured data

Unsupervised

See also Dimensionality reduction

US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)

USPTO

Utility assessment protocols

Utility scale

V

Valid solution

Validation sample

Value sets

Values

See also Propositional Logic (PL)

Vanishing (or exploding) gradient problem in ANNs

VariO

VC (Vapnik-Chervonenkis) dimension

See also Computational Learning Theory (COLT)

Visualization

Vocabulary

v-structure

W

Wald test

Waterfall development process

Weak

See also Calibration

Weak learning theory

Weakly relevant features

See also Kohavi-John framework of relevancy

Weibull survival model

Weighted confusion matrix

Whole slide image (WSI)

Wide

Wide

See also Data format

Within-subject effects

Wolters Kluwer

Word2Vec

See also Embedding

Workflow integration

Worksheet for evaluating new and existing AI/ML methods

Worst, average, and best-case complexity

Wrapper algorithms

Wrapper methods

See also Heuristic feature selection algorithms

Z

Zynx

[1] “Grace Hopper: The Youthful Teacher of Us All” by Henry S. Tropp in
Abacus Vol. 2, Issue 1 (Fall 1984) ISSN 0724-6722.

[2] https://​en.​wikipedia.​org/​wiki/​Homer_​R.​_​Warner.

[3] https://​yalebooks.​yale.​edu/​book/​9780300188226/​the-theory-that-would-not-die/​.

[4] Paul D. Clayton, PhD, Presentation of the Morris F. Collen Award to
Homer R. Warner, MD, PhD: “Why Not? Let’s Do It!”, Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, Volume 2, Issue 2, March 1995,
Pages 137–142, https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​jamia.​1995.​95261907.

[5] https://​www.​youtube.​com/​watch?​v=​cDAXiq-at5M.

[6] https://​khn.​org/​news/​a-reality-check-on-artificial-intelligence-are-health-care-claims-overblown/​.

[7] https://​web.​archive.​org/​web/​20150202014230/​http://​www.​bloomberg.​com/​bw/​magazine/​content/​11_​17/​b4225060960537.​htm.

[8] Domingos, P. 2015, The master algorithm: How the quest for the
ultimate learning machine will remake our world, Basic Books, New York,
NY, USA.

[9] https://​imia-medinfo.​org/​wp/​history-book/​

[10] Conducted on June 2, 2022

[11] conducted on June 2, 2022, and using Mesh index terms when
available

[12] To be further elaborated later in the book, including related Best
Practices.

[13] Several of these and similar topics will be clarified and
elaborated upon in subsequent chapters. However we recommend to class
instructors and self-learners to get a first-pass evaluation of where
the reader/classroom is (attitude, knowledge, experience) with regards
to such problems.

[14] “Possessing the ability” should not be interpreted that the
professional data scientists should code all the programs personally,
but rather know how it should be done correctly so that they can manage
programmers, or evaluate third party codes.

[15] So that the present chapter is self-contained some of the BN
definitions and properties of chapter “Foundations and Properties of
AI/ML Systems” are re-visited in “Properties of Causal Models” and
“Structural Equation Models (SEMs)”. Readers can skip previously
encountered material.

[16] In this section we make extensive use of d-separation to infer
whether variables are dependent or independent given other variables
(also assuming a faithful distribution encoded by the CPGM). Readers not
proficient in application of d-separation in faithful DAGs are advised
to simply use the provided dependence/independence statements.

[17] There are other connecting paths between C and T, but they do not
contribute to the observed bivariate association between C and T because
for the information to travel across them, we need condition on collider
nodes. For example C → G ← D → T does not contribute to the association
between C and T, unless G is observed, since G is a collider (i.e. both
edges involving G have arrow head pointing to G).

[18] For details on data design, classical statistical study design,
and, more broadly, on research design, the interested reader is referred
to a series of articles in the Lancet [6–8, 20] and to [1], which is a
textbook. A comprehensive catalog of biases is available at [21].

[19] The two key references for this chapter are [2] (chapters 14–17 and
19) and [3], both of which are textbooks. These cover basic concepts,
such as validation, overfitting, evaluation metrics for binary and
continuous outcomes. Time-to-even outcome has seen a lot of recent
development and the key reference is [1]; and for calibration, we
recommend [15]. [17] focuses in best practice for clinical effectiveness
measures, and [31] covers net benefit and the decision curve. For the
health economic impact, we recommend [21], which is a widely used
textbook.

[20] Up to exponential to the number of variables in the data.

[21] Attributed to Harry Day, the Royal Flying Corps First World War
fighter ace.
