  PROFESSIONAL WRITING
          W231
      Jacquelyn Collins
INDIANA UNIVERSITY SOUTH BEND
   DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH
            Digitized by the Internet Archive
                in 2021 with funding from
                Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/professionalwrit0000unse_t100
           = create
       Course   PROFESSIONAL WRITING
Course Number   W231
                Jacquelyn Collins
                INDIANA UNIVERSITY SOUTH BEND
                DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH
     The McGraw-Hill companies




create
http://create.mcgraw-hill.com

Copyright 2012 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights
reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Except as
permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part
of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form
or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system,
without prior written permission of the publisher.

This McGraw-Hill Create text may include materials submitted to
McGraw-Hill for publication by the instructor of this course.
The instructor is solely responsible for the editorial content of such
materials. Instructors retain copyright of these additional materials.

ISBN-10: 1121587771      —_ISBN-13: 9781121587779
Contents

   i. Preface 1
  1. Succeeding in Business Communication 16
  2. Adapting Your Message to Your Audience 40
  3. Building Goodwill 70
  4. Working and Writing in Teams 100
  5. Planning, Composing, and Revising 128
  6. Building Résumés 168
  7. Delivering Negative Messages 210
  8. Writing Job Application Letters 246
  9. Analyzing Information and Writing Reports 276
  Online Supplements        331
  ConnectPlus® Business Communications One-Semester Online Access for Business and Administrative
  Communication, 10th Edition 332
  Access Code for the Online Supplements   333
Credits

  i. Preface: Chapter from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition by Locker, Kienzler, 2013   1
  1. Succeeding in Business Communication: Chapter 1 from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition
    by Locker, Kienzler, 2013         16
  2. Adapting Your Message to Your Audience: Chapter2 from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth
    Edition by Locker, Kienzler, 2013      40
  3. Building Goodwill: Chapter 3 from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition by Locker, Kienzler,
    2013   70
  4. Working and Writing in Teams: Chapter 8 from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition by Locker,
    Kienzler, 2013    100
  5. Planning, Composing, and Revising: Chapter5from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition by
    Locker, Kienzler, 2013      128
  6. Building Résumés: Chapter 12 from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition by Locker, Kienzler,
    2013   168
  7. Delivering Negative Messages: Chapter 10 from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition by
    Locker, Kienzler, 2013      210
  8. Writing     Job Application Letters: Chapter 13 from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition by
     Locker, Kienzler, 2013 246
  9. Analyzing Information and Writing Reports: Chapter 18 from Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth
    Edition by Locker, Kienzler, 2013      276

  Online Supplements 331
  ConnectPlus® Business Communications One-Semester Online Access for Business and Administrative
  Communication, 10th Edition: Media by Locker, Kienzler       332
  Access Code for the Online Supplements 333
                                                        Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




          elcome to Business and Administrative Communication (BAC). This
          textbook can make learning about business communication easier
           and more enjoyable.
   You'll find that this edition of BAC is as flexible, specific, interesting, compre-
hensive, and up-to-date as its predecessors. The features that users particularly
like have been retained: the anecdotes and examples, the easy-to-follow lists,
the integrated coverage of ethics and international business communication,
the analyses of sample problems, the wealth of exercises and assignments. But a
good book has become even better. This edition of BAC includes major changes.

MAJOR CHANGES TO THE TENTH EDITION
Major changes make the tenth edition even better:
   = Entire chapter on using technology in business communications. Also,
     additions on new technology throughout.
   = New material and increased emphasis on electronic communication
     throughout:
     = Instant messaging and text messaging.
     a Wikis.
     = Social media.
         = Facebook.
         = Twitter.
         = LinkedIn.
         = Blogs.
   = New material in the job chapters:
     = New sections:
         = Personal branding.
         = Networking.
         = Using an internship as a job hunting tool.
     = New material:
           =   Guidelines for using LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, and blogs in
             the job hunt.
          = Guidelines for older job seekers.
          = Tips for job hunting in a down economy.
       Expanded ethics section, as well as more ethics coverage throughout.
       Expanded material on networking in multiple chapters.
       Expanded coverage of web page design.
       New appendix on APA and MLA documentation.

CONTENT UPDATES
In addition to the major changes, the tenth edition has new material through-
out to keep it up-to-date for instructors and interesting for students:
    = New chapter openers, Newsworthy Communication, provide examples
       of chapter content occurring in the news.
       = Toyota’s communication strategy to recover from its accelerator
           problems.
           Apple’s moving response to the earthquake and tsunami in Japan.
           BP’s communication failures regarding its Gulf oil spill.
           Air New Zealand’s “naked” safety message.
oa   PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                            Preface


                                      New, up-to-date, interesting examples in text and sidebars:
                                      = Persuasion techniques to get men to go to their doctors.
                                      = College ads during football games.
                                      m A takeoff of NBC’s hit sitcom The Office used for an effective ethics
                                         training program.
                                      = Costco’s adaptations for Taiwan.
                                      Examples from popular companies such as Zappos, Best Buy, Google,
                                      and Microsoft.
                                      New additions from the ranks of business bestseller books:
                                      =   Nicholas Boothman, Convince Them in 90 Seconds or Less
                                      =   Richard. J. Connors, ed., Warren Buffett on Business: Principles from the
                                          Sage of Omaha
                                          Atul Gawande, The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right
                                      =   Chip Heath and Dan Heath, Switch: How To Change Things When
                                          Change Is Hard
                                      =   Jay Heinrichs, Thank You for Arguing: What Aristotle, Lincoln, and
                                          Homer Simpson Can Teach Us about the Art of Persuasion
                                      =   Tony Hsieh, Delivering Happiness: A Path to Profits, Passion, and
                                          Purpose
                                      =   Rosabeth Moss Kanter, Supercorp: How Vanguard Companies Create
                                          Innovation, Profits, Growth, and Social Good
                                      =   John Kotter and Lorne Whitehead, Buy In: Saving Your Good Idea from
                                          Getting Shot Down
                                      ®   Patrick Lencioni, The Five Dysfunctions of a Team
                                      =   Daniel Pink, Drive: The Surprising Truth about What Motivates Us
                                      New exercises, including more ethics exercises.


                            QUALITIES RETAINED
                            BAC retains the qualities that have made             it a top textbook in business
                            communication:
                                      BAC is flexible. Choose the chapters and exercises that best fit your
                                      needs. Choose from in-class exercises, messages to revise, problems
                                      with hints, and cases presented as they’d arise in the workplace. Many
                                      problems offer several options: small group discussions, individual
                                      writing, group writing, or oral presentations.
                                      BAC is specific. BAC provides specific strategies, specific guidelines,
                                      and specific examples. BAC takes the mystery out of creating effective
                                      messages.
                                      BAC is interesting. Anecdotes from a variety of fields show busi-
                                      ness communication at work. The lively side columns from The Wall
                                      Street Journal and a host of other sources provide insights into the
                                      workplace.
                                      BAC is comprehensive. BAC includes international communica-
                                      tion, communicating across cultures in this country, ethics, collabora-
                                      tive writing, organizational cultures, graphs, and technology as well as
                                      traditional concerns such as style and organization. Assignments offer
                                      practice dealing with international audiences or coping with ethical
                                      dilemmas.
                                      BAC is up-to-date. The tenth edition of BAC incorporates the latest
                                      research and practice so that you stay on the cutting edge.
                                                   Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                           Preface                            xi



SUPPLEMENTS
The stimulating, user-friendly supplements package has been one of the major
reasons that BAC is so popular. All of the supplements are available on the
book’s website at www.mhhe.com/locker10e.
   1. The Instructor’s Resource Manual contains
      = Answers to all exercises, an overview and difficulty rating for each
           problem, and, for several of the problems in the book, a detailed
           analysis, discussion questions, and a good solution.
       =   Additional exercises and cases for diagnostic and readiness tests,
           grammar and style, and for letters, memos, and reports.
       = Lesson plans and class activities for each chapter. You'll find dis-
         cussion guides, activities to reinforce chapter materials and prepare
         students for assignments, and handouts for group work, peer edit-
         ing, and other activities.
      = Sample syllabi for courses with different emphases and approaches.
   2. The Test Bank contains approximately 2,000 test items with answers.
      Each is tagged with learning objective, level of difficulty (correspond-
      ing to Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives), AACSB standards,
      and page number.
   3. A Computerized Test Bank is available to qualified adopters in both
      Macintosh and Windows formats, and allows professors to generate
      and edit their own test questions.
   4. The BAC website at www.mhhe.com/locker10e identifies sites for
       business, research, ethics, and job hunting. The Instructor’s Manual,
       Test Bank, and PowerPoints are available to instructors. Additional
       exercises, and quizzes are available to help students improve their
       writing and communication skills.


CONTINUING THE CONVERSATION
This edition incorporates the feedback I’ve received from instructors who
used earlier editions. Tell me about your own success stories teaching Business
and Administrative Communication. I look forward to hearing from you!
                                                             Donna S. Kienzler
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




Business and Administrative
Communication, by Kitty O.
Locker and Donna S. Kien-       CHAPTER OUTLINE AND LEARNING OBJECTIVES
zler, is a true leader in the   Each chapter begins with a chapter outline and learn-
business communications         ing objectives to guide students as they study. The
field. The 10th edition is      first exercise for each chapter, Reviewing the Chapter,
                                poses questions specifically linked to the chapter's
designed to teach students      learning objectives.
how to think critically,
communicate effectively,
and improve written, oral,
and electronic business             GH   AP OT EWR               A


communication skills.
These skills will successful-
ly prepare students to meet         Navigating the Business
a variety of challenges they        (Grojsabosensbter-taceyel
                                    Sspanibceraveatcsels
may face in their future
careers.
                                    SULSUS RGIS UUL Ss SOS slain
  Beyond covering the
broad scope of topics in
business communication,
this text uses a student-
                                                                                Summary of Kay Poi




friendly writing style and
strong design elements to
hold student attention. In                          CHAPTER        4            EX cercises
                                                                                Fx                   and Problems

addition, real-world exam-                             Reviewing the Chapter

ples and real business ap-                    .

                                              .
                                                  What are some positive ethical efforts that are
                                                  getting attention? (LO 41)
                                                  What are some ethical components of
                                                                                                                   .

                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                       What are some communication signals you might
                                                                                                                       receive from specific body language cues? (LO 4-3)
                                                                                                                       What are some ways to manage your time more

plications underscore key                         communication? (LO 4-1)
                                              |. What are some elements of corporate culture? How
                                                  do they affect business? (LO 4-2)
                                                                                                                       efficiently? (LO 44)
                                                                                                                       What are 11 trends in business communication?
                                                                                                                       What do these trends mean for you? (LO 4-5)


material within the text.
                                              .   What are some ways to improve interpersonal                      .   What are some electronic privacy issues that could
                                                  communication? (LO 43) 4-3)                                          affect you at your workplace? (LO 4-5)



  We invite you to learn
                                                                                       Part 1 The Building Blocks of Effective Messages

about this new edition
and its features by paging
                                                                                       After studying this chapter
                                                                                       (Xe)          Why ethics is so important in business communication.


through this visual guide.                                                                           How corporate culture impacts the business environment.
                                                                                                     How to improve interpersonal communication.

                                                                                                     How to use your time more efficiently.
                                                                                                     What the trends in business communication are.
                                                                                                                                      Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




AN INSIDE PERSPECTIVE
Each chapter is introduced with current
news articles relevant to the chapter's
concepts. These opening articles set the
stage for the chapter's content and allow
students a glimpse at how the material
applies in the business world.                                                                                                                   NEWSWORTHY                        COMMUNICATION

                                                                                                                                                 Unconventional Job Tactics




                                                                                                                                                                                               ak Foresea
           NeEwsworTHy                          COMMUNICATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                 37880
           Audiences Change with Time



                                                                                                                                                                    ith high U.S. unemployment rates, even                              But do these unusual tactics work? In some cases.
                                                                                                                                                                    the best-qualified candidates may strug- Only 9% of the hiring managers surveyed reported
                                                                                                                                                                    gle tomake an impression ina sea ofother having hired someone who used an unconventional
                                                                                                                                                  job seekers. Some may turn to unconventional meth- tactic to get noticed. However, most of the unusual
                                                                                                                                                  ods to get noticed by hiring directors and recruiters.                            tactics they list benefit the hiring company in some
                                                                                                                                                       Nathan Schwagler, for example, chose an innova- way: one candidate submitted a business plan for
                                                                                                                                                  tive way to get past the traditional hiring process at one of the company’s products; another presented
                                                                                                                                                  Ingram Micro. He dressed up                                                                                        a solution to one of the com-
           |re year in late January, the president the House of Representatives in                                                                                                                                                                                   pany’s problems. As you
                   of the United States gives the State of the tions and gained several seats in                                                  as a deliveryman, complete “Remember that most innovative
                                                                                                                                                  with a clipboard, a bouquet                                                                                        ponder your tactics, keep in
                   Union address to one of the largest and most out the election, the tenor of pol                                                                                                 methods backfire.”                                                 mind that the other 91% of the
                                                                                                                                                  of flowers, and a Candygram.
           diverse audiences of any communication. Congress, become increasingly pointed and’                                                                                                                                                                         people hired used standard
                                                                    President Obama responded t}                                                  He got through security and
           the news media, foreign leaders and diplomats, stu-                                                                                                                                                                      techniques,        in¢luding     a strong application letter and
                                                                                                                                                   to the office of Jessica, the company’s recruiter.
           dents, and members of the American public from all a different kind of State of
                                                                                                                                                   When he finally met her, Schwagler stripped off his a well-designed résumé.
           walks of life watch, listen, or read the president's still outlined ambitious plans,                                                                                                                                           Remember         that   most    innovative methods back-
                                                                 on bipartisan efforts to achieve                                                  coveralls to reveal his business suit underneath and
           comments each year.
                                                                                                                                                   presented Jessica with his résumé, in addition to the fire. Take Nathan Schwagler. After delivering his
              Traditionally, the president uses the State of the more conciliatory and more ff                                                                                                                                      résumé,        he   followed      up   a week later, only to find
                                                                                                                                                   flowers and candy.
           Union to recount his successes and to spell out his the parties in Congress under
                                                                                        his core                                                        These kinds of innovative methods to get noticed himself talking with the head of security: Schwa-
           political goals for the coming
                                                                                                                                                   are on the rise in the United States. One survey of gler had been barred from entering the premises
           year. In 2010, President Barack “His tone and presentation reflected         the same:
                                                                                        care, rebui                                                hiring managers conducted by CareerBuilder.com or calling again. As one of his professors told
           Obama outlined ambitious the changed audience he faced—
                                                                                                                                                   showed that unconventional methods are rising, him later, “The world is not ready for that type of
           plans for health care reform, one more divided than the one he                                                                                                                                                            creativity.”
                                                                                                                                                   with 22% of the managers seeing unusual tactics.
           economic recovery, and an                                                                                                                                                                                                       2011, http://www.carcerbuilder.com/ article/cb-1076 job-search
                                             addressed in 2010.”                                                                                   ‘Sources: Rachel Zupek, “Unusual Job Search Tactics,” CarcerBuilder, accessed April 9,Seekers in2010,Finds NewCareerBuilder Survey,” CareerBuilder, June9,
            increased focus on education                                                                                                           unusual:               ico/; and“Mare Employers Secing Unusual TacticsfromJob                                                    copréeac_cmp!=ch_prS74--
           and green energy initiatives.                                                                                                            2010, htp://www.careerbuilder.com /share/aboutus/preasreleascsdetail.aspxTid prS7Aked=6/9/201Oteed =12/31/201 sited
           He focused much of his speech on the challenges                             audience he faced—one more di
           faced by the people of America and the steps he and                         he addressed in 2010.
           his Democratic party were taking to help.                                        The ability to adjust your me}
              In 2011, however, the president faced a different                        ence is one key to effective cor
           audience. Even though many of the people listen-                            President Obama addressed a
           ing were the same, the situation and the attitudes had                      of millions, most communicatiot
           changed. In spite of President Obama’s success with                         specific audiences—real people
            his goals during 2010, many Americans were dissat- and real concerns. Learning to a
            isfied. Riding a wave of discontent with the govern- ence will provide you with an excellent foundation
            ment, conservative Republicans had gained control of for any kind of communication.
           Sources: Barak Obama, “Remarks bythePresident inStateoftheSa  Union Address,” JJanuary 28,2010,transcript, TheWhite House, OfficeofthePressSecretary,
                                                                                             Z Barak Obama, “Remarks bythePresident inStateoftheUnion
            http://www.whitehouse gov/the-press-office remarks-president
                                               TheWhite House,Office ofthe PressScaetary,http://www.whitehouse,gov/the-prese-office/2011/01/25/remarks-
            ‘Addins January 25, 2011,transcript,
            president: }-state-union-address.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                                                                                                                  (Chapter Aen YowMage Yo Ate
                                                                                                                                      the Document?




                                                                                                                                   overt at 4 general veferanen? Ass
                                                                                                                                   Yyour mudience willusethedocument
                                                                                                                                      oforganization andthebestlevelof

                                                      What hurlbasen htDanyrem everson thai HongKg Diener acre?
                                                      Seale  oo epage
                                                       Intornational Career Exparience
                                                      When plants, stores,areoffice move ovenieas, peoplefollow—trom top
                                                      exreutives © migrant worker. Infact.managers oftenfindtheyneedinter
                                                      ‘ational experiensr iftheywant          pbn.Expatriate experiener hasalso
                                                      teen shown tomake themmoreCreative andbetter problem solver.® This
                                                      fect. combined withbooming ovenem growth, marethatexxcutive bead
                                                      huntersarelooking,forpeoplewithdeepbicultural fluency orexperience in
                                                      severalcountries,withChina,India,andBeazilatthelpofthelist™Respond:
                                                      ing0 thenow forglobalexperience, business schoolsaresipping upthar
                                                       internationalofferings withclasses.sitemational caseshdies,overseascum
                                                       pues, andstudent/aculty   exchange. Forbothyoung,areexperienced hires,
                                                      sever                      ‘andawlticutural    awanmens areaught”
                                                         US.worker joinahost ofmigrant workersalreadyabroad. Nepalis work
                                                      inKorman lactoriex Mengoliars perform meniallaborinPrague.Closetohalf
                                                      ‘ofallmigrantsarewormen.manyofwhom leavechildren behind Theystayi
                                                      touchwithcellphones andtheInternet*
                                                        ‘Migrant workers bendittheeconomics ofbothhostanhome countries
                                                      ‘Themoncytenthome bymigrants, over$317billiona year, threetimesthe
                                                      ‘world’s talforeignaid.Forsevencountries,thatincomefsovera quarterof
                                                                                   ‘This,themoney nenthome soreofthemajor
                                                      veerthemetaphoroffad                      thewermaaing
                                                      The WorldIsFlat:A BriefHistoryoftheTaerityFirstCentury,hesays.
                                                                          oftheworld oeans(sthatwearenowconmmetiog allthe
                                                                                                              retwork, whit


                                                       DIVERSITY IN NORTH AMERICA [EYE]
                                                      EvenifyoustayintheUnitedStatesandCanada,you'llworkwith
                                                                                            Renidents ofsmall\owre:
                                                      fualareasmayhavediflerentnotionsofrieiness thando
                                                      bierities.Califoniana maytalkarntdressdifferently thanpeop




SIDEBARS
These novel and interesting examples
effectively enhance student understanding of
key concepts. Featured in the margins of every
                                                                                                                                      Part4 The
                                                                                                                                             JobHunt
chapter, these sidebars cover topic areas that                                                                                           Always follow up information   and referral interviews with personal thank-
                                                                                                                                      you letters. Use specifics toshow that you paid attention during the interview,
include International, Legal/Ethical, Just for Fun,                                                                                   and enclose a copy of your revised résumé.

                                                                                                                                      CONTENT AND ORGANIZATION
Technology, and On the Job. In addition, gold                                                                                         FOR JOB APPLICATION LETTERS
                                                                                                                                      Job letters help show employers why they should interview you instead ofother—
stars identify “classic” sidebars.                                                                                                    sometimes hundreds ofothers—qualified applicants. In your letter, focus on

                                                                                                                                        » Your qualifications to meet major requirements ofthe job.
                                                                                                                                        ® Points that separate you from other applicants.
                                                                                                                                        ™ Points that show your knowledge ofthe organization.
                                                                                                                                        © Qualities that every employer islikely tovalue: the ability to write and
                                                                                                                                          speak effectively, tosolve problems, to work well with people.

                                                                                                                                         ‘Two different hiring situations call for two different kindsofapplication let-
                                                                                                                                      ters. Write a solicited letter when you know that the company ishiring: you've
                                                                                                                                      seen an ad, you've been advised to apply by a professor orfriend, you've read
                                                                                                                                      ina trade publication that the company is expanding. This situation is similar
                                                                                                                                       to a direct request in persuasion (p. 321): you can indicate immediately that
                                                                                                                                      you are applying for the position. Sometimes, however, the advertised posi-
                                                                                                                                      tions may not be what you want, oryou may want towork for anorganization
                                                                                                                                      that has not announced openings in your area. Then you       write
                                                                                                                                                                                                       a  prospecting
                                                                                                                                      letter. (The metaphor is drawn from prospecting for gold.) The prospecting
                                                                                                                                       letter is like a problem-solving persuasive message (p. 323).
                                                                                                                                          Prospecting letters help you tap into the hidden job market. In some cases,
                                                                                                                                      your prospecting letter may arrive at a company that has decided to hire but
                                                                                                                                      has not yet announced the job. In other cases, companies create positions to
                                                                                                                                      get   agood person who isonthe market. Even in a hiring freeze, jobs are some-
                                                                                                                                       times created for specific individuals.
                                                                                                                                           In both solicited and prospecting letters you should


       INSITE LINKS                                                                                                                         Address the letter toa specific person (a must for a prospecting letter).
                                                                                                                                            Indicate the specific position for which you're applying.
                                                                                                                                            Be specific about your qualifications.
                                                                                                                                            ‘Show what separates you from other applicants.
      These helpful URLs point to websites that include                                                                                      Showa knowledge of the company and the position,
                                                                                                                                            Refer to your résumé (which you would enclose with the letter).

      organizations and resources of effective business                                                                                     Ask for an interview.

                                                                                                                                         The following discussion follows thejob letter from beginning toend. The two.
      communication. These examples underscore the                                                                                    kinds of letters are discussed separately where they differ  and together where
                                                                                                                                      they are the same. Letters for internships follow the same patterns: use a solic-
                                                                                                                                      ited letter to apply foraninternship that has been advertised and a prospecting,
      role of the web in business communication and                                                                                    letter tocreate aninternship with a company that has not announced one.

                                                                                                                                       How to Organize Solicited Letters
      serve to motivate and enrich the student learning                                                                               When you know the company is hiring, use the pattem of organization in Fig
                                                                                                                                       ure133. A sample solicited letter fora graduating senior isshown inFigure 13.4.A
      experience. These websites cover a wide range of                                                                                solicited letter                   up froma career fairand   an internship
                                                                                                                                                                                                            is shown
                                                                                                                                      inFigure 13.7, ThejobadfortheletterinFigure 13.4isprinted inExercise 13.20.

      reference sources, including corporate, small busi-
      ness, nonprofit, and government websites.
                                                                                                                                                                    Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                                                              Chapter2 actingKm                                              FULL-PAGE EXAMPLES
                                                                    Figure 12.5 A Community Cotegs Chronological Rbaumé toUseforCarver FairsandIntorishins

                                                                                                                                                wit
                                                                                                                                              vote
                                                                                                                                             ayer                            A variety of visual examples featuring full-sized
                                                                                                                                                                             letters, memos, e-mails, reports, and résumés are
                                                                                                                                              qoo®


                                                                                                                                             Eurninetne
                                                                                                                                             Lore Nyc
                                                                                                                                             Madion
                                                                                                                                                                             presented in the text. These examples include the
                                                                                    GRA: 30/ADGi~your ce overt
                                                                                                Teaver niger
                                                                                                                                             at 3-7qatar
                                                                                                                                                                             authors’ “handwritten” annotations, explaining
                                                                                                                                                                             communication miscues while offering suggestions
                                                                                   ‘Sot! = Consistently socesfal trackreconinsale
                                                                                         © Ellecively developed andoperated catreprencural business
                                      Caer Wing                                    Financial SalesRepresentative, ABCInc.NewSeunswich, Nj,February 201)-present
 Figure 13.7 Latter Following Upfroma Career FairandR
                                                                                         ‘> Entablishclientbase
                                                                                         = Develop investment strategyplansforclients
                                                                                         © Researhandreconrunend speciicinvestments                                          for improvement.
                                                                                    Other
                                                                                                  ShPhusT-ShiCompany, Middle,
                                                                                                                          NISepember2008-January211
                                                                                           Pate    a aleableprec grin Tits)
                                                                                                           leuppet
                                                                                              Supervised prostaction
                                                                                         Sold      Tahirtsfo highachoo!students
                                                                                          © Realizeds substantial profittopaylorcollegeexpenses
               Ms Deborah Pascel,HRDepartinent                                      ‘Cook, Hamburger Shack, SeasideHeights, NI,Sureners 2007-2008,
                Pree ‘Financial                                                           “Learned    sakesstraegion
               401Prieme  ParkPlace                                                       ‘= Enoured customer saliataction
               New trunswick,   Ni}08901                                                  {© Collaborate   withatearof25
                Dear MsPascel:                                                      Collector andRepairWorker, ACN,Inc.Middlesex. NJ,Sumener 2005-2008
                                                                                          > Collected andcountedappresimately   $1Q0004 day Speciy ape sw ofmoney
               Mary RandiattheEastCoastalCommunity Colley                                 © Atsidtedtechnicians withtoableshooting andrepairing conmechaniaere
               ‘youmyrésemefortheSalesAdvisor
               my pastworkexperiences,  makesmeastrongcand                           Computer:     Wont, Exzel,InDesign, WorPress, Outlook




     TOES Myfinancialeducation,combined withmyprevious workexperiences in
     rectly sales,willallowmetothoroughly analyze knvestinent opportunities andl stent
     Shree eatablah a strangclientbaseforPrineFinancial Forexample, ltarted SS
            theA-PhasT-Shirt Companythalsol!graphicTahirtstohighschool           oowtrce
             sodents @ had« rootineclientbaseofover150customers. From


                With myeducation andexperience, | canprovidetheInnovative andcompetitive
                edge necemary tobepartofyourteam. wouldwelcome aninterview todiscus
                ‘Yourltemship andthecontributions | cooldmakeatPrimeFinancial
                 Sincerely,
                 Ae Chey
                Le Cheng




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Part1 The Building Blocks ofEffective Messages

                                                                                                                                                                                                                Don’t talk about your audience's feelings, either. It’s distancing to have oth-
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ers tell us how we feel—especially ifthey are wrong.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lacks you-attitude: ‘You'll behappy to hear that Open Grip Walkway Channels mest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OSHA requirements.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ‘You-attitude:          Open Grip Walkway Channels meet OSHA requirements,
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Maybe the audience expects that anything you sell would meet government
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ape (OSHA—the Occupational Safety and Health Administration—is
                                                                                                                                                                                                             a     federal agency). The audience may even be disappointed if they expected
                                                                                                                                                                                                             higher standards, Simply explain the situation or describe a product’s fea~
                                                                                                                                                                                                             tures; don’t predict the audience's response.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                When you have good news, simply give the good news.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lacks you-attitude: ‘You'll behappy to hear that your scholarship has been renewed,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                You-attitude:           Congratulations! Your scholarship nas bean renewed.

                                                                                                                                                                                                              4, In positive situations, use you more often than |. Use we when it
                                                                                                                                                                                                              includes the audience.           Talk about the audience,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    not you or your company.
GOOD AND BAD EXAMPLES                                                                                                                                                                                           Lacks you-attitude: We provide health insurance to allemployees.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                You-attitude:       You receive health insurance as a full-time Procter & Gamble
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘employee.

Paired effective and ineffective communication                                                                                                                                                                   Most readers are tolerant of the word / in e-mail messages, which seem
                                                                                                                                                                                                              like conversation. But edit paper documents to use /rarely if at all. I sug-
                                                                                                                                                                                                              gests that you're concerned about personal issues, not about the organiza-
examples are presented so students can pinpoint                                                                                                                                                               tion’s problems, needs, and opportunities. We works well when it includes
                                                                                                                                                                                                              the reader. Avoid we if it excludes the reader (as it would in a letter to acus-

problematic ways to phrase messages to help
                                                                                                                                                                                                              tomer or supplier or as it might in a memo about what we in management
                                                                                                                                                                               may have withtheproducts,      want you to do).
                                                                                                                                                                                 AL Four Seasons Hotels,
improve their communication skills. Commentaries
                                                                                                                                                                               employees receivetreeovernight 5. In negative situations, avoid the word you. Protect your audience's
                                                                                                                                                                               staya andmeals atthehotelfor ego. Use passive verbs and impersonal expressions to avoid assigning
                                                                                                                                                                                themseies  and a guest. They blame. When you                bad news or limitations, use a noun fora group of

in red and blue inks indicate poor or good meth-
                                                                                                                                                                               ‘gaina customer's perspective on which your audience is a part instead of you so people don’t feel that they're
                                                                                                                                                                               thehotel, buttheyalsogradethe singled out for bad news.
                                                                                                                                                                               hotelonvariousservices.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lacks you-attitude: You must getapproval from thedirector before youpublish anyarti-
ods of message communication and allow for easy                                                                                                                                                                   You-attitude:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         clesormemoirs based on your work in the agency.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Agency perscnnel must gat approval fromthedirector to publish any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         articles ormemoirs based ontheirwerk at theagency,
comparison.                                                                                                                                                                                                       Use passive verbs and impersonal expressions to avoid blaming people.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Passive verbs describe the action performed on something, without necessar-
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ily saying who did it. (See Chapter 5 for a full discussion of passive verbs.) In
                                                                                                                                                                                                               most cases, active verbs are better. But when your audience is at fault, passive
                                                                                                                                                                                                               verbs may be useful to avoid assigning blame.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Impersonal expressions omit people and talk only about things. Normally,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               communication is most lively when it’s about people—and most interesting
                                                                                                                                                                                                               to audiences when it’s about them. When you have to report a mistake or
                                                                                                                                                                                                               bad news, however, you can protect your audience's ego by using an imper-
                                                                                                                                                                                                               sonal expression, one in which things, not people, do the acting.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lacks you-attitude:                ‘You made no alowanca forinflation inyourestimate,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  You-attitude (passive):            Noallowance forinflation hasbeen made inthisestimate.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  You-attitude (impersonal):         This estimate makes noallowance for inflation.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Chapter11 Cralting Persuasive Memages



                                                                                                                                                                       Cf thomessage isa memo, doestheoubject Ineindicate thewriter's purpase oroffera
CHECKLISTS                                                                                                                                                               banat? Doesthesubject ineavoid making therequest?
                                                                                                                                                                       D Dowe thefratcartence interest theaudience?
                                                                                                                                                                        CIs theproblem presented asa jointproblem bothcommunicator andaudience have an
                                                                                                                                                                          Interect insohing, ratherthanassomething theaucSence isbeing asked todoforthe
Checklists for important messages appear throughout the                                                                                                                    communicator?
                                                                                                                                                                        1 ows themessage givealoftherelevantinformation? Is thereenough detail?
                                                                                                                                                                        1 Doesthemessage overcome objections thattheaudience mayhave?
                                                                                                                                                                        ClDoesthemessage avokdphrases thatsound dictatorial, condescending, orarrogant?
book. These helpful lists serve as a handy reference guide of                                                                                                          ClDoestheclosingteltheaucence exactly Whatto do?Does & givea deadiine i one
                                                                                                                                                                          ‘nists anda reason foractingprompthy?

items to keep in mind when composing and editing messages.                                                                                                            Originality Ina problem-solving persuasive message may come from
                                                                                                                                                                        1A goodsubjectineandcommon ground.
                                                                                                                                                                        DA clearandcomincing description oftheproblem.
                                                                                                                                                                        OlThinking about theaudience andgiving detailsthatanewer theirquestions, overcome
                                                                                                                                                                          ‘objections, andmakeiteasierforthemtodoasyouask.
                                                                                                                                                                        Adding detais thatshowyou're thinking about a specific organization andthespecific



                                                                                                                                                                       SUMMARY
                                                                                                                                                                        ‘The primary purpose ina persuasive message istohave theaudience act
                                                                                                                                                                          or change beliefs, Secondary purposes are toovercome any objections that            Goting Ivched win
                                                                                                                                                                          might prevent or delay action, to build a good image of the communica~
                                                                                                                                                                          tor and the communicator’s organization, to cement a good relationship
                                                                                                                                                                         between the communicator and audience, andtoreduce oreliminate future
                                                                                                                                                                         communication    onthe same subject.
                                                                                                                                                                         Credibility is the audience's          to you as the sourceofthe message.
                                                                                                                                                                          You can build credibilitybybeing factual, specific, and reliable.
                                                                                                                                                                          You always need to consider your audience and situation before choosing
                                                                                                                                                                         your persuasive strategy. Ingeneral,
                                                                                                                                                                          = Use the direct request pattern when the audience will doasyou ask
                                                                                                                                                                            without any resistance. Also use thedirect request pattem for busy
                                                                                                                                                                            readers in our own organization who do not read allthe messages
                                                                                                                                                                            they receive,SeeFigure 11.1,
                                                                                                                                                                             Use the problem-solving pattern when the audience may resist doing
                                 Past 2 TheCommunication Process                                                                                                            what you ask andyou expect logictobemore important than emotion
                                                                                                                                                                            inthedecision.  SeeFigure 113.
                                                                                                                                                                             Usethe sales pattern when the  audience may resist doing asyouask
           CHAPTER 7             Exercises and Problems                                    (ora
                                                                                             renee ndProbie.                                                                 and you expect emotion tobe moreimportant than logicinthe
                                                                                                                                                                             See Figure 11.10,
                                                                                                                                                                          Use one or more of the following strategies tocounter objections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      that you
               Reviewing the Chapter                                                                                                                                      cannot eliminate:
                                                                                                                                                                          ® Specify how much time and/or money isrequired.
       |. Whyis globalbusiness important? (LO7-1)                  7. Why do people from monochronic cultures some-                                                       = Putthetimeand/or money inthecontext ofthebenefits theybring.
     2. Whatare theadvantages ofreceiving anoverseas                 times have trouble with people frompolychronic                                                       ® Show that money spent nowwill save moneyinthelong run.
          assignment?(LO7-1)                                          cultures?
                                                                              (LO7-4)
     3. Why is diversity       ingmoreimportant   than
                                                                                                                                                                          ®= Show that doing as you ask will benefit some group the audience iden-
          everbefore?(LO7-2)                                                                                                                                                 tifies with or some cause the audience supports.
     4. Whatarelow-context andhigh-context   cultures?
          (LO7-3)                                               9. What aresome cautions toconsider when writing,
     5. How doourvalues andbeliefs affectourresponses             forinternational audiences? (LO7-6)
        tootherpeople?(LO7-3)                                  10, Whyisit important tocheckcultural generaliza-
     6. Whataresome forms ofnonverbalcommunication?                tions?
                                                                        (LO7-7)
        What variations
                      would you   expect  toseeinthem
        among people ofdifferent cultures? (LO7-4)

     72        Identifying Sources of Miscommunication
    Ineach ofthefollowing situations, identify one or 3. Stan wantstonegotiate a jointventure withan
    more ways thatcultural differences maybeleading to   ‘Asian company. HeasksTung-Sen Leeifthepeople
    miscommunication.                                                              income toafford his
     L. Alan isa U.S.sales representative
                                       inSouth America.   product. Mr.Leeissilentfora time,andthen says,
        He makes appointments and                  .        our oooduct is anod

                                                                                                   Qhapter13 WritingJobApplication
                                                                                                                               Letters
                                                   = Use positive emphasis tosound confident. Use you-attitude by supporting
                                                      general claims with specific examples and by relating what you've done to
                                                      what theemployer needs.
                                                   = Haveatleast three paragraphs inyourletter. Mostjoblettersareonlyonepage.
                                                   ® Application essays give you a chance toexpand on your best points and
                                                       show your personality.


                                                          cuapten 19                Exercises and Problems                               (Serre CarvineetProtons         EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS
                                                    |3.1     Reviewing the Chapter
                                                     | Whatarethree waysthatjoblettersdifferfrom
                                                      résumés? (LO 13-2)
                                                                                                              4. Whatarethedifferences between solicited andpros-
                                                                                                                 pecting letters?(LO 13-2)
                                                                                                                                                                         These hands-on exercises are flexible and
                                                    2 What aresome ways toresearch specific employers?        5. Whatarefivetipsforwritinga jobletterthatmakes
                                                      (LO 13-1)
                                                    3, Whatisthedifference between information and
                                                                                                                  you look attractivetoemployers? (LO 13-2)
                                                                                                              6 Whatare 10 waystocreatea professional     image          can be used as in-class discussions or as
                                                       referral interviews?
                                                                         (LO13-1)                                with yourletter?(LO13-2)
                                                                                                                                                                         individual and group assignments. These
                                                    132      Reviewing Grammar
                                                   ‘Asyouhave read, itiscrucial thatyourjobletter be word pairs likeaffect/effect. Practice choosing thecorrect
                                                   ‘error-free. Onecommon errorinjobletters,andonethat word withExercises  B.12, B.13,andB.14inAppendixB.
                                                                                                                                                                         workplace exercises allow students to
                                                    spell-checking programs will notcatch, isconfusing
                                                                                                                                                                         assume a role or perform a task in a vari-
                                                    33       Analyzing First Paragraphs of Prospecting Letters
                                                   Allofthefollowing arefirstparagraphs inprospecting          nust-resistant,leasexpensive   finishisatough ques-
                                                                                                                                                                         ety of realistic business scenarios. Helpful
                                                   letters written bynewcollege graduates. Evaluate the       tion. Butsimilar              must beanswered   daily
                                                    paragraphs    onthesecriteria:
                                                    a Istheparagraph likely tointerest readers andmoti-
                                                                                                               by yoursalespeople. With my                inthe
                                                                                                               electroplating industry, |can contribute greatly to
                                                                                                              your constant need ofgetting customers,
                                                                                                                                                                         “hints” provide structure and guidance to
                                                         vatethem toreadtherestoftheletter?
                                                               the paragraph have some content thatthestu- 5. Whata setoftractors! Thenew9430and9630dic-
                                                    De s
                                                         dentcanuseto create a transition totalking about
                                                         hisorherqualifications?
                                                                                                              selsarejustwhat isneededbytoday’s farmer with
                                                                                                              his  ever-increasing  acreage. John Deere hastruly
                                                                                                                                                                         students for them to complete the exercises.
                                                    ® Docs theparagraph avoidasking fora job?                  done  itagain.
                                                    1. Forthepasttwoandone-half years| havebeen,
                                                         studying turfmanagement.     OnAugust 1,|will
                                                                                                           6 Prudential Insurance Company did much to help
                                                                                                              mycollege career asthesponsor ofmy National                   The first exercise is always a collection of
                                                         graduate from — University witha BA inOrna-          Merit   Scholarship.   Now I think I cangivesomething
                                                                                                              back to Prudential. I'd liketoputmy education,
                                                         mental   Horticulture.The typeofjob|willseekwill
                                                         dealwithgolfcourse maintenance asanassistant
                                                                                                              including a BSdegree infinance from ——
                                                                                                               University, towork inyour investment department.          chapter review questions connected to the
                                                          superintendent.                                  7. Since the             ofDeltaElectric Construction
                                                     2. Ann Gibbs suggested that{ contact you.                 Co. in 1993, thesizeandprofits have grown steadily.
                                                                                                              My father, beinga stockholder andvicepresi-
                                                                                                                  dent, oftendiscusses company dealings withme.
                                                                                                                                                                         learning objectives.
                                                                                                                   Although  thecompany hasprospered,  |understand
                                                                                                                  thecehavisana lwprobleme of      mismanagement
                                                       vacations, theChristmas salesincrease isjustoneof          |feelwith my present andfuture qualifications,
                                                       thecreditsituations I became aware of.                      I could help easetheseproblems,
                                                    4. Whether oplate   atwo-inch yebolt  withcadmium
                                                        fora tough, brilliant
                                                                           shine orwithzinefor
                                                     Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




A WEALTH OF SUPPLEMENTS
IN THE NEW ONLINE LEARNING CENTER




NEW ONLINE LEARNING CENTER

Numerous resources available for both instructors
and students are online at www.mhhe.conVlocker10e.                                        (MANAGEMENT

Instructor resources include downloadable versions
                                                                      CHe 08 & ogo ators to front more 9
                                                                      + Sindents: YOu ari purchave acete te
                                                                               ck tt yur       pratessoc
                                                                                                   ts Boe ft
                                                                      » Insiractors:Fiemme wen? your MOLT
                                                                      rhermaen
of the                                                                Donna. Kieether share the sciner wishon fs’the book and negterch pteissaptey a RELY. UGE
                                                                                                     textbooks, £ iaauses ontharhetencal unchaner ofpudserce.,
                                                                                                                                            wire             ~
= Instructor's Manual.
@ Test Bank.
m= PowerPoint.
Student resources include                                                                                                                    ana. youre snesaRrUcoes
                                                                                             log Wo M8Ort ere eae ask yourfocal sales tncrasent
                                                                       Teheran bonrctee
                                                                       Dhenang
                                                                            Anos BGnotng tresbantbeodh, peiezt AInescoc Heeraha
® Practice exercises.
                                                                                                                  22213 mitre vag Rivage
@ Quizzes.                                                                               ecsesncsth chenne  usem aoe
                                                                                                        bolotatos ecbpat
                                                                                                                       be
                                                                                                                      of  oeannyan y te
                                                                                                                         ee           MLS             aoe
                                                                                                                                        buarrecnae OPTheSse Soeeacins


= Memo, letter, and résumé templates.
® Links to business communication resources.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                       McGraw-Hi_t Connect BUSINESS COMMUNICATION
                          comect                            Less Managing. More Teaching. Greater
                                  ipusiness communicationLearning.    McGraw-Hill Connect Business
                                                         Communication is an online assignment and as-
                       sessment solution that connects students with the tools and resources they'll need
                       to achieve success.
                          McGraw-Hill Connect Business Communication helps prepare students for their future
                       by enabling faster learning, more efficient studying, and higher retention of knowledge.

                       McGraw-Hill Connect Business Communication Features.                      Connect
                       Business Communication offers a number of powerful tools and features to make
                       managing assignments easier, so faculty can spend more time teaching. With
                       Connect Business Communication, students can engage with their course work
                       anytime and anywhere, making the learning process more accessible and efficient.
                       Connect Business Communication offers you the features described below.

                       Simple Assignment Management.                With Connect Business Communication,
                       creating assignments is easier than ever, so you can spend more time teaching and
                       less time managing. The assignment management function enables you to

                       = Create and deliver assignments easily with selectable end-of-chapter questions
                         and test bank items.
                       = Streamline lesson planning, student progress reporting, and assignment grading
                         to make classroom management more efficient than ever.
                       ® Go paperless with the eBook and online submission and grading of student
                          assignments.

                       Smart Grading.         When it comes to studying, time is precious. Connect Business
                       Communication helps students learn more efficiently by providing feedback and
                       practice material when they need it, where they need it. When it comes to teaching,
                       your time also is precious. The grading function enables you to

                       ™ Have assignments scored automatically, giving students immediate feedback on
                         their work and side-by-side comparisons with correct answers.
                       m Access and review each response; manually change grades or leave comments for
                         students to review.
                       m Reinforce classroom concepts with practice tests and instant quizzes.

                        Instructor Library.       The Connect Business Communication Instructor Library is
                       your repository for additional resources to improve student engagement in and out
                       of class. You can select and use any asset that enhances your lecture. The Connect
                       Business Communication Instructor Library includes

                        ® Instructor's Manual.
                        m PowerPoint Slides.
                        = Test Bank.
                        m eBook.
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




Student Study Center.          The Connect Business Communication Student
Study Center is the place for students to access additional resources. The
Student Study Center

= Offers students quick access to lectures, practice materials, eBooks, and more.
= Provides instant practice material and study questions, easily accessible on the go.
= Gives students access to the Personalized Learning Plan described below.

Student Progress Tracking.           Connect Business Communication keeps instruc-
tors informed about how each student, section, and class is performing, allowing
for more productive use of lecture and office hours. The progress-tracking function
enables you to
= View scored work immediately and track individual or group performance with
   assignment and grade reports.
m= Access an instant view of student or class performance relative to learning objectives.
= Collect data and generate reports required by many accreditation organizations,
   such as AACSB.

Lecture Capture.       Increase the attention paid to lecture discussion by decreasing
the attention paid to note taking. For an additional charge Lecture Capture offers
new ways for students to focus on the in-class discussion, knowing they can revisit
important topics later. Lecture Capture enables you to

= Record and distribute your lecture with the click of a button.
= Record and index PowerPoint presentations and anything shown on your
  computer so it is easily searchable, frame by frame.
= Offer access to lectures anytime and anywhere by computer, iPod, or mobile device.
m Increase intent listening and class participation by easing students’ concerns
  about note-taking. Lecture Capture will make it more likely you will see students’
   faces, not the tops of their heads.


 McGraw-HiLL Connect Plus BusiNESS COMMUNICATION
 McGraw-Hill reinvents the Textbook learning experience for the modern student
 with Connect Plus Business Communication. A seamless integration of an eBook
                                                                    ation
 and Connect Business Communication, Connect Plus Business Communic
 provides all of the Connect Business Communication features plus the following:

 m An integrated eBook, allowing for anytime, anywhere access to the textbook.
 = Dynamic links between the problems or questions you assign to your students
   and the location in the eBook where that problem or question is covered.
 = A powerful search function to pinpoint and connect key concepts in a snap.

 In short, Connect Business Communication offers you and your students powerful
                                                                                on
 tools and features that optimize your time and energies, enabling you to focus
                            and student learning. Connect Business Communic ation
 course content, teaching,
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                       also offers a wealth of content resources for both instructors and students. This
                       state-of-the-art, thoroughly tested system supports you in preparing students for
                       the world that awaits.
                           For more information about Connect, go to www.mcgrawhillconnect.com, or
                       contact your local McGraw-Hill sales representative.


                       TEGRITY CAMPUS: LECTURES 24/7
                       Nic rt)       it                 Tegrity Campus is a service that makes class time
                       Hill      egrity CAMPUS available 24/7 by automatically capturing every
                       lecture in a searchable format for students to review when they study and complete
                       assignments. With a simple one-click start-and-stop process, you capture all com-
                       puter screens and corresponding audio. Students can replay any part of any class
                       with easy-to-use browser-based viewing on a PC or Mac.
                          Educators know that the more students can see, hear, and experience class
                       resources, the better they learn. In fact, studies prove it. With Tegrity Campus, stu-
                       dents quickly recall key moments by using Tegrity Campus's unique search feature.
                       This search helps students efficiently find what they need, when they need it, across
                       an entire semester of class recordings. Help turn all your students’ study time into
                       learning moments immediately supported by your lecture.
                          To learn more about Tegrity watch a two-minute Flash demo at http://Ategritycampus
                       .mhhe.com.

                       ASSURANCE OF LEARNING READY
                       Many educational institutions today are focused on the notion of assurance of
                       learning, an important element of some accreditation standards. Business and
                       Administrative Communication, 10e, is designed specifically to support your
                       assurance of learning initiatives with a simple, yet powerful solution.
                          Each Test Bank question for Business and Administrative Communication, 10e,
                       maps to a specific chapter learning outcome/objective listed in the text. You can
                       use our Test Bank software, EZ Test and EZ Test Online, or Connect Business Com-
                       munication to easily query for learning outcomes/objectives that directly relate to
                       the learning objectives for your course. You can then use the reporting features of
                       EZ Test to aggregate student results in similar fashion, making the collection and
                       presentation of assurance of learning data simple and easy.

                       AACSB STATEMENT
                       The McGraw-Hill Companies is a proud corporate member of AACSB International.
                       Understanding the importance and value of AACSB accreditation, Business and Admin-
                       istrative Communication, 10e recognizes the curricula guidelines detailed in the AACSB
                       standards for business accreditation by connecting selected questions in the text and/or
                       the Test Bank to the six general knowledge and skill guidelines in the AACSB standards.
                                                              Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




  The statements contained in Business and Administrative Communication,                  10e,
are provided only as a guide for the users of this textbook. The AACSB leaves
content coverage and assessment within the purview of individual schools, the
mission of the school, and the faculty. While Business and Administrative Com-
munication, 10e, and the teaching package make no claim of any specific AACSB
qualification or evaluation, we have within Business and Administrative Commu-
nication, 10e, labeled selected questions according to the six general knowledge
and skills areas.


MCGRAW-HILL CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE
CONTACT INFORMATION
At McGraw-Hill, we understand that getting the most from new technology can be
challenging. That's why our services, don’t stop after you purchase our products. You
can e-mail our Product Specialists 24 hours a day to get product-training online. Or
you can search our knowledge bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support
website. For Customer Support, call 800-331-5094, e-mail hmsupport@mcgraw-hill
.com, or visit www.mhhe.com/support. One of our Technical Support Analysts will
be able to assist you in a timely fashion.


MHHE AND BLACKBOARD TEAM UP



             The Best of Both Worlds                                    a




                                                                                          this
 McGraw-Hill Higher Education and Blackboard have teamed up. What does
 mean for you?
                                                                                          ll’s
 1. Your life, simplified. Now you and your students can access McGraw-Hi
                                                                                   ll  with   one
    Connect® and Create™ right from within your Blackboard course—a
                                                                                           ons.
    single sign-on. Say goodbye to the days of logging in to multiple applicati
                                                                                 single sign-on
 2. Deep integration of content and tools. Not only do you get
                    and  Create™,    you  also get  deep   integrati  on  of  McGraw-H  ill con-
    with Connect®
                                right in Blackboar d.   Whether     you're   choosing    a book
    tent and content engines
                                  Connect®    assignmen  ts,   all the tools   you  need   are
    for your course or building
    right where you want them—ins     ide   Blackboar  d.
                                                                                    oks and
 3. Seamless gradebooks. Are you tired of keeping multiple gradebo
                                            Blackboa  rd?   We   thought    so.  When   a student
     manually synchronizing grades into
                                                     nt,   the  grade   for  that  assignme  nt
     completes an integrated Connect® assignme
     automatically (and instantly) feeds your Blackboa    rd    grade   center.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                       4. Asolution for everyone. Whether your institution is already using Blackboard
                          or you just want to try Blackboard on your own, we have a solution for you.
                          McGraw-Hill and Blackboard can now offer you easy access to industry-leading
                          technology and content, whether your campus hosts it, or we do. Be sure to ask
                          your local McGraw-Hill representative for details.

                       Mc                                Craft your teaching resources to match the
                       a       creat                     way you teach! With McGraw-Hill Create, www
                                                          -mcgrawhillcreate.com, you can easily rearrange
                       chapters, combine material from other content sources, and quickly upload content
                       you have written, like your course syllabus or teaching notes. Find the content you
                       need in Create by searching through thousands of leading McGraw-Hill textbooks.
                       Arrange your book to fit your teaching style. Create even allows you to personalize
                       your book's appearance by selecting the cover and adding your name, school, and
                       course information. Order a Create book and you'll receive a complimentary print
                       review copy in three to five business days or a complimentary electronic review copy
                       (eComp) via e-mail in about one hour. Go to www.mcgrawhillcreate.com today and
                       register. Experience how McGraw-Hill Create empowers you to teach your students
                       your way.
            i   F
                                                                                                                                                        '                     '
                                                                                                                                                            z
                                                                                                                                                                                                               *1
                                                                                                g
                                                                                                                                                    %                                                      ¢

                         - ‘
                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                          is                   i

                                                                                            -                                                   4

                                                                                                                                                        ‘
        4
                                                                                                                ¥       :
                                                                                                                                ’
                                   f
                                                                                i           ro
                                           )          .
                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                    4
                                                                            :                        °                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                      i

                                                          }
                                                              a                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                                           y       ‘
                                                                      ‘sh                                                               ’

¥                                      2
                                                                                        .                                   ,
    ;
                                            _
                                                                                                                                    >



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ;
                                           “4                         pe            -
                                                  a                   ty                                                                    «
                                                                                                                                            ee                                    Wf                   "
                                                                  :                                      Myst               o
                                            "                                                                                                                                 :
                                             Pa                                                                   , ae                                            >
                                                                                                 ;             yo.  7)                                          x
                                                                                                                                                                iz        s            é
                    of                 ve d                                     ,                        lg= A: ©                               ¥           ae
                    am         -
                                                                                                                                                                                  ot
                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        at
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




CHAPTER




Succeeding in Business
Communication

(Giay-}
     oe}=) LU ali al=
Communication Ability = Promotability         How to Solve Business Communication
                                              Problems
“I'll Never Have to Write Because .. .”
                                                    Gather Knowledge and Brainstorm
Communicating on the Job                            Solutions.
The Cost of Communication                           Answer the Five Questions for Analysis.
                                                    Organize Your Information to Fit Your
Costs of Poor Communication                         Audiences, Your Purposes, and the
   @ Wasted Time                                    Situation.
   ® Wasted Efforts                                 Make Your Document Visually
   ®   Lost Goodwill                                Tayvanalave
   ®   Legal Problems                               Revise Your Draft to Create a Friendly,
                                                    Businesslike, Positive Style.
Benefits of Improving Communication
                                                    lolhan(elti aD)¢-haaniolgsad-laler-|gemaarelitian
Criteria for Effective Messages           |         Double-Check Names and Numbers.
Using Technology for Communication                  Use the Response You Get to Plan
                                                    Future Messages.
Following Conventions
                                              How to Use This Book
Understanding and Analyzing Business
Communication Situations                      Summary of Key Points
                                                                        Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




NEWSWORTHY                       COMMUNICATION

A Communication Recovery from Disaster




    n 2009 and 2010 the Toyota Motor Corporation                              focused on how Toyota was taking responsibility
     recalled more         than 8 million cars and trucks                     and improving its operations.
    after highly publicized incidents of accelerator                             Every company relies on communication with its
pedal failure. In chilling accidents replayed on news                         customers to build trust. When crises hit, as in the
reports and the Internet, Toyota accelerator ped-                             case of Toyota’s recalls, communication becomes

als became stuck, causing serious—and sometimes                               even more important. The quality of written and spo-
fatal—crashes.                                                                ken messages could make the difference between a
   Toyota, the world’s largest automaker, had built                           company’s failure and recovery after a crisis. In the
                                                                                                  and the Firestone
its business on customer trust and loyalty by pro- late 1990s, Ford Motor Company
                                                             and   Rubber    Company        were    investigated for
viding consistent quality in its cars. But now, in Tire
                                                                                             involving    blown-out
addition to the financial costs of the pedal recalls a series of rollover accidents
and the government investi-                                                     tires. After first denying the
gations, the company faced a                                                    problems       and then blaming
                                    “For Toyota, good communication             each     other,    both companies
public relations disaster: cus-
                                    helped  the company recover from the took years to recover from the
tomers no longer trusted Toy-
ota to provide safe vehicles.       costly and embarrassing recalls.”           crisis—they were still dealing
    The company responded ~~                            ae                      with recalls and complaints in
                                                                          six years   after the initial problems.
with a carefully designed communication campaign 2006, more than
 to restore customer trust in the Toyota brand. On         By contrast, Toyota’s straightforward apology and
 February 2, 2010, Jim Lentz, Toyota’s president and    aggressive communication in many forms of media
 chief operating officer in the United States, sent a helped restore
                                                                         its image quickly. In fact, by Decem-
                                                                                          that it had “regained the
 letter to all Toyota customers with a personal apol- ber 2010, Toyota announced
 ogy and a commitment to correct the problems.          number one spot as the most-considered automobile
                                                                                   shoppers.” For Toyota, good
 This letter kicked off a publicity campaign of per- brand among new-car
 sonal and open letters, newspaper and magazine         communication      helped    the company recover from
                    and television commercials that all the costly and embarrassing
                                                                                           recalls.
 advertisements,
                                                                           Put Even More Focus on Its Customers,” news release, December 20, 2010,
 Source: Toyota, “2010 Year-End Progress Report: Major Changes Help Toyota                                                                         2010,
                                                                           ; and Jim Lentz, “Open Letter to Toyota Customers,” Toyota, February 2,
 http:/ /www.toyota.com/about/news/ corporate/2010/12/21-1-Progress.html
 http:/ /www.toyota.com/recall/v2/pdf/ ToyotaCustom   erLetter.pdf .
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                          Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                                          Learning Objectives
                                          After studying this chapter, you will know
                                                        Why you need to be able to communicate well.
                                                        What the costs of communication are.
                                                        What the costs of poor communication are.

                                                        What role conventions play in business communication.

                                          TeYSES)       How to solve business communication problems.



             Communication Is             The amount of business communication is staggering. The U.S. Postal Ser-
             Key to Pay                   vice processed 177 billion pieces of mail in 2009, most of which were business
             How    can you     make      communications. Merchants send American consumers 20 billion catalogs
             more   money     at your     annually, through the mail and e-mail. When you consider that most of your
             job?                         business communications are electronic or oral, you can start to imagine the
  The number one way, accord-             staggering number of business communications that people compose, hear,
ing to the Wall Street Journal,           and read. As one small piece of that, the head of Best Buy says his company
is to “listen to your boss.” Spe-         handles more than 1.5 billion customer interactions annually. The Radicati
cifically, do the work your boss
                                          Group, a technology market research firm, projects that 294 billion e-mail mes-
wants done, follow directions,
work hard, and let your boss
                                          sages were sent daily in 2010, of which 89.1% were spam.!
know what you have accom-
                                             Business depends on communication. People must communicate to plan
plished. Employees who follow             products and services; hire, train, and motivate workers; coordinate manu-
this method collect raises at a           facturing and delivery; persuade customers to buy; and bill them for the sale.
rate of 9.9%, while average per-          Indeed, for many businesses and nonprofit and government organizations,
formers receive 3.6% and poor             the “product” is information or services rather than something tangible. Infor-
performers get 1.3%, according            mation and services are created and delivered by communication. In every
to one survey.                            organization, communication is the way people get work done.
  Just as important is to make               Communication takes many forms: face-to-face or phone conversations,
sure you ask your manager to              informal meetings, presentations, e-mail messages, letters, memos, reports,
define expectations. Don’t assume
                                          blogs, tweets, text messaging, and websites. All of these methods are forms
you know what your manager                                                                                            Nonverbal
                                          of verbal      communication,         or communication   that uses words.
wants. Make sure you understand
what your manager considers an
                                           communication does not use words. Pictures, computer graphics, and company
outstanding performance in your            logos are nonverbal. Interpersonal nonverbal signals include how people sit at
 position.                                 meetings, how large offices are, and how long someone keeps a visitor waiting.

                                           COMMUNICATION ABILITY = PROMOTABILITY
Adapted from Perri Capell, “10 Ways
to Get the Most Pay out of Your Job,”
 Wall Street Journal,   September   18,
 2006, R1.                                 Even in your first job, you'll communicate. You'll listen to instructions; you'll
                                           ask questions; you may solve problems with other workers in teams. Even
                                           “entry-level” jobs require high-level skills in reasoning, mathematics, and
                                           communicating. As a result, communication ability consistently ranks first
                                           among the qualities that employers look for in college graduates.” Warren
                                           Buffet told Columbia Business School students that they could increase their
                                           value 50% by learning communication skills, and that many of them did not
                                           yet have those skills.°
                                              As more people compete for fewer jobs, the ones who will build successful
                                           careers are those who can communicate well with customers and colleagues.
                                           Robert O. Best, Chief Information Officer of UNUMProvident, an insurance
                                           corporation, cautions, “You used to be able to get away with being a technical
                                           nerd. ... Those days are over.”
                                              The National Commission on Writing surveyed 120 major corporations,
                                           employing nearly 8 million workers. Almost 70% of respondents said that at
                                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                          Chapter1   Succeeding in Business Communication                                                  5


least two-thirds of their employees have specific writing responsibilities
                                                                                                                                 Put It in Writing

included in their position descriptions. These writing responsibilities include:                                                 Raymond — Dreyfack
                                                                                                                                 credits his writing
               :
                                                                                                                                 skills for his success-
    E-mail (100% of employees)
    Presentations with visuals, such as PowerPoint slides (100%)                                                     ful career at   Faberge Perfumes.
                                                                                                                     As  he worked in supervisory
    Memos           an       r       m.              %,                                                              and management jobs, he kept
               os        and co ee      dence (70 70)
     Formal reports (62%)                                                                                            his eye open for opportunities
                                                                                                                     to solve problems and improve
     Technical reports (59%)                                                                                         performance. Then, when he had

                                                                                                                     on Be               ee
Respondents also noted that communication functions were least likely to be
                                                                             Why a memo? The written for-
outsourced.”                                                                           Bioviack to organize
   Because communication skills are so important, good communicators earn _ mat forced
                                                                                              idea clearly and con-
more. Research has shown that among people with two- or four-year degrees, _ is initial
                                                 on  average, more  than   three   cisely. Editing    memos trained
workers in the top 20% of writing ability earn,
                as workers  whose writing  falls into  the worst 20%.°   Jeffrey — Dreyfack  to  consider whether his
times as much
                                                                   books,   says — Messages     reflected the reader's
Gitomer, business consultant and author of best-selling business
there are three secrets to getting known in the business world; all of them are                                      interests and viewpoints. The
communication skills: writing, e-zining (he reaches over 130,000 subscribers           Witten format aso gave, Drey-
each week), and speaking. He states, “Writing leads to    wealth.”                     facks boss ame to.coneder ile
                the frequency of on-the-job writing  and the  importance   of over-    ee ee                  oe es
   In spite ofones                                                             é       (If you spring an idea on your
                        a                       ‘
                                                                            skilled  i o¢g    in  the   hallway,  he or she
all communication skills, employers do not find college students well                                                   er
                                                  on behalf  of the Associatio n  Of — jpight  find  it  easier  i
in writing. A survey of employers conducted
                                                                                                                      =a no than to give the idea fair
American Colleges and Universities found that writing was one of the weak-
                                                                                                                      consideration.)
est skills of college graduates.® In another large survey, respondents noted
that a lack of “effective business communication skills appears to be a major
stumbling block among new [job] entrants—even at the college level. Spelling                                          Be                  anas
                                                                                                                      Career,” Supervision 65, no. 4 (April
errors, improper use of grammar, and the misuse of words were common in
written reports, PowerPoint presentations, and e-mail messages.””                                                     2004): 13-16.


 “I'LL NEVER HAVE TO WRITE BECAUSE .                                                           .”
                                                                                  that
 Some students think that an administrative assistant will do their writing,
 they can use form letters if they do      have  to write, that only  technical skills
 matter, or that they'll call or text rather than write. Each of these claims is fun-
 damentally flawed.
    Claim 1:        An administrative assistant will do all my writing.
                                                                                       in offices have
    Reality:        Because of automation and restructuring, job responsibilities
                                                                                      secretaries have
                    changed. Today, many offices do not have typing pools. Most
                                                                                            as training,
                    become administrative assistants with their own complex tasks such
                                              manageme  nt   for several managers.  Managers   are likely
                    research, and database
                    to take care of their own writing, data entry, and phone calls.
    Claim 2:        |’ll use form letters or templates when | need to write.
                                                                                           many of which are
    Reality:        A form letter is designed to cover only routine situations,
                                                                         you  rise, the  more   frequently you'll
                    computerized or outsourced, Also, the higher
                    face situations that   aren’t   routine, that demand   creative  solutions.

    Claim 3:        I’m being hired as an accountant, not a writer.
                                                                                                    you to write
    Reality:        Almost every entry-level professional or managerial job requires
                                                                                                    present your
                     e-mail messages, speak to small groups, write documents, and
                                                                                                       to be pro-
                     work for annual reviews. People who do these things well are likely
                                       the entry  level.  Employee s in jobs as  diverse  as  firefighters , secu-
                     moted beyond
                                                                                            being told to polish
                     rity professionals, and construction project managers are all
                    their writing and speaking skills.1°
    Claim 4:         I'll just pick up the phone.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                       Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                          Reality:    Important phone calls require follow-up letters, memos, or e-mail messages. Peo-
                                      ple in organizations put things in writing to make themselves visible, to create a
                                      record, to convey complex data, to make things convenient for the reader, to save
                                      money, and to convey their own messages more effectively. “If it isn’t in writing, it
                                      didn’t happen” is a maxim at many companies. Writing is an essential way to record
                                      agreements, to make yourself visible, and to let your accomplishments be known.


                       COMMUNICATING                         ON THE JOB
                       Communication—oral,            nonverbal,      and written—goes         to both internal and
                       external audiences. Internal audiences are other people in the same organiza-
                       tion: subordinates, superiors, peers. External audiences are people outside the
                       organization: customers, suppliers, distributors, unions, stockholders, poten-
                       tial employees, trade associations, special interest groups, government agen-
                       cies, the press, and the general public.
                           People in organizations produce a large variety of documents. Figures 1.1 and
                       1.2 list a few of the specific documents produced at Ryerson, a company that fab-
                       ricates and sells steel, aluminum, other metals, and plastics to a wide variety of
                       industrial clients and has sales offices across the United States, Canada, and China.
                          All of the documents in Figures 1.1 and 1.2 have one or more of the three
                       basic purposes of organizational writing: to inform, to request or persuade,
                       and to build goodwill. In fact, most messages have multiple purposes. When
                       you answer a question, for instance, you're informing, but you also want to
                       build goodwill by suggesting that you’re competent and perceptive and that
                       your answer is correct and complete.

                       THE COST OF COMMUNICATION
                       Writing costs money. The annual Social Security statements cost $70 million a
                       year to mail, even with huge economies of scale.'! The cost does not include
                       employee time in the writing and processing, a major expense.




                        Business communication involves paper documents, electronic communications, and most
                        of all, interpersonal abilities.
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition
                                                                                                                                    |




                                               Chapter1    Succeeding in Business Communication


Figure 1.1           Internal Documents Produced in One Organization

 Document                             Description of document                                  Purpose(s) of document

 Transmittal                          Memo accompanying document, telling                      Inform; persuade reader to read
                 ;                      why it’s being forwarded to the receiver                  document; build image and
                                                      :                                           goodwill

                                      Report summarizing profitability, productivity,          Inform; build image and goodwill
 Monthly or quarterly report
                                        and problems during period. Used to plan                  (report is accurate, complete;
                                        activity for next month or quarter                        writer understands company)

                                      Statement of company policies and                         Inform; build image and goodwill
 Policy and procedure
    bulletin                            instructions (e.g., how to enter orders,                   (procedures are reasonable)
                                        how to run fire drills)
                                       Persuasive memo arguing that another                     Persuade; build image and goodwill
 Request to deviate from
                                         approach is better for a specific situation              (request is reasonable; writer
   policy and procedure
                                         than the standard approach                     .         seeks good of company)
   bulletin
                                       Evaluation of an employee’s performance                  Inform; persuade employee to
 Performance appraisal
                                                                                                   improve

                                       Congratulations to employees who have                    Build goodwill
 Memo of congratulations
                                         won awards, been promoted
e eae
  r                                                                                              See


   Document cycling processes also increase costs. In many organizations, all
external documents must be approved before they go out. A major document
may cycle from writer to superior to writer to another superior to writer again
10 or more times before final approval. Longer documents can involve large
teams of people and take months to write.
   Large organizations handle so much paper that even small changes to their
                                                                               of
communication practices amount to millions of dollars. Through better use
technology, InterContinental Hotels    Group  cut communic ations   costs by $2.6
million in two years. Xerox Global Services Europe touts contractual annual
                                                                               s
savings of up to 1 million Euros for organizations with 4,000 or more employee
who switch to its printing  services.”


 Figure 1.2           External Documents Produced in One Organization
                               Description of document                                      Purpose(s) of document
  Document
                               Letter giving price for a specific product                   Inform; build goodwill (price is
  Quotation
                                  or service                                                   reasonable)

                               Letter granting or denying customer request to               Inform; build goodwill
 ~ Claims adjustment
                                  be given credit for defective goods
                               Description of qualifications and duties of job.             Inform; persuade good candidates to
   Job description
                                 Used for performance appraisals, salaries,                    apply; build goodwill (ob duties match
                                 and hiring                                                    level, pay)

                               Report filed with the Securities and Exchange                Inform
   10-K report
                                 Commission detailing financial information
                               Report to stockholders summarizing financial                 Inform; persuade stockholders to retain
   Annual report
                                 information for year                                          stock and others to buy; build goodwill
                                                                                               (company is a good corporate citizen)

                               Letter to suppliers, customers, or other people              Build goodwill
   Thank-you letter
                                  who have helped individuals or the company
 eee                                          See                      ee
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                             Part1      The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                Hurricane
                Katrina Storms
                Communication
                Lines

Hurricane Katrina caused massive
destruction to the Gulf Coast. During
the storm, communication failures
among local, state, and federal offi-
Cials left their own harm.
  The main communication prob-
lems included these issues:
a     Lack of communication
      among responding organiza-
      tions: FEMA claimed it was
      days before they knew about
      the thousands of people in
      the New Orleans Convention                                                       ere?         oe
      Center.
                                             Communication failures increased the damage caused by Hurricane Katrina.
=      Incompatible communication
       systems: The lack of coordi-
       nation and communication
       caused by these systems                  Good communication is worth every minute it takes and every penny it
       put even more lives at risk by        costs. A study of 335 U.S. and Canadian companies with an average of 13,000
       delaying assistance where             employees each and median annual revenues of $1.8 billion found that those
       it was most needed. Some              companies who best communicated with their employees enjoyed “greater
       rescuers in helicopters were          employee engagement and commitment, higher retention and productivity,
       unable to communicate with            and—ultimately—better financial performance... .
       rescuers in boats. Some
       units of the National Guard             =       They boasted a 19.4% higher market premium (the degree to which the
       actually used runners to                        company’s market value exceeds the cost of its assets).
       communicate.                            m       They were 4.5 times more likely to report high levels of employee
=      Inconsistent messages: State                    engagement.
       and local agency teams
                                               m  They were 20% more likely to report lower turnover rates.”19
       received conflicting messages
       which led to confusion.                  Another significant cost of communication is e-mail storage. In addition to
   The massive communication                 the exponential increase in frequency, e-mails are also growing in size. Fur-
 problems led to an entire chap-             thermore, many of them come with attachments. And businesses are storing
 ter on communication in the U.S.            much of this huge load on their servers. But the cost of the hardware is only
 House of Representatives report             some of the storage cost; a larger cost is administering and maintaining the
    on the Hurricane Katrina disaster.       archives. These costs include downtime when storage systems crash and time
    Adapted from U.S. House of Rep-
                                             spent retrieving lost or corrupted messages. !*
    resentatives, A Failure of Initiative:
    Final Report of the Select Bipartisan
    Committee to Investigate the Prepa-
    ration for and Response to Hurri-
                                              COSTS OF POOR COMMUNICATION
    cane Katrina, 109th Cong., 2d sess.       Poor communication can cost billions of dollars. We all can think of examples.
    (Washington, DC, February 15, 2006),
    http://www.gpoaccess.gov/katrina
    report/mainreport.pdf.                      =      Hurricane Katrina caused billions of dollars of damage—damage
                                                       that was worsened by horrendous miscommunications between fed-
                                                       eral, state, and private relief organizations (see the sidebar “Hurricane
                                                       Katrina Storms Communication Lines ” on this page.).
                                                =      The space industry has had billion-dollar mistakes—mistakes where
                                                       miscommunications were major contributing factors as confirmed by
                                                       official government investigations (see sidebars on pages 9 and 12).
                                                   =   Ford and Bridgestone Firestone’s failure to coordinate the design of the
                                                       Ford Explorer and its tires cost them billions of dollars. In hindsight,
                                                       people agree the mistakes could have been prevented if the different
                                                       teams involved had communicated more effectively with each other.!®
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                             Chapter1   Succeeding in Business Communication

                                                                                                                  Business
=     Internal and external communication problems have contributed greatly                                       Communication

      to delays in Boeing’s 787 Dreamliner, delays which have cost Boeing bil-
                                                                                                                  Lessons from Mars

      lions in penalties and have caused some customers to switch their orders                                        The Mars Climate
                                                                                                                    Orbiter spacecraft lost
      to Airbus."
                                                                                                    contact with NASA mission control
=     From figures provided by the members of the Business Roundtable, the                          just after it arrived at Mars. A sub-
      National Commission on Writing calculated the annual private sector                           sequent investigation revealed that
      costs of writing training at $3.1 billion.!” These figures do not include the                 the main problem was a minor soft-
      retail and wholesale trade businesses.                                                        ware programming error caused
=     Even part of the subprime mortgage collapse, which helped spark a                             by communication errors.
      global recession, has been connected to poor communication. Docu-                                Like many business projects,

      ments supposedly explaining some of the riskier investments were so
                                                                                                    the Mars Climate Orbiter involved

      convoluted that even most experts could not understand them. Goldman
                                                                                                    a wide range of people in a range
                                                                                                    of locations. The programmers
      Sachs paid a $550 million fine to settle allegations that it misled inves-                    who wrote the software that con-
      tors in mortgage bonds.’®                                                                     trolled the spacecraft’s engines
                                                                                                    worked in Great Britain, and used
     Costs of poor communication are not just financial. People died in the roll-                    metric measurements in their
overs of Ford Explorers, noted above. In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina,                         calculations, while the engineers
inaccurate media reports of looting convinced some residents to stay to pro-                        who made the satellite's engines
tect their property instead of evacuating; false reports of shootings at heli-                      worked in the United States, and
copters resulted in some states refusing to send trained emergency workers.                          used     English   measurements.
According to the presidential commission, inadequate communication                                   Both teams assumed          that they
                                                                   as within
among British Petroleum, Halliburton, and Transocean, as well
                                                                                                     were using the same measure-
           companie s, was a contribut ing factor in BP’s  massive   oil spill,                      ment standards, neither team
their own
                                                                   Mexico.”                          made any attempt to check, and
which caused so much damage, as well as fatalities, in the Gulf of                                   no one else caught the error. With
   Not all communication costs are so dramatic, however. When communi-                               that failure, NASA lost a $125 mil-
                                                                                               in
cation isn’t as good as it could be, you and your organization pay a price                           lion satellite and years of effort,
wasted time, wasted effort, lost goodwill, and legal problems.                                       while gaining a major public em-
                                                                                                     barrassment.
Wasted Time                                                                                          Adapted from NASA MCO Mission
                                                                            we're
Bad writing takes longer to read as we struggle to understand what
                                                                                                     Failure Mishap Investigation Board,
                                                                                                     Mars Climate Orbiter Mishap Investiga-
                         we  can  do  this is determin ed by the difficulty of the
reading. How quickly                                                                                 tion Board Phase | Report, November
subject matter and by the document’s organization and writing style.                                 10, 1999, ftp://ftp.hg.nasa.gov/pub/
                                                                               ts
   Second, bad writing may need to be rewritten. Poorly written documen
                                                                                                     pao/reports/1999/MCO_report.paf.

frequent ly cycle to other people  for help.
      Third, ineffective communication        may obscure ideas so that discussions
and decisions are needlessly drawn out.




                                                                         communication, the
    When the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft crashed as a result of poor
    United States lost a $125 million satellite and years of effort.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                          Part1    The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


             Poor Customer                   Fourth, unclear or incomplete messages may require the receiver to gather
             Service Becomes              more information and some receivers may not bother to do so; they may make
             Costly
                                          a wrong decision or refuse to act.
        Y    A customer called
             AOL to cancel his
service. The phone call lasted
                                          Wasted Efforts
21 minutes, including automated           Ineffective messages don’t get results. A receiver who has to guess what the
answering, waiting in a queue,
                                          sender means may guess wrong. A reader who finds a letter or memo uncon-
                                          vincing or insulting simply won't do what the message asks.
and a five-minute conversation
with a customer service repre-
sentative. During the conver-
                                             One company sent out past-due bills with the following language:
sation, the customer service
                                                Per our conversation, enclosed are two copies of the above-mentioned   invoice.
representative refused to com-
ply with the customer’s request                 Please review and advise. Sincerely, ... -
to close his account despite 21
requests to “cancel” his service          The company wanted money, not advice, but it didn’t say so. The company
and approximately 9 “I-don't-             had to write third and fourth reminders. It waited for its money, lost interest
need-it,        |-don’t-want-it,  and     on it—and kept writing letters.
|-don’t-use-it”       statements.  To
express his dissatisfaction, the
customer posted the recorded
                                          Lost Goodwill
conversation on the Web as a              Whatever the literal content of the words, every letter, e-mail, or report serves
digital “documentary,” which was          either to build or to undermine the image the reader has of the writer.
 heard by 300,000 visitors and
                                             Part of building a good image is taking the time to write correctly. Even
                                          organizations that have adopted casual dress still expect writing to appear
 highlighted on the Today show on
 NBC. Following the post, an AOL
 executive vice president e-mailed
                                          professional and to be free from typos and grammatical errors.
 employees notifying them of the             Messages can also create a poor image because of poor audience analysis and
 post and warning them that any           inappropriate style. The form letter printed in Figure 1.3 failed because it was
 of their customer interactions           stuffy and selfish. The comments in red show specific problems with the letter.
 could be similarly posted. In
 addition, because of similar ear-          =     The language is stiff and legalistic.        Note the sexist “Gentlemen:” and
 lier violations, AOL agreed to pay               obsolete “Please be advised,” “herein,” and “expedite.”
a fine of $1.25 million and to use
                                            =     The tone is selfish.          The letter is written from the writer’s point of
a third-party verification system.
  Another customer service inci-                  view; there are no benefits for the reader. (The writer says there are, but
 dent occurred when a customer                    without a shred of evidence, the claim isn’t convincing.)
 welcomed a Comcast technician              =     The main point is buried in the middle of the long first paragraph. The
 into his home to replace a faulty                middle is the least emphatic part of a paragraph.
 modem. When the technician
                                            m     The request is vague. How many references does the supplier want?
 called the central office, he was
                                                  Are only vendor references OK, or would other credit references, like
 placed on hold and proceeded
 to fall asleep on the couch after
                                               banks, work too? Is the name of the reference enough, or is it necessary
 an hour of waiting. In response,              also to specify the line of credit, the average balance, the current balance,
 the customer recorded a short                 the years credit has been established, or other information? What “addi-
 documentary, “A Comcast Tech-                 tional financial information” does the supplier want? Annual reports?
 nician Sleeping on My Couch”                  Bank balance? Tax returns? The request sounds like an invasion of pri-
 and posted it to YouTube where                vacy, not a reasonable business practice.
 500,000 viewers watched the                 = Words are misused (herein for therein), suggesting either an ignorant
 customer service blunder.
                                               writer or one who doesn’t care enough about the subject and the reader
 Adapted from Randall Stross, “AOL             to use the right word.
 Said, ‘If You Leave Me I'll Do Some-
 thing Crazy,'” New York Times, July 2,
 2006, E3.                                 You will learn more about tone in Chapter 3 and language in Chapter 5.

                                            Legal Problems
                                           Poor communication choices can lead to legal problems for individuals and
                                           organizations. The news is full of examples. Domino's pizza, which promised
                                           to deliver pizza to your door in 30 minutes, dropped that promise after a law-
                                           suit, involving an accident with a Domino’s delivery person, claimed that the
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                             Chapter1   Succeeding in Business Communication                                 11



Figure 1.3        A Form Letter That Annoyed Customers


        mem Nelson                                 Manufacturing==™
                                 600 N. Main Street                            317-281-3000


     yn tec,                     wivw.nelsoncom
                                 Indianapolis, IN 46204                    fax 317-281-3001

      side address:               ese:
                    not adding th
     feexcuse for

                       Sexist!                  emphasizes the
                                    Stuffy      writer, not the reader
         Gentlemen:
                         ;                  re                  witht@@ons
                                                                ait file                                            main
                                                                                                                    point
          Please be advised)that upon\reviewing your credit file with            (us)     nd the\information
                                                             handling    of your   future  orders  withdus) and  to   is
                  outdated,/In an effort toexpedite)the
                            an appropriat e  line of  credit  for your   comp          any
                                                                                      (we ask that  you  send an    buried
                (us)to open
                                                                                                  n that you can
  (also updated list of vendor references. Any other additional financial informatio
  stuffy) supply would be to both of our    benefits.  \
                                                         Prove it!                          What
                                                                                                 ion?
          May we hear from you soon?                                                     informal

         Sincerely,




pledge led to accidents. Domino’s settled for a sum in the seven-figure range,
but dropped the promise because the company feared other lawsuits.”
   Individual communications can also have legal consequences. Steamy text mes-
                                                                                his
sages revealed an affair between Detroit mayor Kwame Kilpatrick and.one of
aides; both the messages and the affair contradicted testimony the mayor had given
                                                                      million fine.
under oath. Consequences included loss of office, jail time, and a $1
                                                                          House
   US Representative Mark Foley resigned after his instant messages to
                                           bring  about  the fall of many  exec-
pages were published. E-mails have helped
utives, including

     Senior Enron executives
      Boeing CEO Harry Stonecipher
      Credit Suisse First Boston banker Frank Quattrone
      Hewlett-Packard Chairperson Patricia Dunn
      Walmart Vice Presidents Julie Roehm and Sean Womack
      South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford

                                                                                 now comes
 One San Francisco law firm says that 70% of their routine evidence
 from e-mails.”
                                                                                          obli-
    In particular, letters, memos, e-mails, and instant messages create legal
               organiza tions. When    a lawsuit  is filed  against  an  organiza  tion,    the
 gations for
                                                     subpoen   a  documen  ts    written     by
 lawyers for the plaintiffs have the right to
                                    These   documen  ts   may   then be  used  as  evidence   ,
 employees of the organization.
      instance,  that an  employe r  fired  an employe   e   without   adequate     notice or
 for
                                                                                    it.
 that a company knew about a safety defect but did nothing to correct
                          may  also be   used  as evidenc  e   in contexts  the   writer    did
     These documents
                                                                      obligat ions    that  the
 not intend. This means that a careless writer can create
                                                     a letter from a manager
 organization does not mean to assume. For instance,
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




12                                           Part1    The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                  Columbia Disaster          telling a scout troop they may not visit a factory floor because it is too danger-
                  Communication              ous could be used in a worker’s compensation suit.”
                  Failures
                                                Careful writers and speakers think about the larger social context in which
                In 2008, the Colum-          their words may appear. What might those words mean to other people in the
 bia space shuttle disintegrated             field? What might they mean to a judge and jury?
 on re-entry, resulting in the

                                             BENEFITS OF IMPROVING COMMUNICATION
 deaths of all seven crew mem-
 bers. The independent research
 team investigating the disaster             Better communication helps you to
 found communication problems
 to be the root cause of the acci-
 dent. The researchers concluded               =     Save time. Eliminate the time now taken to rewrite badly written
 that organizational barriers pre-                   materials. Reduce reading time, since comprehension is easier. Reduce
 vented effective communication                      the time taken asking, “What did you mean?”
 of critical safety information and
                                               =     Make your efforts more effective. Increase the number of requests
 restrained      communication      of
                                                     that are answered positively and promptly—on the first request. Present
  professionals.
    The report identified the follow-
                                                     your points—to other people in your organization; to clients, customers,
  ing communication problems:                        and suppliers; to government agencies; to the public—more forcefully.
 =       Communication flow between            =     Communicate your points more clearly. Reduce the misunderstand-
         managers and subordinates:                  ings that occur when the audience has to supply missing or unclear
         Managers did not heed the                   information. Make the issues clear, so they can be handled.
         concerns of the engineers             =     Build goodwill. Build a positive image of your organization. Build an
         regarding debris impacts                    image of yourself as a knowledgeable, intelligent, capable person.
         on the shuttle. Throughout
         the project, communication

                                             CRITERIA FOR EFFECTIVE MESSAGES
         did not flow effectively up
         to or down from program
         managers.
                                             Good business and administrative communication meets five basic criteria: it’s
 =       Circulation of information
                                             clear, complete, and correct; it saves the audience’s time; and it builds goodwill.
         among teams: Although engi-
         neers were concerned about
         landing problems and there-           =     It’sclear. The meaning the audience gets is the meaning the communi-
         fore conducted experiments                  cator intended. The audience doesn’t have to guess.
         on landing procedures, the            =     It’s complete. All of the audience questions are answered. The audi-
         concerns were not relayed                   ence has enough information to evaluate the message and act on it.
                                                     It’scorrect. All of the information in the message is accurate. The mes-
         to managers or to system
         and technology experts who
                                               =
         could have addressed the
                                                     sage is free from errors in spelling, grammar, word choice, and sentence
         concerns.                                   structure.
     =   Communication sources:                =     It saves the audience’s time. The style, organization, and visual or
         Managers received a large                   aural impact of the message help the audience read or hear, understand,
         amount of their information                 and act on the information as quickly as possible.
         from informal channels, which          =    It builds goodwill. The message presents a positive image of the com-
         blocked relevant opinions and
                                                     municator and his or her organization. It treats the receiver as a person,
         conclusions from engineers.
                                                     not a number. It cements a good relationship between the communicator
     Adapted from. Columbia Accident
                                                     and the receiver.
     Investigation Board, Report of Colum-

                                                 Whether a message meets these five criteria depends on the interactions
     bia Accident Investigation Board,
     Volume |, August 2003, http://www
     .nasa.gov/columbia/nome/CAIB_Vol1        among the communicator, the audience, the purposes of the message, and the
     -htm.                                    situation. No single set of words will work in all possible situations.


                                              USING TECHNOLOGY                              FOR COMMUNICATION
                                              In this technological age, different forms of media are encompassing all parts
                                              of life. For instance, in 2010, the average American spent 158 hours a month
                                              watching television, accounting for approximately half their leisure time.
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                             Chapter1    Succeeding in Business Communication                           13



They also spent 25 hours a month using the Internet, which has become the
third most popular news platform, behind only local and national television
news. The Internet is now ahead of radio and national and local print newspa-
pers as a news source. However, the greatest use of Internet time is for social
networking. Personal e-mail has fallen out of second place to be replaced by
gaming.”
   Technology has even gripped the highest office in the country. President
Obama battled with U.S. intelligence agencies to keep his BlackBerry when he
took office; he is the first president in the history of our country to use e-mail
while in office.
   If the highest office in the land demands technology, the business world
is no exception. When it comes to technology, business continually embraces
all forms that help increase productivity and save money. Almost all office
 employees are expected to know how to navigate through the web and to use
                                                                 software.
word processing, e-mail, spreadsheet, database, and presentation
Newer forms of technology, especially social media such as Facebook, Twitter,
and texting, are also becoming prominent in business offices. Chapter 9 will
discuss communication technologies in more detail.

 FOLLOWING CONVENTIONS
                                                                                          For
Conventions are widely accepted practices you routinely encounter.
example,   you   wouldn’t    write   an  analytica l   report   to  your   boss   who    only
wanted a “yes” or “no” on whether you could make the scheduled meeting
                                                                                        onal
with potential clients. You would send the more appropriate and conventi
response—an e-mail.
   Similarly, common business communications have conventions. These con-
                                                                                     of com-
ventions help people recognize, produce, and interpret different kinds
                                                                                            al
munications. Each chapter in this textbook presents conventions of tradition
                                           Chapter    13   discusses   conventi  ons   of  job
business documents. For example,
                                                                                             ,
application letters, Chapter 11 highlights conventions of persuasive messages
and Chapter 19 talks about conventions of deliverin           g  oral presentat  ions.
                                                                                     govern-
    Conventions change over time. Consider how the conventions
      movies  and  televisio n  have   changed    just   during   your   lifetime,  allowing
ing
                                                                                             .
more explicit sex and violence. Similarly, conventions change in business
                       mostly   given   way   to e-mails,    and   some   e-mails  are  being
 Paper memos have
 replaced by text messaging.
                                                                                   g nature,
    The key to using conventions effectively, in spite of their changin
               er  that  they   always    need   to  fit  the  rhetoric al  situati  on—they
 is to rememb
                                                       e, context, and purpose.
 always need to be adjusted for the particular audienc
                                                                             negative mes-
 For instance, Chapter 10 provides guidelines on constructing
          Howeve r,  you   will  need   to  adapt   these  guideli nes   based    on the way
 sages.
                                                 e   message s.  Some    organiz  ations will
 your organization presents their negativ
                      tone  than   others;  some   present  negativ e  news   bluntly,    while
 use a more formal
 others ease into it more gently.
                                                                                    follow, the
     Since every organization will be unique in the conventions they
                present ed  in  this text  will provide   a basic  underst  anding      of com-
 information
                                                        always   need   to adjust    the  basics
 mon elements for particular genres. You will
 for your particular needs.
                                                                               is to see what
     The best way to learn conventions in a particular workplace
                                                    commun  icate    with   each     other? Do
 other workers are doing. How do they
                             when    they   commun  icate    with  superio rs?    What     kinds
  their practices change                                                                        is
                                                            do  they  e-mail?   What     tone
  of letters and memos do they send? How much                                                 the
                                      will  help  your   commun  icatio  ns   fit  in  with
  preferred? Close observation
  conventions of your employer.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




14                                           Part1      The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                Wiio’s laws
                                             UNDERSTANDING AND ANALYZING BUSINESS
                Professor    Osmo     A.
                Wiio is a Finnish expert
                                             COMMUNICATION SITUATIONS
                on communication. He         The best communicators are conscious of the context in which they communi-
                has formulated a series      cate; they’re aware of options.
 of communication laws, expressed               Ask yourself the following questions:
 humorously but with serious con-
 tent. These are some of his laws:
                                              =        What's at stake—to whom?      Think not only about your own needs but
 Us      Communication usually fails,
         except by accident. (This is                  also about the concerns your boss and your audience will have. Your
         the fundamental one among                     message will be most effective if you think of the entire organizational
         Wiio’s laws.)                                 context—and the larger context of shareholders, customers, and regula-
         If a message can be inter-                    tors. When the stakes are high, you'll need to take into account people’s
         preted in several ways, it will               feelings as well as objective facts.
         be interpreted in a manner            =       Should you send a message? Sometimes, especially when you're new
         that maximizes the damage.                    on the job, silence is the most tactful response. But be alert for opportu-
         There is always someone                       nities to learn, to influence, to make your case.
         who knows better than you
                                               =       What channel should you use? Paper documents and presentations
         what you meant with your
         message.
                                                       are formal and give you considerable control over the message. E-mail,
                                                       texting, tweeting, phone calls, and stopping by someone's office are less
                                                       formal. Oral channels are better for group decision making, allow mis-
         The more we communicate,
         the worse communication
         succeeds.
                                                       understandings to be cleared up more quickly, and seem more personal.
                                                       Sometimes you may need more than one message, in more than one
         In mass communication,
         the important thing is not
                                                 channel.
         how things are but how they           = What should you say? Content for a message may not be obvious.
         seem to be.                             How detailed should you be? Should you repeat information that the
       Can you think of examples sup-            audience already knows? The answers will depend on the kind of
     porting Wiio’s laws?                        message, your purposes, audiences, and the corporate culture. And
                                                 you'll have to figure these things out for yourself, without detailed
     Laws are quoted from Osmo A. Wiio,
     “How All Human Communication Fails,
                                                 instructions.
     Except by Accident, or a Commentary       = How should you say it? How you arrange your ideas—what comes
     of Wilo’s Laws,” last updated July 4,
     2010, http://www.cs.tut.fi/~jkorpela/
                                                 first, second, and last—and the words you use shape the audience’s
     wiio.html.                                  response to what you say.



                                              HOW TO SOLVE BUSINESS COMMUNICATION
                                              PROBLEMS
                                              When you're faced with a business communication problem, you need to
                                              develop a solution that will both solve the organization’s problem and meet
                                              the psychological needs of the people involved. The strategies in this section
                                              will help you solve the problems in this book. Almost all of these strategies
                                              can also be applied to problems you encounter on the job. Use this process to
                                              create good messages:

                                                       Gather knowledge and brainstorm solutions.
                                                   =   Answer the five questions for analysis in Figure 1.4.
                                                   =   Organize your information to fit your audiences, your purposes, and the
                                                        context.
                                                   =    Make your document visually inviting.
                                                        Revise your draft to create a friendly, businesslike, positive style.
                                                   =    Edit your draft for standard spelling, punctuation, and grammar;
                                                        double-check names and numbers.
                                                   =    Use the response you get to plan future messages.
                                                                  Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                                                                                              15
                                                Chapter1     Succeeding in Business Communication

                                                                                                                         Just a Deadline; No
Figure 1.4         Questions for Analysis                                                                                Directions
I
  . Who is (are) your audience(s)?                                                                             va         School assignments
                                                                                                                          are   spelled    out,
  . What are your purposes in communicating?                                                                sometimes even in writing. In the
  . What information must your message include?                                                             workplace, workers are less likely
= . How
kOoOND  can  you build support for your position? What reasons or benefits will your                        to get details about what a docu-
    audience find convincing?                                                                               ment should include. The tran-
                                                                                                            sition can be disorienting. One
 5. What aspects of the total situation may be relevant?                                                    intern reported, “I was less pre-
nnn                                                                                                         pared than |thought. . . . |was so
                                                                                                            used to professors basically telling

Gather Knowledge and Brainstorm Solutions.                                                                  you what they want from you that
                                                                                                             | expected to be, if not taught,
                                                                               the facts?
Problem solving usually starts by gathering knowledge. What are                                             then told, what exactly it was that
What can you infer from the information you're        given?    What   addition al infor-                    they wanted these brochures to
                             Where   could  you  get  it?  What    emotiona l  complexi -
mation might be helpful?                                                                                     accomplish. . . . They have not
                  ? This informat ion will usually   start  to suggest   some  solutions ,                   taken the time to discuss it—they
ties are involved
                                              .   In all  but  the  very  simplest  prob-
and you should brainstorm other solutions
                                                                                                             just put things on my desk with
                                                                                 may not
lems, there are multiple possible solutions. The first one you think of
                                                                                                             only a short note telling me when
                                                                 measure    them  against                    they needed it done. No directions
be best. Consciously develop several solutions. Then                                                         or comments were included.”
your audience and purposes:     Which    solution  is likely   to work   best?
                                                                                    more
    You will learn more about gathering knowledge in Chapter 15 and                                          Intern’s quotation from Chris M.

about brainstorming in Chapter 8.
                                                                                                             Anson and L. Lee Forsberg, “Moving
                                                                                                             Beyond the Academic Community,”
                                                                                                             Written Communication 7, no. 3 (April
Answer the Five Questions for Analysis.                                                                      4990): 211.

                                                                       purpose(s),
The five questions in Figure 1.4 help you analyze your audience(s),
and the organizational context.
1. Who is (are) your audience(s)?
                                                                               ? If
       What audience characteristics are relevant for this particular message
                                                            how   do the  people  in
   you are writing or speaking to more than one person,
                                      does your audience  know   about  your topic?
    your audience differ? How much
                                                                       they have?
    How will they respond to your message? What objections might
                                                               nt; focus on ones
        Some characteristics of your audience will be irreleva
                                                                                        people or a
     that matter for this message. Whenever you address several
                                                                              nal   differen ces that
     group, try to identify the economic, cultural, or situatio
                                              ps   may    respond     to what     you   have    to say.
     may affect how various subgrou
                             e audienc  e   analysis  ,  see  the  questio   ns   in Chapter     2.
     For a more complet
 2. What are your purposes in communicating?
                                                                                                  What
         What must this message do to meet the organization’s needs?
                                                                                         audience to
     must it do to meet your own needs? What do you want your
     do? To think or feel? List all your purposes, major and minor.
                                                                                                 s: to
          Even in a simple message, you may have several related purpose
                                                                  aware     of  the  policy’s    provi-
      announce a new policy, to make the audience
                                                                                            is a good
      sions and requirements, and to have them feel that the policy
                  the  organiz ation   cares    about    its employe   es,     and   that   you are a
      one, that
      competent communicator and manager.
  3. What information must your message include?
                                                                                              to make
          Make a list of the points that must be included; check your draft
                                    To  include     informa  tion    without     emphas  izing    it, put
      sure you include them all.
                middle  of a paragra ph   or  docume   nt   and  present    it as briefly  as possible.
      it in the
                                                                               reasons or benefits
  4. How can you build support for your position? What
      will your audience find convincing?
                                                                                        behind your
           Brainstorm to develop reasons for your decision, the logic
                                              s   to  the   audien  ce   if  they    do   as you ask.
       argument, and possible benefit
                       audien  ce benefit   s   do   not  have    to  be  moneta   ry.    Making the
       Reasons and
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




16                                          Part1     The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                Classroom versus               audience’s job easier or more pleasant is a good benefit. In an informative
                Workplace Contexts             or persuasive message, identify multiple audience benefits. In your mes-
              Professors      Aviva            sage, use those that you can develop most easily and effectively.
              Freedman and Chris-                 Be sure the benefits are adapted to your audience. Many people do not
 tine Adam found in a research                 identify closely with their organizations; the fact that the organization ben-
 study that students have to                   efits from a policy will help the individual only if the saving or profit is
 relearn ways to acquire basic                 passed directly on to the employees. Instead, savings and profits are often
 knowledge when trying to mesh                 eaten up by returns to stockholders, bonuses to executives, and invest-
 with their employer's organization
                                               ments in plants and equipment or in research and development.
 once they enter the workforce.
   School is structured to help             5. What aspects of the total situation may be relevant?
 students learn. On the other                      Should you consider the economy? The time of year? Morale in the orga-
 hand, the workplace is_ struc-                nization? Any special circumstances? The organization may be prosperous or
 tured to get results, not help the            going through hard times; it may have just been reorganized or may be sta-
 learner/new employee. New col-                ble. All these different situations will affect what you say and how you say it.
 lege graduate hires frequently                       Think about the news, the economy, the weather. Think about the gen-
 don’t understand the context of
                                                    eral business and regulatory climate, especially as it affects the organiza-
 communications. For example,
                                                    tion specified in the problem. Use the real world as muchas possible. Think
 new employees have to figure
 out which co-workers are trust-
                                                    about interest rates, business conditions, and the economy. Is the industry
 worthy and can be a guide while                    in which the problem is set doing well? Is the government agency in which
 not pushing away others.                           the problem is set enjoying general support? Think about the time of year.
   Moreover, the roles of partici-                  If it’s fall when you write, is your business in a seasonal slowdown after
 pants in each situation are dif-                   a busy summer? Gearing up for the Christmas shopping rush? Or going
 ferent. While school settings                      along at a steady pace unaffected by seasons?
 have an instructor as the voice of                     To answer these questions, draw on your experience, your courses, and
 authority, workplace settings are                  your common sense. Read the Wall Street Journal or look at a company’s
 comprised of people with vary-                     website. Sometimes you may even want to phone a local business person
 ing degrees of relevant and useful                 to get information.
 knowledge.
   What has been your experi-
 ence with internships? Have                 Organize Your Information to Fit Your Audiences,
 you noticed other ways in which
 workplace settings differ from
                                             Your Purposes, and the Situation.
 classroom expectations?                     You'll learn different psychological patterns of organization in Chapters 9
     Adapted from Aviva Freedman and
                                             through 11. For now, remember these three basic principles:
     Christine Adam, “Learning to Write
     Professionally: ‘Situated  Learning’
     and the Transition from University
                                              =      Put good news first.
     to Professional Discourse,” Journal      =      In general, put the main point or question first. In the subject line or
     of Business and Technical Commu-
     nication 10, no. 4 (October 1996):
                                                     first paragraph, make it clear that you're writing about something that is
     395-427.                                        important to the reader.
                                               =     Disregard the above point and approach the subject indirectly when you
                                                     must persuade a reluctant audience.


                                             Make Your Document Visually Inviting.
                                             A well-designed document is easier to read and builds goodwill. To make a
                                             document visually attractive

                                                     Use subject lines to orient the reader quickly.
                                                     Use headings to group related ideas.
                                                     Use lists and indented sections to emphasize subpoints and examples.
                                                     Number points that must be followed in sequence.
                                                     Use short paragraphs—usually eight typed lines or fewer.

                                              If you plan these design elements before you begin composing, you'll save
                                              time and the final document will probably be better.
                                                       Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter1   Succeeding in Business Communication                                   17


   The best medium for a document depends on how it will be used. For                                  Succeeding
example, a document that will be updated frequently may need to be on a                                against the Odds
website so the reader can easily obtain the most current information. Chap-                   ily 7.   | developed       my
ters 6 and 16 will provide more information on the design of documents and                              communication
visuals.                                                                                  skills as a technique of survival.
                                                                                          | was born in poverty and spent
                                                                                          two years on the welfare rolls,
Revise Your Draft to Create a Friendly, Businesslike,                                     and | learned early that | had to
Positive Style.                                                                           communicate or die. And so |
                                                                                          talked my way out of poverty—|
In addition to being an organizational member or a consumer, your reader                  communicated my way to the
has feelings just as you do. Writing that keeps the reader in mind uses you-              TOD resins
attitude (see Chapter 3). Read your message as if you were in your reader’s                 | read and re-read books on
shoes. How would you feel if you received it?                                             self-improvement, success and
                                                                                          communication. The most impor-
    Good business and administrative writing is both friendly and businesslike.
                                                                                          tant lesson | learned from these
If you’re too stiff, you put extra distance between your reader and yourself. If          books is what | call “other focus-
you try to be too chummy, you'll sound unprofessional. When you write to                  ing.” This means, among other
strangers, use simple, everyday words and make your message as personal                   things, that if we want to com-
and friendly as possible. When you write to friends, remember that your mes-              municate with employees, man-
sage may be read by people you've never even heard of: avoid slang, clichés,              agers, and even competitors we
and “in” jokes.                                                                           must ask ourselves not what we
   Sometimes you must mention limitations, drawbacks, or other nega-                      want but what they want.
tive elements, but don’t dwell on them. People will respond better to you                   This rule made me a millionaire.
and your organization if you seem confident. Expect success, not failure.                 For the only way | got to where
If you don’t believe that what you're writing about is a good idea, why                   | am today was by persuading
                                                                                          thousands of blacks and whites,
should they?
                                                                                          some of whom were very preju-
   You emphasize the positive when you                                                    diced, that the only way they
                                                                                          could get what they wanted was
 =   Put positive information first, give it more space, or set it off visually in        by helping me get what | wanted.
     an indented list.                                                                    All the law and prophecy of com-
                                                                                          munication theory can be found
 =   Eliminate negative words whenever possible.
                                                                                          in that formula.
 =   Focus on what is possible, not what is impossible.
                                                                                          John H. Johnson, owner and pub-
                                                                                          lisher of Ebony magazine, quoted in

Edit Your Draft for Standard English; Double-Check                                        Gloria Gordon, “EXCEL Award Win-
                                                                                          ner John H. Johnson Communicates
Names and Numbers.                                                                        Success,”     /ABC    Communication
                                                                                          World 6, no. 6 (May 1989): 18-19.
Business people care about correctness in spelling, grammar, and punc-
tuation. If your grasp of mechanics is fuzzy, if standard English is not
your native dialect, or if English is not your native language, you'll need
to memorize rules and perhaps find a good book or a tutor to help you.
Even software spelling and grammar checkers require the writer to make
decisions. If you know how to write correctly but rarely take the time to
do so, now is the time to begin to edit and proofread to eliminate care-
less errors. Correctness in usage, punctuation, and grammar is covered in
Appendix B.
   Always proofread your document before you send it out. Double-check the
reader’s name, any numbers, and the first and last paragraphs. Chapter 5 will
provide more tips on revising and editing communication.


Use the Response You Get to Plan Future Messages.
Evaluate the feedback, or response, you get. The real test of any message is
“Did you get what you wanted, when you wanted it?” If the answer is no, then
the message has failed—even if the grammar is perfect, the words elegant, the
approach creative, the document stunningly attractive. If the message fails,
you need to find out why.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




18                     Part1     The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                          Analyze your successes, too. You want to know why your message worked.
                       There has to be a reason, and if you can find what it is, you'll be more success-
                       ful more often.

                       HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
                       This book has many aids to help you learn the material.

                        =   Chapter outlines, learning objectives, and headings all provide previews
                            of the contents. They can give you hooks on which to hang the informa-
                            tion you are reading.
                         = Examples of written documents provide illustrations of effective and
                            ineffective communications. Comments in red ink highlight problems;
                            those in blue ink note effective practices.
                         = Terminology is defined in the glossary at the end of the book.
                         m Sidebars provide workplace examples of ideas discussed in the text.
                            They are categorized for you by the icons that appear beside them. A
                            gold star with any icon signifies a classic example.
                                 On-the-job examples have briefcase icons.
                                 Ethics and legal examples have gavel icons.
                                 Websites have an @ sign.
                                 Technology examples have smartphone icons.
                                 International examples have globe icons.
                            = Fun examples have balloon icons.
                          = Chapter summaries at the end of each chapter, and review questions at
                             the beginning of each set of chapter exercises, help you review the chap-
                             ters for retention.




                        =      Communication helps organizations and the people in them achieve their
                               goals. The ability to write and speak well becomes increasingly important
                               as you rise in an organization.
                        =      People put things in writing to create a record, to convey complex data, to
                               make things convenient for the reader, to save money, and to convey their
                               own messages more effectively.
                        =      Internal documents go to people inside the organization. External docu-
                               ments go to audiences outside: clients, customers, suppliers, stockholders,
                               the government, the media, and the general public.
                        m      The three basic purposes of business and administrative communication
                               are to inform, to request or persuade, and to build goodwill. Most mes-
                               sages have more than one purpose.
                               Poor writing wastes time, wastes effort, and jeopardizes goodwill.
                        =      Good business and administrative writing meets five basic criteria: it’s clear,
                               complete, and correct; it saves the reader’s time; and it builds goodwill.
                        =      To evaluate a specific document, we must know the interactions among
                                the writer, the reader(s), the purposes of the message, and the context. No
                                single set of words will work for all readers in all situations.
                        =       Common business communications have conventions, as do organizations.
                                Business communicators need to know how to adjust conventions to fit a
                                particular audience, context, and purpose.
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                             Chapter1   Succeeding in Business Communication                                   19


=      To understand    business    communication       situations,    ask the following
       questions:
          What's at stake—to whom?
          Should you send a message?
           What channel should you use?
           What should you say?
           How should you say it?
=      The following process helps create effective messages:
       = Gather knowledge and brainstorm solutions.
       = Answer the analysis questions in Figure 1.4.
       ® Organize your information to fit your audiences, your purposes, and
           the context.
           Make your document visually inviting.
           Revise your draft to create a friendly, businesslike, positive style.
           Edit your draft for standard English; double-check names and numbers.
           Use the response you get to plan future messages.


                                                                                                *Go to www.mhhe.com/locker10e for
         CHAPTER       1           Exercises and Problems                                       additional Exercises and Problems.




 1.1        Reviewing the Chapter
 1. Why do you need to be able to communicate well?               ia   What are the costs of poor communication? (LO 1-3)
    (LO 1-1)                                                      5.   What role do conventions play in business commu-
 2. What are some myths about workplace communi-                       nication? (LO 1-4)
    cation? What is the reality for each myth?                    6. What are the components of a good problem-
    (LO 1-1)                                                         solving method for business communication oppor-
 3. What are the costs of communication? (LO 1-2)                      tunities? (LO 1-5)



 1.2        Assessing Your Punctuation and Grammar Skills

 To help you see where you need to improve in gram-
 mar     and punctuation,   take the Diagnostic Test, B.1,
 Appendix B.


 1.3         Letters for Discussion—Landscape Plants

  Your nursery sells plants not only in your store but also by       The following letters are possible approaches to
  mail order. Today you've received a letter from Pat Sykes,      answering this complaint. How well does each mes-
  complaining that the plants (in a $572 order) did not arrive    sage meet the needs of the reader, the writer, and the
  in a satisfactory condition. “All of them were dry and          organization? Is the message clear, complete, and
_ wilted. One came out by the roots when I took it out of the     correct? Does it save the reader’s time? Does it build
  box. Please send me a replacement shipment immediately.”        goodwill?


              ie     Dear Sir:

                     | checked to see what could have caused the defective shipment you received. After
                     ruling out problems in transit, | discovered that your order was packed by a new
                     worker who didn’t understand the need to water plants thoroughly before they are
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




20                                Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                 shipped. We have fired the worker, so you can be assured that this will not happen
                 again.

                 Although it will cost our company            several hundred      dollars, we will send you a
                 replacement shipment.

                 Let me know if the new shipment arrives safely. We trust that you will not complain
                 again.



                 Dear Pat:


                 Sorry we screwed up that order. Sending plants across country is a risky business.
                 Some of them just can’t take the strain. (Some days | can’t take the strain myself!)
                 We'll send you some more plants sometime next week and we'll credit your account
                 for $372.


                 Dear Mr. Smith:


                 I’m sorry you aren’t happy with your plants, but it isn’t our fault. The box clearly
                 says, “Open and water immediately.” If you had done that, the plants would have
                 been fine. And anybody who is going to buy plants should know that a little care is
                 needed. If you pull by the leaves, you will pull the roots out. Since you don’t know
                 how to handle plants, I’m sending you a copy of our brochure, “How to Care for Your
                 Plants.” Please read it carefully so that you will know how to avoid disappointment
                 in the future.

                 We look forward to your future orders.


                 Dear Ms. Sykes:

                 Your letter of the 5th has come to the attention of the undersigned.

                 According to your letter, your invoice #47420 arrived in an unsatisfactory condition.
                 Please be advised that it is our policy to make adjustments as per the Terms and
                 Conditions listed on the reverse side of our Acknowledgment of Order. If you will
                 read that document, you will find the following:

                       “__. if you intend to assert any claim against us on this account, you shall make an
                       exception on your receipt to the carrier and shall, within 30 days after the receipt of any
                       such goods, furnish us detailed written information as to any damage.”

                  Your letter of the 5th does not describe the alleged damage in sufficient detail. Fur-
                  thermore, the delivery receipt contains no indication of any exception. If you expect
                  to receive an adjustment, you must comply with our terms and see that the neces-
                  sary documents reach the undersigned by the close of the business day on the 20th
                  of the month.


                  Dear Pat Sykes:

                  You'll get a replacement shipment of the perennials you ordered next week.

                  Your plants are watered carefully before shipment and packed in specially designed
                  cardboard containers. But if the weather is unusually warm, or if the truck is delayed,
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                             Chapter1   Succeeding in Business Communication                           21


                  small root balls may dry out. Perhaps this happened with your plants. Plants with
                  small root balls are easier to transplant, so they do better in your yard.

                  The violas, digitalis, aquilegias, and hostas you ordered are long-blooming perenni-
                  als that will get even prettier each year. Enjoy your garden!



1.4      Online Messages for Discussion—Responding to Rumors
The Acme Corporation has been planning to acquire Best          The following messages are possible responses that
Products, and Acme employees are worried about how __ Ed can post to the chat sides. How well does each mes-
the acquisition will affect them. Ed Zeplin, Acme’shuman _ sage meet the needs of the reader, the writer, and the
resource manager, has been visiting the Acme chat sites      organization? Is the message clear, complete, and cor-
and sees a dramatic rise in the number of messages spread- _ rect? Does it save the reader’s time? Does it build
ing rumors about layoffs. Most of the rumors are false.      goodwill?

           ls         :
                  It Will Be Great!
                  Author: L. Ed Zeplin, HR
                  Date: Tuesday, May 23

                  | am happy to tell you that the HR news is good. Two months ago, the CEO told me
                  about the merger, and | have been preparing a human resource plan ever since.

                  | want you to know about this because morale has been bad, and it shouldn’t be.
                  You really should wait for the official announcements, and you'll see that the staff-
                  ing needs will remain strong. My department has been under a lot of pressure, but if
                  you’ll be patient, we’ll explain everything—the staffing, the compensation.

                  Our plan should be ready by Monday, and then if you have any questions, just con-
                  tact your HR rep.


           Po.             :
                  HR Staffing
                  Author: HR Boss
                  Date: Tuesday, May 23

                  The rumors are false. Just ask anyone in HR. There will be no layoffs.


           3.
                  Don’t Believe the Rumors
                  Author: lezeplin@acme.com
                  Date: Tuesday, May 23

                  Acme has 475 employees, and Best Products has 132 employees. Our human
                  resource plan for next year calls for 625 employees. If you do the math, you can see
                  that there will be no layoffs. Rather, we will be hiring 18 employees. Of course, as
                  we consolidate operations with Best, there will be some redeployments. However,
                  our plan indicates that we will be able to retain our current staff. All employees are
                  valued at Acme, as our current benefits package testifies.

                  Our HR plan is based on the best analytic techniques and a business forecast by a
                  top consulting firm. If you’re an employee, you should review our business plan, at
                  the Our Goals page on Acme’s intranet. Everyone should read Acme’s mission state-
                  ment on our home page, www.acme.com/homepage.html.
22                             Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                  Layoff Rumors Do Acme a Disservice
                  Author: Zeplin in HR
                  Date: Tuesday, 23 May

                  If you come here to get your company information, you aren’t getting the straight
                  story. The people posting to this discussion board are spreading false rumors, not
                  the truth. If you want to know the truth about Acme, ask the people who have access
                  to the information.

                  As HR manager, | can assure you we won't be laying off employees after the merger
                  with Best Products. I’m the one who approves the staffing plan, so | should know. If
                  people would ask me, instead of reading the negative, whining lies at this site, they
                  would know the facts, too.

                  If people really cared about job security, they would be working and exceeding their
                  goals, rather than wasting their time in rumor-mongering on message boards. Hard
                  work: that’s the key to success!


                  The True Story about Lay-Offs
                  Author: lezeplin@acme.com
                  Date: Tuesday, 23 May

                  Whenever there is a merger or acquisition, rumors fly. It’s human nature to turn to
                  rumors when a situation seems uncertain. The case of Acme acquiring Best Prod-
                  ucts is no exception, so I’m not surprised to see rumors about layoffs posted on this
                  message board.

                   Have no fear! | am working closely with our CEO and with the CEO and human
                   resource manager at Best Products, and we all agree that our current staff is a valu-
                   able asset to Acme, to Best, and to our combined companies in the future. We have
                   no plans to lay off any of our valued people. | will continue monitoring this message
                   board and will post messages as | am able to disclose more details about our staff-
                   ing plans. In the meantime, employees should watch for official information in the
                   company newsletter and on our intranet.

                   We care about our people! If employees ever have questions about our plans and
                   policies, they should contact me directly.

                   L. Ed Zeplin, HR Manager



 i        Discussing Communication Barriers
 With a small group, discuss some of the communication             to pinpoint exactly how the communication broke down.
 barriers you have witnessed in the workplace or class-            How closely do the problems you've identified coincide
 room. What confuses audiences? What upsets them?                  with the content from Chapter 1?
 What creates ill will? What causes loss of interest? Try


 1.6      Identifying Poor Communicators
 Almost everyone has come in contact with someone                  communicator ineffective? What would have made com-
 who is a poor communicator. With a small group, dis-              munication clearer? After your discussion, develop a list
 cuss some of your experiences with poor communicators             of poor communication traits and what can be done to
 either in the workplace or in the classroom. Why was the          overcome them.
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                           Chapter1   Succeeding in Business Communication                                      23


1.7        Discussing Wiio’s Laws
Reread the list of Wiio’s laws in the sidebar on page 14.       c.     The news media
With a small group, discuss examples of those laws you          d.     Social networking sites
have witnessed in
a. The workplace
b.    The classroom



1.8        Identifying Changing Conventions
This chapter talks about the need to be aware of con-            some changing communication conventions you have
ventions and how they shift with time. What are                  observed at your workplace, or those of your fam-
some changing classroom communication conven-                    ily and friends? With a small group, discuss your
tions you have observed in your classes? What are                examples.


1.9         Understanding the Role of Communication in Your Organization
Interview your work supervisor to learn about the kinds          =    Whoare your most important external audiences?
and purposes of communication in your organization.              =    Whatare the challenges of communicating in this
Your questions could include the following:                           organization?
=     What kinds of communication (e.g., memos,                  =    What kinds of documents and presentations does
      e-mail, presentations) are most important in this               the organization prefer?
      organization?
                                                                 As your instructor directs,
=     What communications do you create? Are they
                                                                 a. Share your results with a small group of students.
      designed to inform, to persuade, to build goodwill—
      or to do a combination?                                    b. Present your results in a memo to your instructor.
=     What communications do you receive? Are they               c. Join with a group of students to make a group pre-
      designed to inform, to persuade, to build goodwill—            sentation to the class.
      or to do a combination?                                    d. Post your results online to the class.
=     Whoare your most important audiences within the
      organization?


1.10        Introducing Yourself to Your Instructor
Write a memo (at least 1 pages long) introducing your-                Include things that gave you a real sense of accom-
self to your instructor. Include the following topics:                plishment and pride, whether or not they’re the sort
    Background: Where did you grow up? What have                      of thing you'd list on a résumé.
    you done in terms of school, extracurricular activi-            Goals: What do you hope to accomplish this term?
    ties, jobs, and family life?                                    Where would you like to be professionally and per-
    Interests: What are you interested in? What do you              sonally five years from now?
    like to do? What do you like to think about and talk         Use complete memo format with appropriate headings.
    about?                                                       (See Appendix A for examples of memo format.) Use a
    Academics: What courses have you liked the best in           conversational writing style; check your draft to polish
    school? Why? What life skills have you gained? How           the style and edit for mechanical and grammatical cor-
    do you hope to use them? What do you hope to gain            rectness. A good memo will enable your instructor to see
    from this course?                                            you as an individual. Use specific details to make your
    Achievements: What achievements have given you               memo vivid and interesting. Remember that one of your
    the greatest personal satisfaction? List at least five.      purposes is to interest your reader!


    1.11    Introducing Yourself to Your Collaborative Writing Group
 Write a memo (at least 14 pages long) introducing your-             ’ Background: What is your major? What special areas of
 self to the other students in your collaborative writing              knowledge do you have? What have you done in terms
 group. Include the following topics:                                  of school, extracurricular activities, jobs, and family life?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




24                                Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


     Previous experience in groups: What groups have                   Areas of expertise: What can you contribute to the
     you worked in before? Are you usually a leader,                   group in terms of knowledge and skills? Are you
     a follower, or a bit of both? Are you interested in               good at brainstorming ideas? Researching? Design-
     a quality product? In maintaining harmony in the                  ing charts? Writing? Editing? Word processing? Man-
     group? In working efficiently? What do you like                   aging the flow of work? Maintaining group cohesion?
     most about working in groups? What do you like                    Goals for collaborative assignments: What do
     least?                                                            you hope to accomplish this term? Where does this
     Work and composing style: Do you like to talk out                 course fit into your priorities?
     ideas while they’re in a rough stage or work them out          Use complete memo format with appropriate headings.
     on paper before you discuss them? Would you rather             (See Appendix A for examples of memo        format.) Use
     have a complete outline before you start writing or            a conversational writing style; edit your final draft for
     just a general idea? Do you want to have a detailed            mechanical and grammatical correctness. A good memo
     schedule of everything that has to be done and who             will enable others in your group to see you as an indi-
     will do it, or would you rather “go with the flow”?            vidual. Use details to make your memo vivid and inter-
     Do you work best under pressure, or do you want to             esting. Remember that one of your purposes is to make
     have assignments ready well before the due date?               your readers look forward to working with you!


1.12        Describing Your Experiences in and Goals for Writing
Write a memo (at least 1% pages long) to your instructor             m= What voluntary writing have you done—journals,
describing the experiences you've had writing and what                   poems, stories, essays? Has this writing been
you'd like to learn about writing during this course.                    just for you, or has some of it been shared or
   Answer several of the following questions:                            published?
= What memories do you have of writing? What made                    = Have you ever written on a job or in a student or
    writing fun or frightening in the past?                               volunteer organization? Have you ever edited other
= What have you been taught about writing? List the                       people’s writing? What have these experiences led
      topics, rules, and advice you remember.
                                                                          you to think about real-world writing?
=     What kinds of writing have you done in school?                 = What do you see as your current strengths and
      How long have the papers been?                                      weaknesses in writing skills? What skills do you
                                                                          think you'll need in the future? What kinds of writ-
=     How has your school writing been evaluated? Did the                 ing do you expect to do after you graduate?
      instructor mark or comment on mechanics and gram-
      mar? Style? Organization? Logic? Content? Audience             Use complete memo format with appropriate headings.
      analysis and adaptation? Have you gotten extended               (See Appendix A for examples of memo format.) Use
      comments on your papers? Have instructors in dif-             _a conversational writing style; edit your final draft for
      ferent classes had the same standards, or have you              mechanical and grammatical correctness.
      changed aspects of your writing for different classes?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




CHAPTER




Adapting Your Message
to Your Audience

Chapter Outline
Identifying Your Audiences                                    5. What Are the Audience’s Expectations
                                                                  Elovoltjenda\-w-\o)olge) olat-1d-me-iaiel6l-le[-n
Ways to Analyze Your Audience                                     Content, and Organization of
  ® Analyzing Individuals                                         Messages?
  @ Analyzing Members of Groups                                 . How Will the Audience Use the
  t WyNav-V\Vr4late ant @)gef-Jalp4-)a(elst-1 meu) heeles         Document?
    and the Discourse Community
                                                            Audience Analysis Works
Choosing Channels to Reach Your
                                                            Audience Benefits
Audience
                                                              ®   Characteristics of Good Audience
Using Audience Analysis to Adapt Your                             Benefits
Message                                                       ® Ways to Identify and Develop
   1. How Will the Audience Initially React                       Audience Benefits
       to the Message?
                                                            Audience Benefits Work
     . How Much Information Does the
       Audience Need?                                       Writing or Speaking to Multiple Audiences
     . What Obstacles Must You Overcome?                    with Different Needs
    . What Positive Aspects Can You                         Summary of Key Points
      Emphasize?
                                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




NEWSWORTHY                        COMMUNICATION


Audiences Change with Time




       very year in late January, the president                                 the House of Representatives in the November elec-
       of the United States gives the State of the                              tions and gained several seats in the Senate. Through-
       Union address to one of the largest and most                             out the election, the tenor of political discourse had
diverse audiences of any communication. Congress,                               become increasingly pointed and divisive.
the news media, foreign leaders and diplomats, stu-                               President Obama responded to his audience with
dents, and members of the American public from all                              a different kind of State of the Union—one that
walks of life watch, listen, or read the president’s                            still outlined        ambitious        plans, but focused               more
comments each year.                                    on bipartisan efforts to achieve them. His tone was
   Traditionally, the president uses the State of the more conciliatory and more focused on uniting
Union to recount his successes and to spell out his the parties in Congress under his leadership, but
political goals for the coming =——_____                               a       his core messages remained
year. In 2010, President Barack <“ is tone and presentation reflected         the same: improving health
Obama      outlined ambitious the changed audience he faced—                  care, rebuilding the economy,
plans for health care reform,                                                 strengthening education, and
                                  one more divided than the one he            expanding green energy ini-
economic recovery, and an
increased focus on education
                                  addressed in 2010.”                         tiatives. His tone and presen-
and green energy initiatives.         “epenr y                                tation reflected the changed
He focused much of his speech on the challenges audience he faced—one more divided than the one
faced by the people of America and the steps he and he addressed in 2010.
his Democratic party were taking to help.                 The ability to adjust your message to your audi-
   In 2011, however, the president faced a different   ence is one key to effective communication. While
audience. Even though many of the people listen- President Obama addressed a complex audience
ing were the same, the situation and the attitudes had of millions, most communications have very small,
changed. In spite of President Obama’s success with specific audiences—real people with real situations
his goals during 2010, many Americans were dissat- and real concerns. Learning to adjust to your audi-
isfied. Riding a wave of discontent with the govern- ence will provide you with an excellent foundation
ment, conservative Republicans had gained control of for any kind of communication.
                                                                                                                                                     Secretary,
Sources: Barak Obama, “Remarks by the President in State of the Union Address,” January 28, 2010, transcript, The White House, Office of the Press
                                                                                                                                                Union
http:// www.whitehouse.gov   / the-press-office / remarks-president-state-union-address; Barak Obama, “Remarks by the President in State of the
Address,” January 25, 2011, transcript, The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, http: / /www.whitehouse.gov /the-press-office /2011 /01/25/remarks-
president-state-union-address.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




28                     Part1     The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                       Learning Objectives
                       After studying this chapter, you will know

                       Teh            ways to analyze different kinds of audiences.
                                      a. Individuals

                                      b. Groups

                                      c. Organizations

                       Tey            How to choose channels to reach your audience.
                                      How to analyze your audience and adapt your message to it.
                                      How to identify and develop audience benefits.
                                    eee                              COT
                                                                CE NCC   CELLED            EL   LDL TT




                       Knowing who you're talking to is fundamental to the success of any message.
                       You need to identify your audiences, understand their motivations, and know
                       how to reach them.

                       IDENTIFYING YOUR AUDIENCES
                       The first step in analyzing your audience is to decide who your audience is.
                       Organizational messages have multiple audiences:
                       1. A gatekeeper has the power to stop your message instead of sending it
                           on to other audiences. The gatekeeper therefore controls whether your
                           message even gets to the primary audience. Sometimes the supervisor
                           who assigns the message is the gatekeeper; sometimes the gatekeeper is
                           higher in the organization. In some cases, gatekeepers may exist outside
                           the organization.
                       2. The primary audience decides whether to accept your recommendations
                           or acts on the basis of your message. You must reach the primary audience
                           to fulfill your purposes in any message.
                       3. The secondary audience may be asked to comment on your message or to
                           implement your ideas after they've been approved. Secondary audiences
                           also include lawyers who may use your message—perhaps years later—as
                           evidence of your organization’s culture and practices.
                        4. An auxiliary audience may encounter your message but will not have to
                           interact with it. This audience includes the “read-only” people.
                        5. A watchdog audience, though it does not have the power to stop the mes-
                               sage and will not act directly on it, has political, social, or economic power.
                            The watchdog pays close attention to the transaction between you and the
                            primary audience and may base future actions on its evaluation of your
                            message.
                           As the following examples show, one person can be part of two audiences.
                        Frequently, a supervisor is both the primary audience and the gatekeeper.
                                   Dawn is an assistant account executive in an ad agency. Her boss asks her to write
                               a proposal for a marketing plan for a new product the agency’s client is introducing.
                               Her primary audience is the executive committee of the client company, who will
                               decide whether to adopt the plan. The secondary audience includes the marketing
                               staff of the client company, who will be asked for comments on the plan, as well as
                               the artists, writers, and media buyers who will carry out details of the plan if it is
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter 2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                       29


  adopted. Her boss, who must approve the plan before it is submitted to the client, is                   Reading Levels
  the gatekeeper. Her office colleagues who read her plan are her auxiliary audience.                     One of the most rel-
      Joe works in the information technology department of a large financial institu-                   evant     demographic
  tion. He must write a memo explaining a major software change. His boss is the                          measures for writers
  gatekeeper; the software users in various departments are the primary audience.            is the literacy level of your audi-
  The secondary audience includes the tech people who will be helping the primary            ence.    Unfortunately,    even   in
  audience install and adjust to the new software. The auxiliary audience includes           advanced economies you have
  department program assistants who forward the memo to appropriate people in                to ask how well your audience
  each department. A watchdog audience is the board of directors.                            can read and put information to
                                                                                             use. In the United States, the

WAYS TO ANALYZE YOUR AUDIENCE                                                                answer may be “not very well.”
                                                                                                The National Assessment of
The most important tools in audience analysis are common sense and empa-                     Adult Literacy (NAAL), conducted
thy. Empathy is the ability to put yourself in someone else’s shoes, to feel with            by the US Department of Educa-
that person. Use what you know about people and about organizations to pre-                  tion, found that 14% of adults
                                                                                             had difficulty reading well enough
dict likely responses.
                                                                                             to follow simple instructions (such
                                                                                             as when to take medication), 12%
Analyzing Individuals                                                                        struggled to use simple forms
                                                                                              (deciding where to sign their
When you write or speak to people in your own organization and in other
                                                                                              name on a form), and 22% had
organizations you work closely with, you may be able to analyze your audi-                   trouble working with numbers
ence as individuals. You may already know them, or can probably get addi-                     (simple addition tasks). NAAL
tional information easily. You may learn that one manager may dislike phone                   also found that 5% of adults were
calls, so you will know to write your request in an e-mail. Another manager                   nonliterate—their language skills
may have a reputation for denying requests made on a Friday, so you will                      weren’t strong enough to partici-
know to get yours in earlier.                                                                 pate in the assessment.
   A useful schema for analyzing people is the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator.®                   Overall,   that    translates    into
This instrument uses four pairs of dichotomies to identify ways that people                   30 million adults in the United
differ.' One of these dichotomies is well known: Extroversion-Introversion,                   States with “below basic” read-

measuring how individuals prefer to focus their attention and get energy.
                                                                                              ing and comprehension levels,
                                                                                              and another 63 million with only
Extroverted types are energized by interacting with other people. Introverted                 “basic” literacy levels. For business
types get their energy from within.                                                           writers, this poses a challenge.
    The other three dichotomies in Myers-Briggs® typology are Sensing-                        When composing a message for
Intuition, Thinking-Feeling, and Judging-Perceiving. The Sensing-Intuition                    a broad audience of employees or
dichotomy measures the way an individual prefers to take in information.                      customers, you may have to use
Sensing types gather information through their senses, preferring what is real                short sentences, simple words,
and tangible. Intuitive types prefer to gather information by looking at the big              and clarifying graphics. What
picture, focusing on the relationships and connections between facts.                         other techniques might you use to
   The Thinking-Feeling dichotomy measures the way an individual makes                        ensure that audiences with lower

decisions. Thinking types prefer to use thinking in decision making to con-                   literacy levels can understand and
                                                                                              use your message?
sider the logical consequences of a choice or action. Feeling types make deci-
sions based on the impact to people, considering what is important to them                    Adapted from Mark Kutner, Elizabeth
and to others involved.                                                                      _ Greenberg, and Justin Baer, “National

   The Judging-Perceiving dichotomy measures how individuals orient them-
                                                                                               Assessment of Adult Literacy (NAAL):
                                                                                               A First Look at the Literacy of Amer-
selves to the external world. Judging types like to live in a planned, orderly                 ica's Adults in the 21st Century,”
way, seeking closure. Perceiving types prefer to live ina flexible, spontaneous                American Institutes for Research,
                                                                                               National Center for Education Sta-
way, enjoying possibilities.                                                                  tistics, U.S. Department of Educa-
   The descriptors on each of the scales’ dichotomies represent a preference,                 tion, 2006, http://nces.ed.gov/NAAL/
just as we have a preference for using either our right or our left hand to write.            PDF/2006470.PDF.

If necessary, we can use the opposite style, but we have less practice in it and
use it less easily.
   You can find your own personality type by taking the Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator® instrument at your college’s counseling center or student services
office. Some businesses administer the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator® instru-
ment to all employees to assist with team building and/or personal growth
and development.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




30                                       Part1    The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


Figure 2.1             Using Personalities in Communication

     if your
     audience is      Use this strategy                                              Because

 Extraverting         Try out ideas orally.                                          Extraverts like to develop ideas by talking; they are
                                                                                        energized by people.
     Introverting     Communicate in writing so the audience can                     Introverts like to think before they communicate.
                        think about your message before responding.                     Written messages give them their thinking time.

     Sensing           Present all of the needed facts, and get them                  Sensing people are good at facts, and expect others
                         right. Present your reasoning step by step.                    to be, also. They trust their own experience more
                         Stress practicalities.                                         than someone else’s account.

     Intuiting         Focus on the big picture and underlying patterns _ Intuitive people like new possibilities and innovation;
                         first. Save details for later. Use metaphors and     they enjoy problem solving and creative endeavors.
                         analogies in explanations.     Stress  innovation.   They    can be impatient with details, routine, and
                                                                               repetition.

     Thinking          Use logic and principles of consistency and          Thinking people make decisions based on logic and
                         fairness rather  than  emotion    or personal         abstract principles. They are often uncomfortable
                         circumstances.                                        with emotion or personal revelations.

     Feeling           Stress positives. Show how your ideas value the —_Feeling people care about other people and their
                          people needs of the organization. Use tactful        feelings. They are empathetic and desire harmony.
                          language.
     Judging           Make your communications very organized.                       Judging people are eager to make decisions, so they
                                                                                        may not seek out additional information. They        2
                         Provide all needed information. Follow
                         company procedures. Schedule work in                           prefer a structured, orderly work life.
                         advance; provide time frames for various tasks.
     Perceiving        Provide alternatives. Ask for action or a decision           _ Perceiving people like to gather lots of information
                          by a specific date.                                           before making decisions, and they like to keep all
                                                                                         options open as long as possible.
 a
 Source: People Types and Tiger Stripes, 4e 2009 Gordon Lawrence. Used with permission. CAPT, Inc.


                                             As Figure 2.1 suggests, you'll be most persuasive if you play to your audi-
                                          ence’s strengths. Indeed, many of the general principles of business communi-
                                          cation appeal to the types most common among managers. Putting the main
                                          point up front satisfies the needs of judging types, and some 75% of US man-
                                          agers are judging. Giving logical reasons satisfies the needs of the nearly 80%
                                          of U.S. managers who are thinking types.”

                                           Analyzing Members of Groups
                                           In many organizational situations, you'll analyze your audience not as indi-
                                           viduals but as members of a group: “taxpayers who must be notified that
                                           they owe more income tax,” “customers who use our accounting services,”
                                           or “employees with small children.” Focus on what group members have
                                           in common. Although generalizations won’t be true for all members of the
                                           group, generalization is necessary when you must appeal to a large group of
                                           people with one message. In some cases, no research is necessary: It’s easy to
                                           guess the attitudes of people who must be told they owe more taxes. In other
                                           cases, databases may yield useful information. In still other cases, you may
                                           want to do original research.
                                               Databases enable you to map demographic and psychographic profiles of
                                           customers or employees. Demographic characteristics are measurable fea-
                                           tures that can be counted objectively: age, sex, race, religion, education level,
                                           income, and so on.
                                               Sometimes demographic information is irrelevant; sometimes it’s impor-
                                            tant. Does education matter? Well, the fact that the reader has a degree from
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                       Chapter 2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                      31


                                                                                                        One Huge Audience
                                                                                                         Baby boomers num-
                                                                                                         ber 76 million and
                                                                                                         account for about half
                                                                                            of total U.S. consumer spending.
                                                                                            They are expected to spend an
                                                                                            additional $50 billion over the next
                                                                                            decade. So businesses are subtly
                                                                                            beginning to accommodate the
                                                                                            needs of this major audience.
                                                                                              Subtle is a key word: boom-
                                                                                            ers do not like to be reminded
                                                                                            that they are aging. For instance,
                                                                                            many boomers dislike having
                                                                                            people talk slowly to them, so
                                                                                            ADT Security Services trains new
                                                                                            operators to talk quickly and get
                                                                                            to the point. CVS stores have
                                                                                            installed carpeting to reduce slip-
                                                                                            ping. Arm & Hammer sharpened
Group membership sometimes gives clues about your audience.                                 the color contrast on its cat litter
                                                                                            packaging and increased font
                                                                                            size 20%.
Eastern State rather than from Harvard may not matter, but how much the                        Euphemisms abound. ADT's
reader knows about accounting may. Does family structure matter? Some-                       medical-alert Systems are now
times. Some hotels and resorts offer family packages that include baby-sitting,             “companion services”; bathroom-
multiple bedrooms, and children’s activities.                                               fixture manufacturer Kohler has
   Age certainly matters. Mutual funds are aiming for young investors by low-                “belay” bars instead of grab bars
ering the minimum investment to less than the cost of an iPod, and simplify-                for showers; and Kimberly-Clark’s
                                                                                             Depends are sometimes labeled
ing choices.?                                                                                as underwear. Small packages of
   One aspect of age that gets much press is the differences between genera-                 Depends look like underwear and
tions in the office. Many older people believe younger workers have a sense of               hang on hooks rather than being
entitlement, that they expect great opportunities and perks without working                  stacked on shelves like diapers.
for them. On the other hand, many younger workers see their older colleagues
as rigid and hostile. Figure 2.2 shows some of the frequently mentioned age                  Adapted from Ellen Byron, “How to
                                                                                             Market to an Aging Boomer: Flattery,
differences. While awareness of generational differences may help in some                    Suberfuge, and Euphemism,” Wall
communication situations, such lists are also a good place to attach mental                  Street Journal, February 5, 2011, A1.
warnings against stereotypes. Plenty of baby boomers also like frequent posi-
tive feedback, and almost everyone likes a chance to make a difference.
   For most companies, income is a major demographic characteristic. In 2011,
Walmart quietly returned to its “everyday low prices” after experimenting
with low-priced sale products balanced by slightly higher prices elsewhere.
The new pricing had not appealed to Walmart’s financially strapped custom-
ers. The chain also returned shotguns and rifles to the shelves of many of its
stores in an attempt to attract more male customers.”
   Location is yet another major demographic characteristic. You can prob-
ably think of many differences between regional audiences, or urban/rural
audiences, in the United States. See Chapter 7 for more information on cross-
cultural audiences.
   Psychographic characteristics are qualitative rather than quantitative: val-
ues, beliefs, goals, and lifestyles. Knowing what your audience finds impor-
tant allows you to choose information and benefits that the audience will
find persuasive. The Choice and Gaylord hotel groups use semantic analysis
software on their customer satisfaction surveys. Results can be connected to
specific hotels, departments, shifts, employees, and rooms, allowing manag-
ers to track trends and respond to problems. Digital marketing companies are
combining consumers’ web surfing records with personal off-line data from
sources such as the Census Bureau, consumer research firms such as Nielsen,
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




32                                           Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


              Chinese Internet               Figure 2.2              Some Generational Differences in the Office
              Companies
                                                                             Baby Boomers                           Generation X and Millenials
            Chinese        Internet
            companies are best-               Birth Dates                     Between 1946 and 1964                 1964 and on
            ing their American                                                Long hours in office                  Productivity counts, not hours
                                              Work ethic
counterparts for Chinese users,                                                                                        at office
and part of the reason is that they
                                              Values                          Hard work; consistency;               Work-life balance; flexibility;
analyze their audience and give
                                                                                hierarchy; clearly defined             autonomy, informality; variety of
them what they want.
                                                                                roles; serious about                   challenges; the workplace can
     Baidu’s Internet search domi-                                                                                     be fun
                                                                                work
     nates Google's. One reason is
     that early on, Baidu’s search             Preferred channels             Face-to-face, e-mail                  Texting, social networks
     bar was longer and wider                  Motivators                     Duty to company                       Why a task is important; what's in
     than Google’s, an important                                                                                      it for them
     difference because Chinese
                                               Communication style          |Through channels and                    Freely offer opinions, both laterally
     characters are more complex
                                                                                 hierarchy; accept annual               and upward; want great
     than English letters, and
                                                                                 evaluation                             amounts of attention and praise;
     the larger bar makes them
                                                                                                                        want faster feedback
     clearer.
     Tencent Holdings popularized              Decorum                        Follow basic business                  May need to be reminded about
     instant messaging in China by                                               decorum                             basic business decorum
     pairing it with blogging and            nn                                                                           neat aE InnInSEIIINESSnSES SEER
                                                                                                                                                      Piper Fogg,
     online gaming, both highly              Sources: Ron Alsop, “The ‘Trophy Kids’ Go to Work,” Wall Street Journal, October 21, 2008, D1, D4; and
     popular in China. Now it has            “When Generations Collide,” Chronicle of Higher Education, July 18, 2008, B18.
     a bigger market value than
     Yahoo.                                  credit card and shopping histories, and real estate and motor vehicle records.
     Alibaba e-commerce site Tao-            The combined data allow marketers to reach narrowly defined audiences,
     bao added instant messaging             especially convenient for cable TV ads.°
     to allow buyers and sellers
     to haggle over prices, just as
     business is done off-line in             Analyzing the Organizational Culture
     China. eBay couldn’t com-                and the Discourse Community
     pete and closed its website in
     China.                                   Be sensitive to the culture in which your audiences work and the discourse
                                              community of which they are a part. Organizational culture is a set of values,
 Adapted from Loretta Chao, “Some-            attitudes, and philosophies. An organization’s culture is revealed verbally in
                                              the organization’s myths, stories, and heroes, as well as in documents such as
 thing Borrowed . . . ,” Wall Street Jour-
 nal, November 16, 2009, R4.
                                              employee manuals. It is revealed nonverbally through means such as dress
                                              codes, behavior standards, or the allocation of space, money, and power. A
                                              discourse community is a group of people who share assumptions about
                                              what channels, formats, and styles to use for communication, what topics to
                                              discuss and how to discuss them, and what constitutes evidence.
                                                 In an organization that values equality and individualism, you can write
                                              directly to the CEO and address him or her as a colleague. In other companies,
                                              you'd be expected to follow a chain of command. Some organizations prize
                                              short messages; some expect long, thorough documents. Messages that are
                                              consistent with the organization’s culture have a greater chance of succeeding.
                                                 You can begin to analyze an organization’s culture by asking the following
                                              questions:

                                                =    Is the organization tall or flat? Are there lots of levels between the CEO
                                                     and the lowest worker, or only a few?
                                                =    How do people get ahead? Are the organization’s rewards based on
                                                     seniority, education, being well-liked, saving money, or serving cus-
                                                     tomers? Are rewards available only to a few top people, or is everyone
                                                     expected to succeed?
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                          Chapter 2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                   33

                                                                                                          Write Your Way
                                                                                                          into Your New Job

                                                                                                          You can learn a bit
                                                                                                           about your organiza-
                                                                                               tion's discourse community by
                                                                                               listening to people and read-
                                                                                               ing the documents that other
                                                                                               people write. But the best way
                                                                                               to learn is to write. The feed-
                                                                                               back you get from your supervi-
                                                                                               sor will show you how to adapt
                                                                                               your writing for the particular
                                                                                               organization. To make the feed-
                                                                                               back most useful, categorize the
                                                                                               comments and generalize. Are
                                                                                               you being asked to provide spe-
                                                                                               cific supporting details? To write
                                                                                               so that people can understand
                                                                                               what you say without having to
                                                                                               reread? To use a more or less
                                                                                        Sia    formal style? To include lots of
                                                                                 e             charts or none at all?
Some companies are beginning to accept visible body art and long hair in traditional             Learning to adapt your con-
workplace cultures.                                                                            tent, structure,   and style to
                                                                                               the organization will make you
                                                                                               a more effective writer and a
                                                                                               more effective worker. And that

 =    Does the organization value diversity or homogeneity? Does it value                       means that more often you'll be
      independence     and creativity or being a team player and following                      able to get what you want in the
                                                                                                organization.
      orders?
 =    What stories do people tell? Who are the organization’s heroes and
      villains?
 =    How important are friendship and sociability? To what extent do work-
      ers agree on goals, and how intently do they pursue them?
 =    How formal are behavior, language, and dress?
 =    What does the work space look like? Do employees work in offices,
      cubicles, or large rooms?
 =    What are the organization’s goals? Making money? Serving cus-
      tomers and clients? Advancing knowledge? Contributing to the
      community?

   To analyze an organization’s          discourse community,          ask the following
questions:

  =   What media, formats, and styles are preferred for communication?
  =   What do people talk about? What topics are not discussed?
  =   What kind of and how much evidence is needed to be convincing?


CHOOSING CHANNELS TO REACH YOUR
AUDIENCE
A communication channel is the means by which you convey your message.
Communication channels vary in speed, accuracy of transmission, cost, num-
ber of messages carried, number of people reached, efficiency, and ability to
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




34                                                Part1    The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                      A Channel Pro               promote goodwill. Depending on the audience, your purposes, and the situa-
                                                  tion, one channel may be better than another.
                      Virgin   Atlantic    Air-
                   p) lines    (VAA)      uses
                                                     A written message makes it easier to
               ~      multiple channels to
              support its branding                        Present extensive or complex data.
 as a fun, innovative, honest, car-                       Present many specific details.
 ing, and value-offering airline.
                                                          Minimize undesirable emotions.
       The most-read portion of
       its Facebook page contains
                                                          Track details and agreements.
       travel tips from crew mem-
       bers, communication that                      Oral messages make it easier to
       comes across as honest and
       caring.             &                              Use emotion to help persuade the audience.
        Its website contains a “rapid                     Focus the audience’s attention on specific points.
        response” link to Twitter and
                                                          Resolve conflicts and build consensus.
        Facebook for up-to-date
        communications during                             Modify plans.
        crises.                                           Get immediate action or response.
        Its Vtravelled site allows cus-
        tomers to exchange travel                    Choosing the right channel can be tricky sometimes. Even in the office, you
        information and advice.
                                                  will have to decide if your message will be more effective as an e-mail, text
        Its Facebook Flight Status                message, phone call, visit, or sticky note posted on a colleague’s computer. In
        app was a first for any airline,
                                                  nonstandard situations, choosing a channel can be challenging. If you are the
                                                  head of a small, nonprofit literacy agency which helps adults learn to read,
        as was its iPhone app, Flight

                                                  how do you reach your clients? You cannot afford TV ads, and they cannot
        Tracker, which includes real-
        time aircraft positions.
                                                  read print channels such as flyers. If you are asafety officer for a manufacturer,
        In response to suggestions
        from its online community,
                                                  how do you send out product recall notifications? How many people file the
        it launched an airport taxi-
        sharing service.
       VAA's head of e-business says,
     “Twitter is no more than a sound                                        Geneon)
                                                                                CO CROP Cams
     bite. Facebook can be an article.
     The website is for in-depth detail.                                           A sweet idea to grow your bottom line.
     They all need to signpost each
     other.”

     Adapted from Patrick Barwise and
     Sean Meehan, “The One Thing You
     Must Get Right When Building a
     Brand,” Harvard Business Review 88,
     no. 12 (December 2010): 83-84.




                                                                            @                  FREE LOGO SETUP
                                                                                  ~                ASIOOV   !




                                                   M&M candies offer a sweet communication channel to organizations.
                                                                              Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                       Chapter 2        Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                                 35


contact-information cards when they purchase an item? If you are the ben-                                                            Trolling for Plaintiffs
efits manager in a large manufacturing plant, how will you get information                                                          Law firms are spend-
about your new benefits plan out to the thousand people on the floor? They                                                          ing millions to develop
don’t use computers at work and may not have computer access at home.                                                               their online presence—
    Businesses are becoming ever more savvy about using the array of chan-                                               and to get new clients. And this
nels. Ad money has been moving out of print and TV channels and into online                                              online spending is replacing more
                                                                                                                         traditional spending for yellow
advertising, which totaled $25 billion in 2010. Of those billions, $2 billion were
                                                                                                                         pages, TV, and radio ads.
spent on social media sites, Facebook in particular.®
                                                                                                                           Many of these online sites look
   Businesses use Twitter, YouTube, and Flickr to highlight new products and
                                                                                                                         like community forums or news
services. Many companies have interactive websites and forums where cus-                                                 boards. They are publicized on
tomers can get product information and chat about products; Amazon is the                                                forums such as Facebook and
prime example. Diaper companies are giving perks to “mommy” bloggers to                                                  Twitter. Many firms, knowing that
talk about their products; car companies are using strong social media influ-                                            people generally trust material
encers     to post their opinions online.” Nonprofits advertise                                 events, connect          they find in electronic searches
with volunteers, and schedule volunteer service on their Facebook pages. And                                             far more than they trust ads, are
all that social network chatter can now be mined by software which performs                                              also adding content so that their
semantic analyses providing feedback to advertisers about both products and                                              sites appear early in a Google
                                                                                                                         search.
audiences.
                                                                                                                            The marketing officer for one
    Even traditional paper channels are moving online. Publishers are making                                             such law firm told the Wall Street
their travel books into e-books and cell phone apps. Newspapers are expand-                                              Journal that people reaching the
ing from print to blogs, podcasts, and chatrooms. In fact, Warren Buffet himself                                         firm through social media were
warned the Washington Post, on whose board he served, that the paper-only                                                twice as likely to become clients
model would no longer work.’ In 2010, 41% of Americans got their national                                                as those who made contact
and international news from the Internet, surpassing newspapers (40%) for                                                through television or print.
the first time, and online advertising surpassed print newspaper advertising                                             Adapted from Nathan Koppel, “Using
for the first time.”                                                                                                     Social Networking as Legal Tool: Law
   The big three TV network newscasts are facing similar problems. Accord-                                               Firms Say They Are Turning to the
ing to the Pew Research Center, network evening news audiences have been                                                 Web to Develop Evidence for Suits
                                                                                                                         and Market Themselves to Potential
on a downward               trend for three decades. Staffers have been cut, as have                                     Clients,” Wall Street Journal, June 15,
bureaus and offices. Audience median age is now over 50.'° In response to                                                2010, B4.
declining viewership, networks are posting news in online stories and vid-
eos, as well as blogs.




                                 Heartlanders




                                                        1      atte

                                                      Young Digerati




                                Greenbelt Sports      Blue-Chip Blues       Close-In Couples   |


 Market research firm Claritas, Inc., combines demographic and psychographic data to identify 66 lifestyle segments,
 including “Young Digerati” (tech-savvy young adults), “Close-In Couples" (older, African-American couples), and
                                                                                                                    of
 “Blue-Chip Blues” (young families with well-paying blue-collar jobs). PRIZM is a trademark or registered trademark
 The Nielsen Company (US), LLC.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




36                                       Part1    The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


              Is It the Black Abyss         Creative uses of channels are appearing everywhere (for more on electronic
              for the White              channels, see Chapters 4 and 9):
              Pages?

                                                 Intel is using electronic billboards in New York’s Penn Station to pro-
     Wer    = White     pages    may
       4      become a relic as
                                          =
 more and more telecommunica-
                                                 mote its Smart TV technology. People with the appropriate mobile app
 tion companies       cease   to print
                                                 will be personally greeted by the signs.’
 paper copies.                            =      Popular bands such as Phish have developed their own apps, with fea-
   As land lines steadily decrease,              tures such as remixing tools and games, for their fates
 more and more people rely solely
                                           =     Toy maker Mattel is using Facebook, Twitter, and a series of eight webi-
 on their cell phones, whose num-
                                                 sodes to celebrate the 50th birthday of Barbie’s boyfriend Ken. The webi-
                                                 sodes allow Mattel to extend the audience to teenagers and adults who
 bers usually are not in the white

                                                 have an emotional tie with the toy and may be collectors.'*
 pages. Furthermore, those cell
 phones store frequently used
 numbers. For numbers not in               =     Dunkin’ Donuts quickie contest for people to submit pictures of them-
 their cell phones, most consum-                 selves drinking iced coffee in the winter generated 140 submissions and
 ers now check the Internet.                     3.9 million product plugs through posts and status updates.’
   Telecommunication companies
                                           =     Digital book store Wowio is selling ads on e-books readers download
 tout the change as an environ-
                                                 from its site.’°
 mentally friendly one. Verizon
 notes a savings of 17,000 tons of         =     Bill Cosby recorded a hip-hop album to help carry his message of edu-
 paper annually by switching to In-              cation and self-respect to new audiences. To sell its cleaning products,
 ternet listings in its 12-state area            Clorox put out an album, “The Blue Sky Project: A Clorox Charity Col-
 of operation.                                   lection.” Companies such as Procter & Gamble and Allstate also offer
                                                 full-length versions of tunes used in their ads. In regions such as the
                                                 United Kingdom and Asia, original songs featured in ads often become
 Adapted from Michael Felberbaum,
 “It's Looking Dark for White Pages of
 Phone Books,” Des Moines Register,              quite popular.'®
 November 12, 2010, 1A.
                                           =     Vienna, Austria, raised money for the main public library with a phone
                                                 sex hotline. Pay by the minute and you got to hear a famous Austrian
                                                 actress reading passages from the library’s collection of erotic fiction
                                                 from the 18th through 20th centuries.'”

                                             Creative channels abound. Ads are appearing on hotel shower curtains, the
                                          bellies of pregnant women, airport luggage conveyor belts, grocery check-
                                          out conveyors, sidewalks, and toilet stall doors. Ads inside subway tunnels
                                          appear to be in motion as trains ride by. One company prints ads on cardboard
                                          shirt hangers which are distributed free to cleaners. The hangers are touted as
                                          a good way to reach male consumers.'®
                                               As consumers become ever more savvy about ways to ignore advertising,
                                          one channel that has received publicity is the vivistitial: ads that take advan-
                                          tage of more receptive times in consumers’ lives. One much talked about
                                          example is the elevator ad. Captivate offers video programming, such as news
                                          headlines and weather, in elevators. The programming is not intrusive: screens
                                          are not huge and the video does not have sound. Recall of Captivate ads is two
                                          to four times higher than that of TV ads.’


                                          USING AUDIENCE ANALYSIS TO ADAPT
                                          YOUR MESSAGE
                                          Zeroing in on the right audience with the right message is frequently a for-
                                          mula for success. If you know your audience well and if you use words
                                          well, much of your audience analysis and adaptation will be unconscious.
                                          If you don’t know your audience or if the message is very important, take
                                          the time to analyze your audience formally and to revise your message with
                                          your analysis in mind. The questions in Figure 2.3 will help guide a careful
                                          analysis.
                                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter 2    Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                         37


                                                                                                                          A Zappos Channel
Figure 2.3            Analyzing Your Audience
                                                                                                                          [According    to Tony
  These questions will help you analyze your audience:                                                              “wm   Hsieh, founder and
     4. How will the audience initially react to the message?                                                             CEO      of    Zappos,
     2. How much information does the audience need?                                                                    the popular Internet
                                                                                                            footwear business], “There’s a lot
     3. What obstacles must you overcome?
                                                                                                            of buzz these days about ‘social
     4. What positive aspects can you emphasize?                                                            media’ and ‘integration market-
     5. What are the audience’s expectations about the appropriate language, content,                       ing.’ As unsexy and low-tech as
        and organization of messages?                                                                       it may sound, our belief is that
     6. How will the audience use the document?                                                             the telephone is one of the best
                                                                                                            branding devices out there. You
                                                                                                            have the customer's         undivided
                                                                                                            attention for five to ten minutes,
   As you answer these questions for a specific audience, think about the orga-                             and ifyou get the interaction right,
nizational culture in which the person works. At every point, your audience’s                               what we've found is that the cus-
reaction is affected not only by his or her personal feelings and preferences                               tomer remembers the experience
but also by the political environment of the organization, the economy, and                                 for a very long time and tells his
current events.                                                                                             or her friends about it.

                                                                                                               “At Zappos, we don’t measure
1. How Will the Audience Initially React to the Message?                                                     call times (our longest phone call

a. Will the audience see this message as important? Audiences will                                          was almost six hours long}). . . .
                                                                                                            We don’t have scripts because
read and act on messages they see as important to their own careers; they may                               we trust our employees to use
ignore messages that seem unimportant to them.                                                              their best judgment when dealing
   When the audience may see your message as unimportant, you need to                                       with each and every customer. . . .
                                                                                                            We're trying to build a lifelong re-
 =     Usea subject line or first paragraph that shows your reader this message                             lationship with each customer one
       is important and relevant.                                                                           phone call at a time.”

 =     Make the action as easy as possible.                                                                  Quoted from Tony Hsieh, Delivering
                                                                                                             Happiness: A Path to Profits, Passion,
       Suggest a realistic deadline for action.                                                              and Purpose (New York: Business
 =     Keep the message as short as possible.                                                                Plus, 2010), 143-45. With permission
                                                                                                             from Central Grand Publishing.



 STONE SOUP                                                                                                               BY JAN ELIOT




 STONE SOUP © 2006 Jan Eliot. Reprinted with permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. Alll rights reserved.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




38                                       Part1    The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


             Customer Analysis           b. How will the fact that the message is from you affect the audience’s
            According to Harvey
                                         reaction? Theaudience’s experience with you and your organization shapes
            Mackay, author of the        the way they respond to this new message. Someone who thinks well of you
            business __ bestseller       and your organization will be prepared to receive your message favorably;
Swim with the Sharks without             someone who thinks poorly of you and the organization will be quick to find
Being Eaten Alive, the Golden            fault with what you say and the way you say it.
Rule of sales is Know Your Cus-             When your audience has negative feelings about your organization, your
 tomer.   Your customers     are not     position, or you personally, you need to
 companies, but rather the indi-
 viduals at companies who decide
 whether or not to buy your goods         =      Make a special effort to avoid phrases that could seem condescending,
 or services. To analyze these                   arrogant, rude, hostile, or uncaring.
 buyers, he has developed a
                                          =      Use positive emphasis (Chapter 3) to counteract the natural tendency to
 66-question customer profile, the
 Mackay 66.
                                                 sound defensive.
   The profile includes questions         =      Develop logic and benefits fully.
 about such topics as the individ-
 ual’s education, spouse, children,
 politics, religion, activities, hob-
 bies, vacations, cars, personal-        2. How Much Information Does the Audience Need?
 ity, personal goals, and business
 goals. In addition to typical ques-     a. How much does the audience already know about this subject? It’s
 tions you might expect, such as         easy to overestimate the knowledge an audience has. People outside your own
 employment record, the profile          immediate unit may not really know what it is you do. Even people who once
 also asks about                         worked in your unit may have forgotten specific details now that their daily
 =   Status symbols in office.           work is in management. People outside your organization won’t know how
 =   Sensitive items to be avoided.      your organization does things.
 =   Subjects arousing strong                  When some of your information is new to the audience, you need to
     feelings.
 =   Favorite conversation topics.
                                           ™ Make a special effort to be clear. Define terms, explain concepts, use
   Mackay uses the information in
                                             examples, avoid acronyms.
 these profiles to meet the needs
 of his customers. (He says he also        = Link new information to old information that the audience already
 guards it with his life, because he         knows.
 knows how sensitive it is.)               = Use paragraphs and headings to break up new information into related
 Adapted from Harvey Mackay, “Know-
                                             chunks so that the information is easier to digest.
 ing Your Customer Is Key,” Des Moines     m Test a draft of your document with your reader or a subset of your
 Register, November 29, 2010, 6E.            intended audience to see whether the audience can understand and use
                                             what you've written.



                                         b. Does the audience’s knowledge need to be updated or
                                         corrected? Our personal experience guides our expectations and actions,
                                         but sometimes needs to be corrected. If you’re trying to change someone’s
                                         understanding of something, you need to


                                           =     Acknowledge the audience’s initial understanding early in the
                                                 message.
                                           =     Use examples, statistics, or other evidence to show the need for the
                                                 change, or to show that the audience’s experience is not universal.
                                           =     Allow the audience to save face by suggesting that changed circum-
                                                 stances call for new attitudes or action.
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter 2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                       39


c. What aspects of the subject does the audience need to be aware of                                      Tiny Marketing
to appreciate your points? When the audience must think of background                                      In its goal of attract-
or old information to appreciate your points, you can                                                      ing 1 billion additional
                                                                                                           consumers,       Procter

 =       Preface information with “As you know” or “As you may remember”                                   & Gamble is adding

         to avoid suggesting that you think the audience does not know what                  new marketing techniques to
                                                                                             its arsenal. Since most of these
         you're saying.                                                                      potential customers are poor
 =       Put old or obvious information in a subordinate clause.                             women in developing countries
                                                                                             who buy single-use packets of
                                                                                             products such as shampoo,
3. What Obstacles Must You Overcome?                                                         soap, and detergent, P&G is
a. Is your audience opposed to what you have to say? People who                              packaging its products in small
                                                                                             portions. The small packages
have already made up their minds are highly resistant to change. When the                    also please the tiny mom-and-
audience will oppose what you have to say, you need to                                       pop stores, many just kiosks or
                                                                                             closet-sized stores, which serve
 = Start your message with any areas of agreement or common ground that                      these customers. These stores
   you share with your audience.                                                              aggregated are P&G's largest

 m Make a special effort to be clear and unambiguous. Points that might be                    customer, larger even than Wal-
                                                                                              Mart. To attract owners, P&G
   clear to a neutral audience can be misinterpreted by someone opposed                       employs local agents who tidy
   to the message.                                                                            and price P&G in-store products,
 = Make a special effort to avoid statements that will anger the audience.                    distribute promotional items, and
 = Limit your statement or request to the smallest possible area. If parts of                 stock shelves—sparing owners
   your message could be delivered later, postpone them.                                      trips to distributors.
                                                                                                 P&G is also developing spe-
 = Show that your solution is the best solution currently available, even                     cial products just for these mar-
   though it isn’t perfect.                                                                   kets. One example is feminine
                                                                                              hygiene       products.      Because
b. Will it be easy for the audience to do as you ask?                Everyone has a set      ‘many customers lack the money
of ideas and habits and a mental self-image. If we’re asked to do something                   and privacy to change pads fre-
that violates any of those, we first have to be persuaded to change our attitudes             quently, P&G developed a low-
or habits or self-image—a change we’re reluctant to make.                                     priced, extra-absorbent           pad,
   When your request is time-consuming, complicated, or physically or psy-                    which is now the leading prod-
                                                                                               uct in Mexico.
chologically difficult, you need to
                                                                                                 What unique marketing prac-
                                                                                              tices have you noticed in other
 =     Make the action as easy as possible.                                                    countries?
 =     Break down complex actions into a list, so the audience can check off                  Adapted from Ellen Byron, “P&G's
       each step as it is completed. This list will also help ensure complete                 Global Target: Shelves of Tiny Stores:
       responses.                                                                             It Woos Poor Women Buying Single

     = Show that what you ask is consistent with some aspect of what the audi-
                                                                                              Portions; Mexico’s ‘Hot Zones,’” Wall
                                                                                              Street Journal, July 16, 2007, A1.
       ence believes.
     = Show how the audience (not just you or your organization) will benefit
       when the action is completed.

4. What Positive Aspects Can You Emphasize?
 a. From the audience’s point of view, what are the benefits of your
 message?    Benefits help persuade the audience that your ideas are good ones.
 Make the most of the good points inherent in the message you want to convey.

     m    Put good news first.
     =    Use audience benefits that go beyond the basic good news.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




40                                          Part1    The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


             Customer Service               b. What experiences, interests, goals, and values do you share with
ve           Channels                       the audience? A sense of solidarity with someone can be an even more
             “If you think the privacy      powerful reason to agree than the content of the message itself. When
   =         of your medical infor-         everyone in your audience shares the same experiences, interests, goals, and
 mation has been compromised,               values, you can
 you can file a complaint with the
 Office for Civil Rights. A brochure
 distributed by this office tells            =      Consider using a vivid anecdote to remind the audience of what you
 people they can call and ‘ask for
                                                    share. The details of the anecdote should be interesting or new; other-
 a civil-rights or privacy-complaint                wise, you may seem to be lecturing the audience.
 form.                                       =      Use asalutation and close that remind the audience of their membership
     “But you can’t really ask for                  in this formal or informal group.
 anything, because when you Call
 the number, you can’t get a per-
 son on the line.                           5. What Are the Audience’s Expectations about the
   “An automated voice thanks               Appropriate Language, Content, and Organization
 you for calling and then breaks
 the news:
                                            of Messages?
   “We're sorry, a Staff person is          a. What style of writing does the audience prefer? Good writers adapt
 not able to receive your call. This        their style to suit the reader’s preferences. A reader who sees contractions as
 number is not able to receive              too informal needs a different style from one who sees traditional business
 messages.’
                                            writing as too stuffy. As you write,
   “Callers are directed to a web-
 site to file a complaint. Twice.
 And if you don’t have a com-                 =     Use what you know about your reader to choose a more or less formal,
 puter, . . . [t]he voice tells you . . .           more or less friendly style.
 ‘most local libraries have com-              =     Use the reader’s first name in the salutation only if both of you are com-
 puters available that residents
                                                    fortable with a first-name basis.
 can use to access the Internet at
 no extra cost.’”*
    Is this an ethical way to distrib-      b. Are there hot buttons or “red flag” words that may create an
 ute information? What groups               immediate negative response?           You don’t have time to convince the
 of people does this channel dis-           audience that a term is broader or more neutral than his or her understanding.
 criminate against? Do you know             When you need agreement or approval, you should
 of other organizations that com-
 municate only through the web?
                                              =     Avoid terms that carry emotional charges for many people: for example,
 *Quoted from “Not Exactly a Model for              criminal, un-American, feminist, fundamentalist, liberal.
 Customer Service,” Des Moines Reg-
 ister, August 23, 2008, 14A.                 =     Use your previous experience with individuals to replace any terms that
                                                    have particular negative meanings for them.

                                            c. How much detail does the audience want? A message that does
                                            not give the audience the amount of or kind of detail they want may fail.
                                            Sometimes you can ask your audience how much detail they want. When you
                                            write to people you do not know well, you can

                                              =     Provide all the detail they need to understand and act on your message.
                                              =     Group chunks of information under headings so that readers can
                                                    go directly to the parts of the message they find most interesting and
                                                    relevant.
                                              =     Be sure that a shorter-than-usual document covers the essential points;
                                                    be sure that a longer-than-usual document is free from wordiness and
                                                    repetition.

                                             d. Does the audience prefer a direct orindirectorganization?   Individual
                                             personality or cultural background may lead someone to prefer a particular
                                             kind of structure. You'll be more effective if you use the structure and
                                             organization your audience prefers.
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                      41


                                                                                                      Audience Is Not a
6. How Will the Audience Use the Document?                                                            Mystery for Her
a. Under what physical conditions will the audience use the,                                  Every year,     mystery
document?      Reading a document in a quiet office calls for no special care. But            writer  Mary     Higgins
suppose the audience will be reading your message on the train commuting                      Clark sells 3.7 million
home, or on a ladder as he or she attempts to follow instructions. Then the        copies of her books; in fact, she
physical preparation of the document can make it easier or harder to use.          has sold over 100 million copies
   When the reader will use your document outside an office,                       in the United States alone.
                                                                                              Perhaps the biggest factor in
                                                                                            her success is her careful audi-
 =     Use lots of white space.                                                             ence analysis; she gives her audi-
 =     Make the document small enough to hold in one hand.                                  ence what they want. In her case,
 =     Number items so the reader can find his or her place after an interruption.          this means intelligent women in
                                                                                            danger who unravel sinister plots
                                                                                            and often help engineer their own
b. Will the audience use the document as a general reference? As a                          escapes. Her heroines tend to be
specific guide? Understanding how your audience will use the document                       self-made professionals.
will enable you to choose the best pattern of organization and the best level of               Because her novels are always
detail.                                                                                     “G-rated” (no cursing, no living
      If the document will serve as a general reference,                                    together before marriage, no
                                                                                             explicit depictions of violence),
                                                                                            they are a favorite of mother—
 = Use a specific subject line to aid in filing and retrieval. If the document               daughter book clubs and sell
   is online, consider using several keywords to make it easy to find the                    heavily for Mother's Day, the third
   document in a database search program.                                                    biggest book-selling holiday of
                                                                                             the year (Father’s Day and Christ-
 = Use headings within the document so that readers can skim it.                             mas are bigger).
 = Give the office as well as the person to contact so that the reader can get
   in touch with the appropriate person some time from now.                                  Adapted from Alexandra Alter, “The
                                                                                             Case of the Best-Selling Author: How
 = Spell out details that may be obvious now but might be forgotten in a year.               a Former Pan-Am Stewardess Has
                                                                                             Stayed at the Top of the Publishing
                                                                                             Game Since 1975,” Wall Street Jour-
                                                                                             nal, March 25, 2011, D1.
      If the document will be a detailed guide or contain instructions,


  =     Check to be sure that all the steps are in chronological order.
  =     Number steps so that readers can easily see which steps they’ve
        completed.
  =     Group steps into five to seven categories if there are many individual
        steps.
  =     Put any warnings at the beginning of the document; then repeat them
        just before the specific step to which they apply.



 AUDIENCE ANALYSIS WORKS
 Audience analysis is a powerful tool. Amazon.com tracks users’ online his-
 tories to make suggestions on items they might like. Nintendo believes that
 much of its success is extending its concept of audience. An important part of
 its audience is hard-core gamers, a very vocal group—they love to blog. But
 if Nintendo listened just to them, they would be the only audience Nintendo
 had. Instead, Nintendo extended its audience by creating the Wii, a new sys-
 tem that the hard-core gamers had not imagined and one that is collecting
 new users who never imagined owning a system at all.2° With the introduc-
 tion of Wii Fit, Nintendo is expanding its audience to more women and even
 senior citizens.
    Best Buy uses its extensive customer feedback to tweak its private-label elec-
 tronics. The company noticed, for instance, that many portable DVD players
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




42                                         Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


             Audience Analysis
             at the Front Line

     i       Some      major busi-
             nesses    are sending
their executives out to the front
lines for a day or more to increase
awareness of both clients’ and
employees’ needs. Such stints
are bringing changes to the
front lines. A Loews executive
who served as a bellhop, pool
attendant, and housekeeper at a
Florida hotel sweated so much in
his polyester uniform that he had
both the style and material of the
uniforms altered. Executives at
DaVita, a firm that runs kidney                                                             YOU HAVE THE VISION TO IMPROVE YOUR COMMUNITY.
                                                                                            NOW.HERE’S YOUR OPPORTUNITY TO BRING IT TO LIFE.
dialysis centers, learn that patient
needs must come first, even
before company paperwork.
   Other companies which send
executives out to be low-level
workers include Walt Disney,
 Continental Airlines, Sysco, and
 Amazon.com.
   What do you think executives
 learn on the front lines at these
 companies? Can you think of
                                           The U.S. Census Bureau prepared over 100 posters, similar to this one, to reach various
 other companies that would ben-           segments of its audience.
 efit from similar programs for their                                                 United States Census    2010,   http://2010.census.gov/partners/materials/
                                           Source: “Posters,” U.S. Census   Bureau:
 executives?                               posters-materials.php.

 Adapted from Joann S. Lublin, “Top
 Brass Try Life in the Trenches: To Pro-   were purchased for young children. So they developed a spill-resistant model
 mote Understanding, Firms Require
 Executives to Perform Entry-Level
                                           with rubberized edges that became a top seller.”
 Jobs,” Wall Street Journal, June 25,         Tesco PLC, Britain's largest retailer, signs up customers for its Clubcard.
 2007, B1, B3.                             The card gives customers discounts, and it gives Tesco audience data. When
                                           Tesco added Asian herbs and ethnic foods in Indian and Pakistani neighbor-
                                           hoods, the data showed the products were also popular with affluent white
                                           customers, so Tesco expanded its roll-out. When customers buy diapers the
                                           first time, they get coupons for usual baby products such as wipes and toys.
                                           They also get coupons for beer, because the data show that new fathers buy
                                           more beer.

                                            AUDIENCE BENEFITS
                                            Use your analysis of your audience to create effective audience benefits,
                                            advantages that the audience gets by using your services, buying your prod-
                                            ucts, following your policies, or adopting your ideas. In informative mes-
                                            sages, benefits give reasons to comply with the information you announce and
                                            suggest that the information is good. In persuasive messages, benefits give
                                            reasons to act and help overcome audience resistance. Negative messages do
                                            not use benefits.

                                            Characteristics of Good Audience Benefits
                                            Good benefits meet four criteria. Each of these criteria suggests a technique for
                                            writing good benefits.
                                                              Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                            Chapter 2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                       43




                                                                                                 “
                                                                                                              Witness.org: Sharing
1. Adapt benefits to the audience.              When you write to different audiences,
                                                                                                              Evidence of Human
you may need to stress different benefits. Suppose that you manufacture a                                     Rights Abuses
product and want to persuade dealers to carry it. The features you may cite in ads
directed toward customers—stylish colors, sleek lines, convenience, durability,                               “For the past 16 years

good price—won’t convince dealers. Shelf space is at a premium, and no dealer                      Witness has provided video cam-
                                                                                                   eras to carefully selected activists
carries all the models of all the brands available for any given product. Why                      and community leaders in more
should the dealer stock your product? To be persuasive, talk about the features                    than 100 countries. The group
that are benefits from the dealer’s point of view: turnover, profit margin, the                    has amassed one of the largest
national advertising campaign that will build customer awareness and interest,                     existing collections of human-
the special store displays you offer that will draw attention to the product.                      rights-abuse footage and has
                                                                                                   shown its videos to policy mak-
2. Stress intrinsic as well as extrinsic motivators.                  Intrinsic motivators         ers and human-rights groups
come automatically from using a product or doing something. Extrinsic                              around the world.”
motivators are “added on.” Someone in power decides to give them; they do                             The graphic and disturbing
not necessarily come from using the product or doing the action. Figure 2.4                         nature of these videos make
gives examples of extrinsic and intrinsic motivators for three activities.                         them difficult to distribute to pub-
   Intrinsic motivators or benefits are better than extrinsic motivators for two                    lic forums (such as YouTube),
                                                                                                   where user guidelines prevent
reasons:
                                                                                                    anyone from sharing violent or
                                                                                                    sexually explicit material. Instead,
 =      There just aren’t enough extrinsic motivators for everything you want                       Witness created their own ver-
        people to do. You can’t give a prize to every customer every time he or                     sion    of YouTube—http://hub.
        she places an order or to every subordinate who does what he or she is                     witness.org/—where            anyone
        supposed to do.                                                                             can submit video clips of human
                                                                                                    rights abuses, and anyone can
 m      Research shows that extrinsic motivators may actually make people less                      log in and view the evidence.
        satisfied with the products they buy or the procedures they follow.                           Witness’ video evidence has
                                                                                                    led to war crimes prosecutions
   In a groundbreaking study of professional employees, Frederick Herz-                             and put pressure on govern-
berg found that the things people said they liked about their jobs were all                         ments to change their policies.
intrinsic motivators—pride in achievement, an enjoyment of the work itself,                           How does Witness’ approach
responsibility. Extrinsic motivators—pay, company policy—were sometimes                             demonstrate a keen understand-
mentioned as things people disliked, but they were never cited as things that                       ing of audience analysis? What
motivated or satisfied them. People who made a lot of money still did not                           “audience benefits” does their
mention salary as a good point about the job or the organization.”                                  website address? What ethical

   Steak ‘n Shake restaurant chain wanted to find out what motivated its                            concerns might there be about

employees to do their best at work. The company learned that what employ-
                                                                                                    publishing graphic video evi-
                                                                                                    dence on a public website?
ees want more than money is respect and the feeling that management listens
to them and values their input.                                                                     Quoted and adapted from David
                                                                                                    Kushner, “In Your Eyes: Peter Gabri-

3. Prove benefits with clear logic and explain them in adequate                                     els Human-Rights Group Embraces
                                                                                                    Social Media. A YouTube for Unseen
detail. Anaudience benefit is a claim or assertion that the audience will benefit                   Atrocities,” Fast Company, November
if they do something. Convincing the audience, therefore, involves two steps:                       2008, 80-2.
making sure that the benefit really will occur, and explaining it to the audience.


 Figure 2.4            Extrinsic and Intrinsic Motivators
  Activity                             Extrinsic motivator                    Intrinsic motivator

                                       Getting a commission                   Pleasure in convincing someone; pride in using
     Making a sale
                                                                                your talents to think of a strategy and execute it
  Turning in a suggestion to a         Getting a monetary reward when         Solving a problem at work; making the work
       company suggestion system         the suggestion is implemented           environment a little more pleasant

     Writing a report that solves an   Getting praise, a good performance     Pleasure in having an effect on an organization;
        organizational problem            appraisal, and maybe a raise          pride in using your skills to solve problems;
                                                                                solving the problem itself
 U
 aa NI E
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




44                     Part1     The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                         If the logic behind a claimed benefit is faulty or inaccurate, there’s no way to
                       make that particular benefit convincing. Revise the benefit to make it logical.
                             Faulty logic:         Moving your account information into Excel will save you time.
                             Analysis:             If you have not used Excel before, in the short run it will probably take
                                                   you longer to work with your account information using Excel. You may
                                                   have been pretty good with your old system!

                             Revised benefit:      Moving your account information into Excel will allow you to prepare
                                                   your monthly budget pages with a few clicks of a button.

                          If the logic is sound, making that logic evident to the audience is a matter of
                       providing enough evidence and showing how the evidence proves the claim
                       that there will be a benefit. Always provide enough detail to be vivid and con-
                       crete. You'll need more detail in the following situations:

                                The audience may not have thought of the benefit before.
                         =      The benefit depends on the difference between the long run and the
                                short run.
                         =      The audience will be hard to persuade, and you need detail to make the
                                benefit vivid and emotionally convincing.

                          The apparel industry, which is actively seeking a middle-aged and baby
                       boomer audience, is using details to attract them. Slacks may offer slimming
                       panels, and jeans may offer stretch waists and room for padded hips and
                       thighs. Tops may cover upper arms. The potential market is huge. Women
                       over 35 bought over half the annual $100 billion spent on women’s apparel
                       purchases.”




                        Until recently, Islamic women who wanted to go swimming had a problem. To meet their
                        customers’ needs, the Australian company Ahiida now makes hooded full-bodied bathing
                        suits, called Burqinis, for Muslim women who wish to go swimming while still maintain-
                        ing the Islamic customs of full body coverage.
                         Source: Lisa Miller, “Belief Watch: Surf's Up!” Newsweek,   January 29, 2007, 15.
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                          Chapter 2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                        45


4. Phrase benefits in you-attitude.       If benefits aren’t worded with you-                                No Substitute for
                                                                                                             Face Time
attitude (Chapter 3), they’ll sound selfish and won't be as effective as they
could be. It doesn’t matter how you phrase benefits while you're brainstorming                                 In the face of global-
and developing them, but in your final draft, check to be sure that you've used                                ization and remote
you-attitude.                                                                                                  video feeds that simul-
                                                                                                taneously connect workers and
  Lacks you-attitude:   We have the lowest prices in town.                                      clients all around the world, face-
  You-attitude:         At Havlichek Cars, you get the best deal in town.                       to-face meetings are still critical
                                                                                                in global business. Culturally, the
                                                                                                world is still incredibly diverse, and
Ways to Identify and Develop Audience Benefits                                                  to make global coalitions, such as
                                                                                                launching a Coca-Cola bottling
Brainstorm lots of benefits—perhaps twice as many as you'll need. Then you                      plant in Albania a few years ago,
can choose the ones that are most effective for your audience, or that you can                  meeting the right people in person
develop most easily. The first benefit you think of may not be the best.                        was crucial for Coke’s CEO.
   Sometimes benefits will be easy to think of and to explain. When they are                       Another example is MTV in the
harder to identify or to develop, use the following steps to identify and then                   center of Islamic nations. Would it
develop good benefits.                                                                           be possible to enter MTV into the
                                                                                                 Arabian market without offend-

4. Identify the needs, wants, and feelings that may motivate your
                                                                                                 ing the religious institutions of this
                                                                                                 region? Not without many carefully
audience.         All of us have basic needs, and most of us supplement those
                                                                                                 planned, face-to-face meetings.
needs with possessions or intangibles we want. We need enough food to                            The chief of MTV Networks Inter-
satisfy nutritional needs, but we may want our diet to make us look sexy. We                     national managed to accomplish
need basic shelter, but we may want our homes to be cozy, luxurious, or green.                   the establishment of MTV Arabia
And our needs and wants are strongly influenced by our feelings. We may feel                     by convincing the mayor of Mecca
safer in a more expensive car, even though research does not show that car as                    that the new station would pro-
being safer than cheaper models.                                                                 vide educational opportunities and
                                                                                                 would not show skin.
2. Identify the objective features of your product or policy that could                             Collaborative         technologies

meet the needs you've identified.               Sometimes just listing the audience’s             such as videoconferencing may

needs makes it obvious which feature meets a given need. Sometimes several
                                                                                                 be convenient and less expensive
                                                                                                 than frequent flying, but technol-
features together meet the need. Try to think of all of them.                                    ogy simply cannot take the place
   Suppose that you want to persuade people to come to the restaurant you                        of physically sitting down with a
manage. It’s true that everybody needs to eat, but telling people they can                       colleague or client to solve prob-
satisfy their hunger needs won't persuade them to come to your restaurant                        lems and form alliances.
rather than going somewhere else or eating at home. Depending on what fea-
tures your restaurant offered, you could appeal to one or more of the follow-
                                                                                                 Adapted from Tom Lowry et al., “It's
                                                                                                 All About the Face-to-Face,” Busi-
ing subgroups:                                                                                   nessWeek, January 28, 2008, 48-51.

    Subgroup                           Features to meet the subgroup’s needs
    People who work                    A quick lunch; a relaxing place to take
    outside the home                   clients or colleagues
    Parents with small                 High chairs, children’s menus, and toys to
    children                           keep the kids entertained while they wait
                                       for their order
    People who eat out a lot           Variety both in food and in decor
    People on tight budgets            Economical food; a place where they don’t
                                       need to tip (cafeteria or fast food)
    People on special diets            Low-sodium and low-carb dishes;
                                       vegetarian food; kosher food
    People to whom                     Music or a floor show; elegant
    eating out is part of an            surroundings; reservations so they can get
    evening’s entertainment             to a show or event after dinner; late hours
                                        so they can come to dinner after a show or
                                        game
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




46                                       Part1     The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


             A Song Becomes a               Whenever you’re communicating with customers or clients about features
             Star Channel                that are not unique to your organization, it’s wise to present both benefits of
              Wavin'’ Flag, a song       the features themselves and benefits of dealing with your company. If you talk
              by Somali-Canadian         about the benefits of the new healthy choices in children’s menus but don’t
              hip-hop artist K’naan,     mention your own revised menu, people may go somewhere else!
became a World Cup anthem
and top iTunes hit in 17 coun-
                                         3. Show how the audience can meet their needs with the features of
                                         the policy or product. Features alone rarely motivate people. Instead, link
tries. It also was the centerpiece
 of Coca-Cola's largest marketing
 campaign,    which reached 160
                                         the feature to the audience’s needs—and provide details to make the benefit
 countries.
                                         vivid.
   Coke liked K’naan’s multina-                Weak:     You get quick service.
 tional upbringing and the song's
 melody and chorus.           K’naan           Better:   If you only have an hour for lunch, try our Business Buffet. Within minutes, you
 recorded versions of the song                           can choose from a variety of main dishes, vegetables, and a make-your-Own-
 with various multinational pop                          sandwich-and-salad bar. You’ll have a lunch that’s as light or filling as you want,
 stars to increase its appeal.                           with time to enjoy it—and still be back to the office on time.
   Coke put the profits from the
 sale of Wavin’ Flag downloads
 into its Replenish Africa Initiative,
 a $30 million effort to provide
                                         AUDIENCE BENEFITS WORK
 clean water and better sanitation       Appropriate audience benefits work so well that organizations spend much
 on that continent.                      time and money identifying them and then developing them.
 Adapted from Duane D. Stanford,
 “Coke’s World Cup Song Hits the           =  Procter & Gamble increased the market share of Gain detergent, and
 High Notes,” Bloomberg Business-
 week, July 19, 2010, 24-25.
                                              saw annual sales of over a billion dollars, by focusing on a benefit their
                                              audience considered important: the scent.”
                                           = Hotels study which benefits are worth the money, and which are not.
                                              Holiday Inn keeps restaurants and bars in all their hotels, even though
                                              they are not money makers, but does not have bellhops. Staybridge
                                              Suites cleans less often but has “Sundowner receptions” which give
                                              guests a free meal and a chance to socialize.””
                                           = The Daily Sun, a South African tabloid, is gaining market share, when
                                              other newspapers are losing it, by focusing on stories—soccer, sex, soap
                                              operas, local witches, supernatural events like evil flying tortoises—its
                                              audience wants to read. This audience, primarily newly enfranchised
                                              black Africans, has given the paper an audited paid circulation of over a
                                              half million.”
                                           = Many companies offer their employees health benefits, an arrangement
                                              that benefits both the company and employee. Meredith Corporation,
                                              publisher of magazines such as Better Homes and Gardens, Family Cir-
                                              cle, and Parents, pays for employee health screenings. Employees who
                                              accept the offer get $300 off their health insurance cost; Meredith gets a
                                              decrease in corporate health care costs.”?
                                            = Companies branching out into servicing their products find that they
                                               are more successful if they offer benefits in addition to cost saving. One
                                               truck company offers its customers fleet-management services, includ-
                                               ing monitoring fuel consumption and showing drivers how to increase
                                               their gas mileage. This service in turn helps its customers appeal to envi-
                                                  ronmentally concerned clients such as government agencies.


                                             Remember that audience benefits must be appropriate for the audience
                                          before they work. Tylenol tried a new ad campaign that said, “We put our
                                          love into Tylenol.” Upset customers who remembered the Tylenol cyanide
                                          poisonings wrote in saying they didn’t want anyone putting anything into
                                          their Tylenol.)
                                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                      Chapter 2     Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                                    47


                                                                                                                                     Localizing Incentive
                                                                                                                                     Programs


                                            Now That’s Fast Food                                                                     Incentive      programs
                                                                                                                                    are employee ben-
                                                                                                                                    efits aimed to reward
                                            To pump up business 24/7, McDonald's has sped up
                                                                                                                        good work performances. Glo-
                                            its new-product introductions. Here's its secret recipe:
                                                                                                                        balization has complicated such
                                                                                                                        programs, because what works
                                            Make it easy                         :Make it easy                          in one country may not work in
                                            to eat                                to prepare                            another.
                                            McDonald’s does more than half : McDonald's restaurant crews                   In the United States, top per-
                                            its business at drive-through      turn over entirely within a year,        formers     might be rewarded
                                            windows. That means it needs       on average. To maintain                  with an expensive luxury item
                                            snacks and meals that can be       consistency amid this churn,             such as a watch. In China or
                                            held in one hand while the other : tasks must be simple to learn            India, a moped might be more
                                            is on the steering wheel.          and repeat.
                                                                                                                        appropriate.
                                                                                                                           Travel awards may also differ.
                                             Make it                              Make what the -                       US employees generally prefer
                                             quick                                customers want                        unstructured, leisurely vacations,
                                             It's called fast food for a         McDonald's prowls the market           such as those offered by beach
                                             reason. McDonald's tests all        for new products and then               resorts. Europeans tend to prefer
                                             new products for cooking times      spends months in carefully              more adventurous trips, perhaps
                                             so customers don’t have to wait     monitored field tests to ensure         including a strenuous mountain
                                             even a second longer than           that people will buy its new
                                                                                                                         hike or rafting trip. Many Chinese
                                             absolutely necessary.               concoctions.
                                                                             L
                                                                             EOE
                                                                             EES
                                                                             ESEEHERESEHHEHETEHH
                                                                              LTTE
                                                                              EE
                                                                              CER
                                                                              POORER
                                                                                                                   ae    prefer highly structured tours with
                                                                                                                         carefully planned itineraries.
McDonald’s plans menu items to meet the needs and expectations of customers, employ-                                        Religion can also be a factor.
ees, and franchise owners.
                                                                                                                         Many U.S. employees would
Source: From Michael Arndt, “Special Report: McDonald's,” Reprinted from the February 5, 2007 issue of BusinessWeek.     appreciate a trip to Las Vegas,
Used with permission of Bloomberg L. P. Copyright © 2011. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                         with a complimentary bottle of
                                                                                                                         champagne in their room. But
                                                                                                                         many religious people in the Mid-
   Sometimes it is hard to know what your audience wants. A classic example                                              dle East or Asia would not want
is “feature creep” in electronic goods. Unfortunately, consumers seem to want                                            the gambling or the alcohol.
lots of features in their electronics when they buy them, but then become frus-                                             What     are some      employee
trated trying to use them and return the devices. In the United States, product                                           incentives you can name that

returns cost $100 billion.** Research has shown that over half the wares are in                                          would be appropriate in one
                                                                                                                          country but not another? What
complete working order; consumers just cannot operate them.°*?                                                            are some ways large firms can
                                                                                                                          work with these differences?

WRITING OR SPEAKING TO MULTIPLE                                                                                          Adapted from Irwin Speizer, “Good Inten-

AUDIENCES WITH DIFFERENT NEEDS
                                                                                                                         tions, Lost in Translation,”   Workforce
                                                                                                                         Management, November 21, 2005,
                                                                                                                         http://www.workforce.com/archive/
Many business and administrative messages go not to a single person but to a                                             feature/benefits-compensations/good-
larger audience. When the members of your audience share the same interests                                              intentions-lost-translatiorvindex.php.

and the same level of knowledge, you can use the principles outlined above
for individual readers or for members of homogeneous groups. But often dif-
ferent members of the audience have different needs.
   Researcher Rachel Spilka has shown that talking to readers both inside and
outside the organization helped corporate engineers adapt their documents
successfully. Talking to readers and reviewers helped writers involve read-
ers in the planning process, understand the social and political relationships
among readers, and negotiate conflicts orally rather than depending solely on
the document. These writers were then able to think about content as well as
about organization and style, appeal to common grounds (such as reducing
waste or increasing productivity) that multiple readers shared, and reduce the
number of revisions needed before documents were approved.
   When it is not possible to meet everyone’s needs, meet the needs of gate-
keepers and decision makers first.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




48                     Part1       The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                                As you write for multiple audiences, consider these strategies:

                        Content and number of details

                        =         Provide an overview or executive summary for readers who want just
                                  the main points.
                        =         In the body of the document, provide enough detail for decision makers
                                  and for anyone else who could veto your proposal.
                        =         Ifthe decision makers don’t need details that other audiences will want,
                                  provide those details in appendices—statistical      tabulations,   earlier
                                  reports, and so forth.

                         Organization
                        =         Use headings and a table of contents so readers can turn to the portions
                                  that interest them.
                         =        Organize your message based on the decision makers’ attitudes toward it.
                            Level of formality
                            =     Avoid personal pronouns. You ceases to have a specific meaning when
                                  several different audiences use a document.
                            =     If both internal and external audiences will use a document, use a
                                  slightly more formal style than you would in an internal document.
                            =     Use amore formal style when you write to international audiences.
                            Technical level

                            =     Inthe body of the document, assume the degree of knowledge that deci-
                                  sion makers will have.
                            =     Put background and explanatory information under separate headings.
                                  Then readers can use the headings and the table of contents to read or
                                  skip these sections, as their knowledge dictates.
                            =     If decision makers will have more knowledge than other audiences, pro-
                                  vide a glossary of terms. Early in the document, let readers know that
                                  the glossary exists.




                        =        The primary audience will make a decision or act on the basis of your
                                 message. The secondary audience may be asked by the primary audience
                                 to comment on your message or to implement your ideas after they’ve
                                 been approved. The auxiliary audience encounters the message but does
                                 not have to interact with it. A gatekeeper controls whether the message
                                 gets to the primary audience. A watchdog audience has political, social,
                                 or economic power and may base future actions on its evaluation of your
                                 message.
                        =        A communication channel is the means by which you convey your mes-
                                 sage to your audience.
                        =        The following questions provide a framework for audience analysis:
                                  1. What will the audience’s initial reaction be to the message?
                                 2. How much information does the audience need?
                                                              Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                           Chapter2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                    49


      3. What obstacles must you overcome?
      4. What positive aspects can you emphasize?
      5. What expectations does the audience have about the appropriate lan-
          guage, contents, and organization of messages?
      6. How will the audience use the document?
=     Audience benefits are advantages that the audience gets by using your
      services, buying your products, following your policies, or adopting your
      ideas. Benefits can exist for policies and ideas as well as for goods and
      services.
=     Good benefits are adapted to the audience, based on intrinsic rather than
      extrinsic motivators, supported by clear logic, explained in adequate
      detail, and phrased in you-attitude. Extrinsic benefits simply aren’t avail-
      able to reward every desired behavior; further, they reduce the satisfaction
      in doing something for its own sake.
=     Tocreate audience benefits,
       1. Identify the feelings, fears, and needs that may motivate your
           audience.
       2. Identify the features of your product or policy that could meet the
           needs you've identified.
       3. Show how the audience can meet their needs with the features of the
           policy or product.
=      When you write to multiple audiences, use the primary audience to deter-
       mine level of detail, organization, level of formality, and use of technical
       terms and theory.


                                                                                                  *Go to www.mhhe.com/locker10e for

           CHAPTER 2                Exercises and Problems ©                                      additional Exercises and Problems.




2.1            Reviewing the Chapter

    1. Who are the five different audiences your message             7. What kinds of electronic channels seem most useful
       may need to address? (LO 2-1)                                    to you? Why? (LO 2-2)
    2. What are some characteristics to consider when ana-           8. What are considerations to keep in mind when
       lyzing individuals? (LO 2-1)                                     selecting channels? (LO 2-2)
    3. What are some characteristics to consider when ana-           9. What are 12 questions to ask when analyzing your
       lyzing groups? (LO 2-1)                                          audience? (LO 2-3)
    4. What are some questions to consider when analyz-             10. What are four characteristics of good audience ben-
       ing organizational culture? (LO 2-1)                             efits? (LO 2-4)
    5. What isa discourse community? Why will discourse             11. What are three ways to identify and develop audi-
          communities be important in your career? (LO 2-1)             ence benefits? (LO 2-4)
    6. What are standard business communication chan-               12. What are considerations to keep in mind when
          nels? (LO 2-2)                                                addressing multiple audiences? (LO 2-3)



    2.2         Reviewing Grammar

    Good audience analysis requires careful use of pronouns.
    Review your skills with pronoun usage by doing gram-
    mar exercise B.5, Appendix B.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




50                               Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


2.3       Identifying Audiences
In each of the following situations, label the audiences as               and fire departments. The mayor asks Paul to
gatekeeper, primary, secondary, auxiliary, or watchdog                    prepare a proposal for the city council, which will
audiences (all audiences may not be in each scenario):                    vote on whether to implement the change. Before
                                                                          they vote, council members will hear from (1) citi-
1. Kent, Carol, and Jose are planning to start a web-
   site design business. However, before they can get                     zens, who will have an opportunity to read the
   started, they need money. They have developed a                        proposal and communicate their opinions to the
   business plan and are getting ready to seek funds                      city council; (2) mayors’ offices in other cities, who
   from financial institutions for starting their small                   may be asked about their experiences; (3) union
                                                                          representatives, who may be concerned about the
   business.
                                                                          reduction in income that will occur if the proposal is
2. Barbara’s boss asked her to write a direct mail let-                   implemented; (4) department heads, whose ability
   ter to potential customers about the advantages                        to schedule work might be limited if the proposal
   of becoming a preferred member of their agency’s                       passes; and (5) the blue-ribbon panel and good-
   travel club. The letter will go to all customers of the
                                                                          government lobbying groups. Council members
   agency who are over 65 years old.                                      come up for reelection in six months.
3. Paul works for the mayor’s office in a big city. As                    Sharon, Steven’s boss at Bigster Corporation, has
   part of a citywide cost-cutting measure, a blue-
                                                                          asked him to write an e-mail for everyone in her
   ribbon panel has recommended requiring employ-                         division, informing them of HR’s new mandatory
   ees who work more than 40 hours in a week to                           training sessions on new government regulations
   take compensatory time off rather than being paid
                                                                          affecting Bigster’s services.
   overtime. The only exceptions will be the police


2.4       Analyzing Multiple Audiences

Like most major corporations, the U.S. Census Bureau                      What would be appropriate benefits for each type of
has multiple, conflicting audiences, among them the                       audience?
president, Congress, press, state governments, citizens                   What kinds of categories might the bureau create for
(both as providers and users of data), statisticians, and                 its largest audience (citizens)?
researchers.                                                              How do some of the posters at the website
m For the bureau, who might serve as gatekeeper, pri-                     below differ for different audiences?: “Posters,”
    mary, secondary, auxiliary, and watchdog audiences?                   U.S. Census Bureau: United States Census 2010,
= What kinds of conflicting goals might these audi-                       http://2010.census.gov/partners/materials/
    ences have?                                                           posters-materials.php.



 20       Choosing a Channel to Reach a Specific Audience
 Suppose your organization wants to target a product,                      Part-time students at a community college
 service, or program for each of the following audiences.                  Non-English speakers.
 What would be the best channel(s) to reach that group in                  People who use hearing aids
 your city? To what extent would that channel reach all                    Parents whose children play softball or baseball
 group members?
                                                                           Attorneys
 a. Stay-at-home mothers
                                                                       Female owners of small businesses
 b. Vegetarians
                                                                    wo
                                                                    TR
                                                                     SpPet owners
  c. Full-time students at a university


 2.6       Identifying and Developing Audience Benefits

 Listed here are several things an organization might like           oF    Become more physically fit.
 its employees to do:                                                4.    Volunteer for community organizations.
 1. Use less paper.                                                  Be    Write fewer e-mails.
 2. Attend a brown-bag lunch to discuss ways to                      6.    Attend mandatory training about new government
      improve products or services.                                        regulations affecting the business.
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication,
                                                                                                   Tenth Edition




                                          Chapter2    Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                    51


As your instructor directs,                                      b.     Take each need or motive and develop it as an au-
    Identify the motives or needs that might be met by                  dience benefit in a full paragraph. Use additional
a.
                                                                        paragraphs for the other needs met by the activity.
    each of the activities.
                                                                        Remember to use you-attitude!




aa         Identifying Objections and Audience Benefits

Think of an organization you know something about,                &     Your organization is thinking of outsourcing one of
and answer the following questions for it:                              its primary products to a manufacturer in another
a.  Your organization is thinking about developing a                    country where the product can be made more cost-
    knowledge management system that requires work-                     efficiently. What fears or objections might people
                                                                        have? What benefits might your organization re-
    ers to input their knowledge and experience in their
    job functions into the organizational database. What                ceive? Who would be easiest to convince? Who
    benefits could the knowledge management system                       would be hardest?
    offer your organization? What drawbacks are there?            As your instructor directs,
    Who would be the easiest to convince? Who would
                                                                  a.  Share your answers orally with a small group of stu-
    be the hardest?                                                      dents.
    New telephone software would efficiently replace
                                                                  Ds     Present your answers in an oral presentation to the
    your organization’s long-standing human phone oper-
                                                                         class.
    ator who has been a perennial welcoming voice to in-
    coming callers. What objections might people in your                 Write a paragraph developing the best audience ben-
    organization have to replacing the operator? What                    efit you identified. Remember to use you-attitude.
    benefits might your organization receive? Who would
    be easiest to convince? Who would be the hardest?




2.8        Analyzing Benefits for Multiple Audiences

The U.S. Census Bureau lists these benefits from cooper-
ating with the census:

                     “Census information affects the numbers of seats your state occupies in the U.S.
                     House of Representatives. And people from many walks of life use census data to
                     advocate for causes, rescue disaster victims, prevent diseases, research markets,
                     locate pools of skilled workers and more.

                                                                                                        can
                     “When you do the math, it’s easy to see what an accurate count of residents
                                                                                                         for
                     do for your community. Better infrastructure. More services. A brighter tomorrow
                                                             census collects helps to determine  how   more
                     everyone. In fact, the information the
                                                                                                        and
                     than $400 billion dollars of federal funding each year is spent on infrastructure
                     services like:

                         Hospitals
                         Job training centers
                         Schools
                         Senior centers
                         Bridges, tunnels and other public works projects
                         Emergency services”


      How well do these benefits meet the four characteris-           Quoted from “Why It’s Important,” U.S. Census Bureau:
                                                                      United States Census 2010, accessed May 8, 2010, http://2010
 tics of good audience benefits discussed in this chapter?
                                                                      census.gov /2010census/about/why-important.php.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




52                                Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


2.9        Addressing Your Audience’s Need for Information

“Tell me about yourself.”                                                   tone for your answer? What topics should you avoid
   This may be the most popular opening question of job                     (at least for now)?
interviews, but it’s also a question that you'll encounter          =   What are the physical conditions that will affect
in nearly any social situation when you meet someone                    your answer? Where are you (e.g., Are you outside,
new. Although the question may be the same, the answer                  in a noisy room, on the phone)? How much time do
you give will change based upon the rhetorical situation:               you have to give your response?
the audience, purpose, and context of the question.                 Write your response to the statement “Tell me about
    For each of the following situations in a-g, ask your-          yourself.” Assume that the question is being asked by
self these questions to help create a good response:                a. A recruiter at a career fair in your university’s audi-
= How will the audience react to your answer? Will                       torium.
     the audience see the message as important? What                b. A recruiter in a job interview in a small interview or
     information will you need to include in your answer                 conference room.
     to keep their attention?
                                                                     c. An attractive male or female at a popular weekend
= How will the audience use your answer? Why is the                      nightspot.
     audience asking the question? What information is
                                                                         Your instructor on the first day of class.
     relevant to the audience and what information can
     you leave out?                                                  e. Your new roommate on your first day in the dormi-
                                                                             tory.
= How much information does the audience need?
     What information do they already know about you?                        Anew co-worker on your first day at a new job.
     What level of detail do they need?                              g.      Anew co-worker on your first day volunteering at
m What are the audience’s expectations about your                            your local food pantry.
     answer? What are the appropriate word choices and



2.10        Analyzing Individuals
Read about the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator on page                   =      Identify other students in the classroom with the
29. On the web, take one of the free tests similar to the                   same combination of personality traits. Create a brief
 Myers-Briggs. Read about your personality type and                         oral presentation to the class that describes your
 consider how accurate the description may be. Print                        Type Indicator and explains how the pros and cons
 your results.                                                              of your personality will affect group dynamics in
                                                                            collaborative work.
 As your instructor directs,
                                                                        =   Write a brief memo to your instructor describing
 =    Share your results orally with a small group of stu-                  your results, assessing how well the results reflect
      dents and discuss how accurately the Type Indica-                     your personality, and suggesting how your person-
      tor describes you. Identify some of the differences                   ality traits might affect your work in class and in the
      among your personality types and consider how                         workplace.
      the differences would affect efforts to collaborate on
      projects.



 2.11       Getting Customer Feedback

 Smart businesses want to know what their customers                         http:/ /www.thesqueakywheel.com
 and clients are saying about their products and services.                  http://www.yelp.com
 Many websites can help them do so.                                         What does each site do?
    Check some of the common sites for customer com-                        What are good features of each site?
 ments. Here is a list to get you started:
                                                                            What are drawbacks?
      http://www.amazon.com
      http:/ /www.angieslist.com                                        As your instructor directs,
      http://getsatisfaction.com                                        a. Discuss your findings in a memo to your instructor.
      http:/ /www.my3cents.com                                          b. Share your findings in small groups.
      http:/ /www.ratepoint.com                                         c. Asa group, make a presentation to your classmates.
      http:/ /www.suggestionbox.com
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication,
                                                                                                    Tenth Edition




                                          Chapter 2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                     53


2.12       Identifying International Audience Benefits

Reread the sidebar on page 39 explaining how Procter             As your instructor directs,
& Gamble is marketing its products in developing coun-           a. Post your findings electronically to share with the
tries. In small groups, discuss different marketing prac-            class.
tices you have become aware of in other countries. How           b. Present your findings in a memo to your instructor.
do these practices benefit consumers? How do they ben-           c. Present your findings in an oral presentation to the
efit store owners?                                                   class.


2.13       Evaluating a New Channel

To combat software piracy, Microsoft tried an unusual            =        How do you think receivers of the black screen
communication channel. A new software update turned                       react?
screens black on computers using pirated software; the            As your instructor directs,
update also posted a message to switch to legitimate
software copies. The update did not prevent people from           a. Post your findings electronically to share with the
using their machines, and they could manually change                  class.
their wallpaper back to its previous design. But the black        b. Present your findings in a memo to your instructor.
screen returned every 60 minutes. Microsoft said there             c. Present your findings in an oral presentation to the
was little protest except in China, where ironically the                   class.
software piracy problem is greatest.
    In small groups, discuss this practice.                       Source: Loretta Chao and Juliet Ye, “Microsoft Tactic Raises
= What do you think of this channel?                              Hackles in China: In Antipiracy Move, Software Update Turns
                                                                  Screens Black and Urges Users to Buy Legal Windows Copies,”
m Is it ethical?                                                  Wall Street Journal, October 23, 2008, B4.
® Will it help or hurt Microsoft profits in China?


2.14       Discussing Ethics

 a. What do you think about the practice among some                  What do you think about the practice of tracking con-
                                                                     c.
    companies of giving perks such as free samples to                sumers’ Internet surfing and selling the information
    bloggers to discuss their products? Does your opin-              to marketers? Does the tracking seem more intrusive
    ion change according to the expense of the perk (free            when it is combined with off-line records such as
    tissues vs. tablet computers, for instance)? How can             shopping and credit card records?
    you tell if bloggers have been influenced by the com-         d. What do you think about the practice of companies
    panies whose products they discuss?                              asking their employees to take health screenings and
 b. What do you think about the practice of law firms us-            then giving them hundreds of dollars off their health
    ing social media to find plaintiffs (see sidebar on page         insurance if they do so? What benefits do you see for
    35)? Is it any worse to use social media than print or TV        employees? Drawbacks? Is this just a way to penalize
    ads? Why? Look at some of the sites provided by law              employees who refuse by making them pay more for
    firms. Try http:/ /www.oil-rig-explosions.com/, http:/ i         health insurance?
       www.consumerwarningnetwork.com/ ; http://www.
       sokolovelaw.com/legal-help /dangerous-drugs /birth-
       control; http:// westwoodscammed.me/.
       How persuasive is the content?


 2.15       Banking on Multiple Audiences

 Bruce Murphy, an executive at KeyBank, is working on a                 However, they are a tough audience. Many of them
 new problem: how to extend banking services to a new                have a deep distrust of banks or believe banks will not
 audience—people who use banks intermittently or not                 serve them. Murphy also faced another tough audience:
 at all. It is a large group, estimated at 73 million people.        bank managers who feared attracting forgeries and other
 Together, they spend an estimated $11 billion in fees at            bad checks and thus losing money. One manager actu-
 places such as check-cashing outlets, money-Wwire com-              ally said, “Are you crazy? These are the very people
 panies, and paycheck lenders (companies offering cash               we're trying to keep out of the bank!”
 advances on future paychecks).
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




54                                Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


      To attract the new customers, KeyBank cashes pay-             m        What are some other businesses that could expand
roll and government checks for a 1.5% fee, well below                        services to underserved populations?
the 2.44% which is average for check-cashing outlets. The           =        What services would they offer?
bank also started offering free financial education classes.                 What problems would they encounter?
In fact, the bank even has a program to help people with            =        What audience appeals could they use to attract
a history of bounced checks to clear their records by pay-                   clients or customers?
ing restitution and taking the financial education class.
   The program is growing, both among check-cashing                 Source: Adapted from Ann Carrns, “Banks Court a New Client:
clients and branches offering the services, to the satisfac-        The Low-Income Earner: KeyCorp Experiments with Check
tion of both audiences.                                             Cashing,” Wall Street Journal, March 16, 2007, Al, Al4.



2.16        Announcing a New Employee Benefit

Your company has decided to pay employees for doing                  4.      Will promoting community participation help the
charity work. Employees can spend one hour working                           organization attract and retain workers?
with a charitable or nonprofit group for every 40 hours
                                                                     As your instructor directs,
they work. As Vice President of Human Resources, you
need to announce this new program.                                   a. Present your answers in an oral presentation to the
   Pick a specific organization you know something                       class.
about, and answer the following questions about it:                  b. Present your answers in a memo to your instructor.
1. What proportion of the employees are already                      c. Share your answers with a small group of students
    involved in volunteer work?                                               and write a joint memo reporting the similarities and
2. Is community service or “giving back” consistent                           differences you found.
    with the organization’s corporate mission?
3. Some employees won't be able or won’t want to
     participate. What is the benefit for them in working
     for a company that has such a program?


reaed       Announcing a Tuition Reimbursement Program

Assume that your organization is considering reimburs-                        people could be promoted? Or does the organiza-
ing workers for tuition and fees for job-related courses.                     tion have many more low-level than high-level jobs?
As Director of Education and Training, you will present                 5.    How much loyalty do employees have to this partic-
to company executives a review of pros and cons for the                       ular organization? Is it “just a job,” or do they care
program. To prepare, you have composed a list of ques-                        about the welfare of the organization?
tions you know they may have. Pick a specific organi-                   6.    How competitive is the job market? How easy is
zation that you know something about, and answer the                          it for the organization to find and retain qualified
following questions about it.                                                 employees?
1. What do people do on the job? What courses or                        7.    Is knowledge needed to do the job changing,
     degrees could help them do their current jobs even                       or is knowledge learned 5 or 10 years ago still
     better?                                                                  up-to-date?
2. How much education do people already have? How                       8.    How competitive is the economic market? Is this
     do they feel about formal schooling?                                     company doing well financially? Can its customers
3. How busy are employees? Will most have time to                             or clients easily go somewhere else? Is it a govern-
     take classes and study in addition to working 40                         ment agency dependent on tax dollars for fund-
       hours a week (or more)?                                                ing? What about the current situation makes this
 4.    Is it realistic to think that people who get more edu-                 an especially good time to hone the skills of the
       cation would get higher salaries? Or is money for                      employees you have?
       increases limited? Is it reasonable to think that most           9.    Do you support the program? Why or why not?


 2.18        Crafting a Memo for a Particular Audience

 Your supervisor at a fitness center wants to increase the              your supervisor gave you to help you get started, write a
 organization’s membership and has asked you to write a                 version of a letter targeted at each of the three audiences.
 letter to the three primary population segments in your                = Become a member with no sign-up fees.
 town: retirees, college students, and working profession-              = Attend free nutrition classes to help with weight
 als with families. Using the following fitness benefits                    control and optimal fitness.
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                              Chapter 2   Adapting Your Message to Your Audience                                 55


=       Attend any of our many fitness classes, scheduled            =  Lose weight and feel your healthiest with a personal
        for your convenience.                                           trainer, who will guide you toward your fitness
=       Enjoy the new indoor/outdoor pool with lap lanes                goals.
        and zero-gravity entrance.                                   Remember these benefits were just to get you started;
=       Use the large selection of free-weights and exercise         you are expected to come up with more on your own.
        machines.

2.19          Analyzing Your Co-Workers

What do your co-workers do? What hassles and challenges              b.       Present your answers in an oral presentation to the
do they face? To what extent do their lives outside work                      class.
affect their responses to work situations? What do your co-           c.      Present your answers in a memo to your instructor.
workers value? What are their pet peeves? How committed               d.      Share your answers with a small group of students
are they to organizational goals? How satisfying do they                      and write a joint memo reporting the similarities and
find their jobs? Are the people you work with quite similar                   differences you found.
to each other, or do they differ from each other? How?
As your instructor directs,
a. Share your answers orally with a small group of
    students.

2.20           Analyzing the Audiences of Noncommercial Web Pages

Analyze the implied audiences of two web pages of two                 =       What assumptions about audiences do content and
noncommercial organizations with the same purpose                             visuals suggest?
(combating hunger, improving health, influencing the                     =    Can you think of ways that the pages could better
political process, etc.). You could pick the home pages                       serve their audiences?
of the national organization and a local affiliate, or the               As your instructor directs,
home pages of two separate organizations working                         a. Share your results orally with a small group of stu-
toward the same general goal.                                                dents.
   Answer the following questions:
                                                                         b. Present your results orally to the class.
    = Do the pages work equally well for surfers and for                  c. Present your results in a memo to your instructor.
      people who have reached the page deliberately?                         Attach copies of the home pages.
    = Possible audiences include current and potential                   d. Share your results with a small group of students,
         volunteers, donors, clients, and employees. Do the                  and write a joint memo reporting the similarities and
         pages provide material for each audience? Is the
                                                                               differences you found.
         material useful? Complete? Up-to-date? Does new                 e.    Post your results in an e-mail message to the class.
         material encourage people to return?                                  Provide links to the two web pages.


    2.21.      Analyzing a Discourse Community

    Analyze the way a group you are part of uses language.               =    What strategies or kinds of proof are convincing to
    Possible groups include                                                   members?
    = Work teams.                                                        &    What formats, conventions, or rules do members
                                                                              expect messages to follow?
        Sports teams.
                                                                         =    What are some nonverbal ways members
        Sororities, fraternities, and other social groups.                    communicate?
        Churches, mosques, synagogues, and temples.
        Geographic or ethnic groups.                                      As your instructor directs,
        Groups of friends.                                                a. Share your results orally with a small group of
    Questions to ask include the following:
                                                                              students.
    =    What specialized terms might not be known to                     b. Present your results in an oral presentation to the
         outsiders?                                                           class.
    m  What topics do members talk or write about? What                    c. Present your results in a memo to your instructor.
       topics are considered unimportant or improper?                     d. Share your results with a small group of students,
    = What channels do members use to convey messages?                        and write a joint memo reporting the similarities and
                                                                              differences you found.
    m= What forms of language do members use to build
       goodwill? to demonstrate competence or superiority?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




CHAPTER




Building Goodwill

Gate oc) mOlenaliar=
You-Attitude                                   Reducing Bias in Business Communication
  ®    How to Create You-Attitude                ®   Making Language Nonsexist
  B® You-Attitude beyond the Sentence Level      B   Making Language Nonracist and
                                                     Nonageist
Positive Emphasis                                ®   Talking about People with Disabilities
  ®    How to Create Positive Emphasis               and Diseases
  ® How to Check Positive Emphasis               ®   Choosing Bias-Free Photos and
Tone, Power, and Politeness                          itustrations

  ®    Use Courtesy Titles for People You      Summary of Key Points
       Don’t Know Well
   ™   Be Aware of the Power Implications of
       the Words You Use
                                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




NeEwsworTHY COMMUNICATION
Restoring Goodwill at Delta
                                                |


            ta
                                                ere t oy


4 A Del                                                 2
                                                +   .




[=   ection  %




         raveling by air can be a frustrating experi-                            experience. Agents may not be able to solve
         ence.     High prices, extra fees, delays, and                          all customers’ complaints, but by acknowledg-
        cancellations can leave a customer feeling                               ing frustration they show that they care and are
frazzled and angry. After a year in which it had the                             attempting to help.
highest number of customer complaints, Delta Air                                 = Don’t apologize for the rules. Baggage fees and other
Lines is trying to change its image by sending all                               expenses have become part of the flying experience.
11,000 flight agents back to training.                                           Agents should stick to the facts, rather than saying
Tn      day-long        seminars,         agents            learn   how    to    they agree with angry customers. Michael Hazelton,
respond to customer complaints and worries with                                  a facilitator for the training classes, said, “You may
a positive attitude andafocus                                                                                    think you are bonding with the
on improving the customer’s                                                                                      customer by agreeing the fees
                              ‘Agents learn how to respond to
experience.   The    seminars                                                                                    are horrible, but the customer
                              customer complaints and worries
include these key points:                                                                             thinks, ‘This person just threw
                              with a positive attitude and a                                          his company under the bus.””
= Be positive. The agents are
                              focus on  improving
                                          -
                                                   the customers                                      uw Don't place blame. Cus-
taught to smile and express         ;
appreciation for the custom-  experience.                                                             tomers know when they’ve
ers’ business, especially when                                                                        made poor decisions, such as
the customers           are unhappy            or when              there are    arriving late or not allowing enough time to get
problems.                                                                        through airport security. Agents should work to
= Be honest. If a passenger is late and going to miss                            help the customers and solve problems as much as
her flight, the agents learn to tell her immediately                              possible.
and offer to help rebook, rather than encouraging                                     Of course,        better customer     service can’t solve
her to rush through the airport.                                                  every problem with flying. But at Delta Air Lines,
= Recognize the customer's feelings. Empathizing                                  they believe that an increased focus on the customer
with a frustrated customer can make the dif-                                      will improve peoples’ impressions of the flying
ference between a bad experience and a good                                       experience.
                                                                               Street Journal, February 3, 2011, D3.
Source: Scott McCartney, “Delta Sends Its 11,000 Agents to Charm School,” Wall
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




58                     Part1    The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                       Learning Objectives
                       After studying this chapter, you will know how to

                                     Create you-attitude.
                                     Create positive emphasis.

                                     Improve tone in business communications.

                                     Reduce bias in business communications.




                       Goodwill smooths the challenges of business and administration. Companies
                       have long been aware that treating customers well pays off in more sales and
                       higher profits.

                         =     Amazon’s corporate mission says “We seek to be Earth’s most customer
                               centric company for three primary customer sets: consumer customers,
                               seller customers and developer customers.” Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s founder
                               and CEO, has a video on YouTube entitled “Everything I Know.” It has
                               three points: obsess over customers, invent on behalf of customers, and
                               think long term, because doing so allows you to serve customers better.!
                         =     Tony Hsieh built Zappos around customer service, including a service
                               attitude for their vendors.
                         =     Linda Thaler and Robin Koval built the Kaplan Thaler Group into an
                               advertising agency with nearly $1 billion in billings using goodwill,
                               you-attitude, and positive tone.”
                         =     A study by Vanderbilt University found that a portfolio of companies
                               whose ACSI (American Consumer Satisfaction Index) scores were
                               above the national average far outperformed the market. Over a 10-year
                               period, the portfolio gained 212%; the Standard & Poor 500-stock index
                               rose 105% over the same period.

                           Goodwill is important internally as well as externally. More and more orga-
                        nizations are realizing that treating employees well is financially wise as well
                        as ethically sound. Happy employees create less staff turnover, thus reducing
                        hiring and training costs. A University of Pennsylvania study of 3,000 com-
                        panies found that investing 10% of revenue on capital improvement boosted
                        company productivity 3.9%, but spending the money on employees increased
                        productivity 8.5%, or more than twice as much.*
                           You-attitude, positive emphasis, and bias-free language are three ways to
                        help build goodwill. Messages that show you-attitude use the audience’s point
                        of view, not the writer’s or speaker’s. Positive emphasis means focusing on the
                        positive rather than the negative aspects of a situation. Bias-free language does
                        not discriminate against people on the basis of sex, physical condition, race,
                        ethnicity, age, or any other category. All three help you achieve your purposes
                        and make your messages friendlier, more persuasive, more professional, and
                        more humane. They suggest that you care not just about money but also about
                        the needs and interests of your customers, employees, and fellow citizens.


                        YOU-ATTITUDE
                        Putting what you want to say in you-attitude is a crucial step both in think-
                        ing about your audience’s needs and in communicating your concern to your
                        audience.
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                Chapter 3   Building Goodwill                                           59


                                                                                                                Customer Service
How to Create You-Attitude                                                                                      Becoming Popular
You-attitude is a style of communication that looks at things from                                   =          with Businesses

the audience’s point of view, emphasizing what the audience wants                                         Zz More companies are
to know, respecting the audience’s intelligence, and protecting the audi-                            improving customer service to
ence’s ego.                                                                                          increase both sales and market
   To apply you-attitude on a sentence level, use the following techniques:                          share,
                                                                                                       Walgreens is training pharma-
                                                                                                     cists to work more closely with
     Talk about the audience, not about yourself.                                                    patients with chronic illnesses
     Refer to the customer’s request or order specifically.                                          such as diabetes. Pharmacists
     Don’t talk about feelings, except to congratulate or offer sympathy.                            are replacing their normal 3- to
                                                                                                     5-minute meetings with regular
 ie
 pes
 EUS)In positive situations, use you more often than I. Use we when it                               20- to 45-minute patient meet-
     includes the audience.                                                                          ings to help them manage their
 5. In negative situations, avoid the word you. Protect the audience's ego.                          disease.
     Use passive verbs and impersonal expressions to avoid assigning                                    American Express is. training
     blame.                                                                                          call-center agents to focus on
                                                                                                      building customer loyalty rather
                                                                                                     than processing the call quickly.
   Revisions for you-attitude do not change the basic meaning of the sentence.                          Even Comcast, which has had
However, revising for you-attitude often makes sentences longer because the                           well-publicized  problems with
revision is more specific and has more information. Long sentences need not                           customer service, is giving its
be wordy. Wordiness means having more words than the meaning requires.                                24,000 call-center agents addi-
We can add information and still keep the writing concise.                                            tional training.

                                                                                                     Adapted from Dana Mattioli, “Cus-

4. Talk about the audience, not about yourself. Your audience wants
                                                                                                     tomer Service as a Growth Engine,”
                                                                                                     Wall Street Journal, June 7, 2010, B6.
to know how they benefit or are affected. When you provide this information,
you make your message more complete and more interesting.
   Lacks you-attitude:    We have negotiated an agreement with Apex Rent-a-Car that gives
                          you a discount on rental cars.

   You-attitude:          As a Sunstrand employee, you can now get a 20% discount when
                          you rent a car from Apex.


2. Refer to the customer's request or order specifically. Refer to the
customer’s request, order, or policy specifically, not as a generic your order or
your policy. If your customer is an individual or a small business, it’s friendly to
specify the content of the order. If you’re dealing with a company with which
you do a great deal of business, give the invoice or purchase order number.
   Lacks you-attitude:    Your order...
   You-attitude
   (to individual):       The desk chair you ordered . . .
   You-attitude
   (to a large store):    Your invoice #783329 .      .



 3. Don’t talk about feelings, except to congratulate or offer sympathy.                        In
 most business situations, your feelings are irrelevant and should be omitted.
    Lacks you-attitude:   We are happy to extend you a credit line of $10,000.
   You-attitude:          You can now charge up to $10,000 on your American Express card.

    It is appropriate to talk about your own emotions in a message of congratu-
 lations or condolence.
    You-attitude:         Congratulations on your promotion to district manager! | was really
                          pleased to read about it.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                      Part1      The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


           Exercising Empathy            Don’t talk about your audience’s feelings, either. It’s distancing to have oth-
           for Employees and          ers tell us how we feel—especially if they are wrong.
           Customers
                                         Lacks you-attitude:        You'll be happy to hear that Open Grip Walkway Channels meet
            Although the concept                                    OSHA requirements.
of happy employees leading to
happy customers is not new, it           You-attitude:              Open Grip Walkway Channels meet OSHA requirements.
is experiencing a resurgence in
                                      Maybe the audience expects that anything you sell would meet government
many different industries. For
example, call centers are allow-
                                      regulations (OSHA—the Occupational Safety and Health Administration—is
ing seasoned employees to work        a federal agency). The audience may even be disappointed if they expected
at home while a grocery chain is      higher standards. Simply explain the situation or describe a product's fea-
giving employees a profit-sharing     tures; don’t predict the audience’s response.
plan that rewards them for excel-        When you have good news, simply give the good news.
lent customer service.
                                         Lacks you-attitude:        You'll be happy to hear that your scholarship has been renewed.
  Companies are finding creative
ways to help employees iden-             You-attitude:              Congratulations! Your scholarship has been renewed.
tify with customers. USAA, an
insurance agency for the military,    4. In positive situations, use you more often than /. Use we when it
provides new employees with
                                      includes the audience. Talk about the audience, not you or your company.
MREs (meals ready to eat) dur-
ing orientation so they will bet-         Lacks you-attitude:       We provide health insurance to all employees.
ter understand the lifestyle of the                                 You      receive   health   insurance   as a full-time   Procter   & Gamble
                                         You-attitude:
members they serve.
                                                                    employee.
  Cabela’s, an outdoor outfitter,
encourages employees to use              Most readers are tolerant of the word I in e-mail messages, which seem
products they sell by loaning         like conversation. But edit paper documents to use I rarely if at all. I sug-
items free of charge in exchange
                                      gests that you're concerned about personal issues, not about the organiza-
for writing reviews on a company
                                      tion’s problems, needs, and opportunities. We works well when it includes
system. The loans are good perks
for employees, and they help staff
                                      the reader. Avoid we if it excludes the reader (as it would in a letter to a cus-
understand the issues customers       tomer or supplier or as it might in a memo about what we in management
may have with the products.           want you to do).
  At    Four   Seasons      Hotels,
employees receive free overnight      5. In negative situations, avoid the word you. Protect your audience's
stays and meals at the hotel for      ego. Use passive verbs and impersonal expressions to avoid assigning
themselves and a guest. They          blame. When you report bad news or limitations, use a noun for a group of
gain a customer’s perspective on      which your audience is a part instead of you so people don’t feel that they're
the hotel, but they also grade the
                                      singled out for bad news.
hotel on various services.
  The     companies      exercising       Lacks you-attitude:           You must get approval from the director before you publish any arti-
empathy for employees and cus-                                          cles or memoirs based on your work in the agency.
tomers believe their customer
                                          You-attitude:                 Agency personnel must get approval from the director to publish any
service helps set them apart from
                                                                        articles or memoirs based on their work at the agency.
other organizations.

Adapted from Jena McGregor, “Cus-
                                          Use passive verbs and impersonal expressions to avoid blaming people.
tomer Service Champs,” Business-       Passive verbs describe the action performed on something, without necessar-
Week, March 5, 2007, 52.               ily saying who did it. (See Chapter 5 for a full discussion of passive verbs.) In
                                       most cases, active verbs are better. But when your audience is at fault, passive
                                       verbs may be useful to avoid assigning blame.
                                          Impersonal expressions omit people and talk only about things. Normally,
                                       communication is most lively when it’s about people—and most interesting
                                       to audiences when it’s about them. When you have to report a mistake or
                                       bad news, however, you can protect your audience’s ego by using an imper-
                                       sonal expression, one in which things, not people, do the acting.
                                              Lacks you-attitude:                      You made no allowance for inflation in your estimate.
                                              You-attitude (passive):                  No allowance for inflation has been made in this estimate.
                                              You-attitude (impersonal):               This estimate makes no allowance for inflation.
                                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                                 Chapter3      Building Goodwill                                      61


                                                                                                                                  You-Attitude with
                                                                                                                                  International
                                                                                                                                  Audiences

                                                                                                                                 When you communi-
                                                                                                                                 cate with international
                                                                                                                    audiences, look at the world from
                                                                                                                    their point of view.
                                                                                                                      The United States is in the mid-
                                                                                                                    dle of most of the maps sold in
                                                                                                                    the United States. It isn’t in the
                                                                                                                    middle of maps sold elsewhere in
                                                                                                                    the world.
                                                                                                                       The United States clings to a
                                                                                                                     measurement system that has
                                                                                                                     been abandoned by most of the
                                                                                                                    world. When you write for inter-
                                                                                                                     national audiences, use the met-
                                                                                                                    ric system.
                                                                                                                      Even pronouns and direction
                                                                                                                    words need attention. We may
                                                                                                                    not feel inclusive to readers with
                                                                                                                    different assumptions and back-
                                                                                                                    grounds. Here won’t mean the
                                                                                                                    same thing to a reader in Bonn as
                                                                                                                    it does to one in Boulder.




Hallmark is producing a new line of cards for common situations such as depression or
chemotherapy. For example, “Get Well Soon,” is not appropriate for someone who is bat-
tling cancer. Hallmark has changed the tone of their Journey’s Collection to reflect the
needs of their dual audiences—buyers and receivers of cards.
                                                                                February 19, 2007, sec. Business.
Source: David Twiddy, “Hallmark Tackles Real-Life Situations,” Chicago Tribune,




   A purist might say that impersonal expressions are illogical: An estimate,
for example, is inanimate and can’t “make” anything. In the pragmatic world
of business writing, however, impersonal expressions help you convey criti-
cism tactfully.


You-Attitude beyond the Sentence Level
Good messages apply you-attitude beyond the sentence level by using content
and organization as well as style to build goodwill.
  To create goodwill with content,

  =    Be complete. When you have lots of information to give, consider put-
       ting some details in an appendix, which may be read later.
  =    Anticipate and answer questions your audience is likely to have.
       Show why information your audience didn’t ask for is important.
  =    Show your audience how the subject of your message affects them.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




62                                   Part1       The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


Figure 3.1             ALetter Lacking You-Attitude




                                                                                   Ss 450 INDUSTRIAL PARK
                       $S ] WA] LWA] oO IN|                                           CLEVELAND, OH 44120

                       STRUCTURAL STEEL Fax: (216) 555-4672
                       December 11, 2012

                       Ms. Carol McFarland
                       Rollins Equipment Corporation
                       18438 East Night Hawk Way
                       Phoenix, AZ 85043-7800                                 xc
                                                                     o
                                                                         \S

                       Dear Ms. McFarland:                        \e
         Not
        you- <—We are now ready to issue acheck to Rollins Equipment in the amount of
       attitude        $14 207.02. To receive sai:   ck, you will deliver to me a release of the
                       mechanic's liens in the amount of $14,207.02. Sounds dictatorial
                   5                                                                                            Lacks you-attitude
                  se Before we c                 se the  check,      must be satisfied that the release is in the
     Foc use?
            ve                                       eae                            ;   ;              Paes
      nega"            proper form.         ust insist that we be provided with a stamped original of the
                       lien indicating the document number in the appropriate district court where it
                       is filed. Also, either the release must be executed by an officer of Rollins                 Hard to
                       Equipment, or(wemust be provided with a letter from an officer of Rollins |faad
                       Equipment authorizing another individual to execute the release. _         remember

                       Please contact the undersigned so that an appointment can be scheduled for
                       this transaction.      Jargon

                       Sincerely,

                       Kelly. Pickett
                       Kelly J. Pickett




                                               To organize information to build goodwill,

                                           =     Put information your audience is most interested in first.
                                           =     Arrange information to meet your audience’s needs, not yours.
                                           =     Use headings and lists so readers can find key points quickly.

                                             Consider the letter in Figure 3.1. As the red marginal notes indicate, many
                                          individual sentences in this letter lack you-attitude. Fixing individual sen-
                                          tences could improve the letter. However, it really needs to be totally rewritten.
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                               Chapter3        Building Goodwill                             63


   Figure 3.2 shows a possible revision of this letter. The revision is clearer,
easier to read, and friendlier.


POSITIVE EMPHASIS
Some negatives are necessary. When you have bad news to give—
announcements of layoffs, product defects and recalls, price increases—
straightforward negatives build credibility. (See Chapter 10 on how to present
bad news.) Sometimes negatives are needed to make people take a problem

Figure 3.2        A Letter Revised to Improve You-Attitude




                  SIMMONS                                                     223283
                                                                              CLEVELAND, OH          44120

                                        eic)ss:555-4672
                                   Fax (216)
                  STRUCTURAL STEEL FAX:
                  December 11, 2012


                  Ms. Carol McFarland
                  Rollins Equipment Corporation
                  18438 East Night Hawk Way
                  Phoenix, AZ 85043-7800                                          ca @i?ow
                                                                      yi     eC ar?
                                                                   cite    ‘\iarare)
                  Dear Ms. McFarland:                        CHO            ofS
                                                                   ia oo"
                                                                     {
     coos it      Let's clear up the lien in the Allen contract.
             wh
       ial
      a ai@       Rollins will receive a check for $14,207.02 when you give us a release for the
              €   mechanic's lien of $14,207.02. To assure us that the release is in the proper form, .            es it
                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                             List Moe that
                                                                                                  asy 1°  to do
                      1. Give us a stamped original of the lien indicating the document's district,
                         court number, and                                                   Ss adet     andbs

                      2. Either                                                                              the sone in
                         a. Have an officer of Rollins Equipment sign the release                               ae way
                                  or
                          b. Give usa letter from a Rollins officer authorizing someone else to sign
                             the release.
                                                .      .                           m       pasizes
                   Please call me to tell me which way is best for you. © i der's
                                                                                           hoice
                   Sincerely,                                                          g

                   Kelly). Dichelt                     oe
                                          ‘on numb
                   Kelly J. Pickett Extensor ead! fo phone
                   Extension 5318! easy for

 e
 Le gn ee’                                                                                                                   |
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                               Part1      The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                   Defining Allowable          seriously. In some messages, such as disciplinary notices and negative per-
Pad                Negatives                   formance appraisals, one of your purposes is to make the problem clear. Even
                   The Des Moines Regis-       here, avoid insults or attacks on your audience’s integrity or sanity.
      =                               7
                   ter issued the following       Sometimes negatives create a “reverse psychology” that makes people look
 standards for contributors to its             favorably at your product. German power tool manufacturer Stihl advertises
 electronic forum:                             that its chain saws and other tools are not sold by chains like Lowe’s or Home
 “(The Des Moines Register’s] new              Depot. Instead, the company emphasizes that its products are sold through
 updated standards make the distinc-
                                               independent retailers. While the campaign risks offending potential custom-
                                               ers by implying that shopping at big box stores means that they don’t appreci-
 tion between offensive opinion and
 offensive approach.
   We will remove comments including           ate quality, Stihl insists that its high-end products are worth the prices that are
 these types of specific information or        charged by specialty stores.”
 language:                                        But in most situations, it’s better to be positive. Researchers have found
 ®      Libel. In general terms, that          that businesspeople responded more positively to positive than to negative
        means a comment that includes
                                               language and were more likely to say they would act ona positively worded
                                               request.° In ground-breaking research for Met Life, Martin Seligman found
        a false statement of fact that
        actually harms a person's reputa-
        tion (as opposed to insulting or       that optimistic salespeople sold 37% more insurance than pessimistic col-
        offending them).                       leagues. As a result, Met Life began hiring optimists even when they failed
 =      Sexually explicit or crude sexual      to meet the company’s other criteria. These “unqualified” optimists outsold
        comments about someone.                pessimists 21% in their first year and 57% in the next.’
 ®@     Threatening statements or state-          Positive emphasis is a way of looking at things. Is the bottle half empty or
        ments that suggest violent acts
                                               half full? You can create positive emphasis with the words, information, orga-
                                               nization, and layout you choose. “Part-time” may be a negative phrase for
        against someone.
 ™      Crude comments about a child.
                                               someone seeking full-time employment, but it may also be a positive phrase
                                               for college students seeking limited work hours while they pursue their edu-
 =      Swearing or obscenity.

                                               cation. It may become even more positive if connected with flexible hours.
 m      Derogatory phrases to define a
        group of people.
 @      Nasty name-calling (language
        such as “moron” and “white
        trash”).                                How to Create Positive Emphasis
    But we will allow opinions some will
 find offensive.                               Create positive emphasis by using the following techniques:
    We will allow conversation that is
 simply strident in tone.
    We will allow criticism of public                Avoid negative words and words with negative connotations.
  Officials.                                         Beware of hidden negatives.
       We will allow criticism of people who
  are subjects of stories.                           Focus on what the audience can do rather than on limitations.
    We will allow opinions that some             AOE Justify negative information by giving a reason or linking it to an audi-
                                                 ge
                                                 pe
                                                 I)
  may find offensive about tough                     ence benefit.
  social issues around race and sexual
     orientation,    as long as they don't       5. Put the negative information in the middle and present it compactly.
     include the kind of specific language
     | just described.”
                                                Choose the technique that produces the clearest, most accurate communication.
     Quoted from Carolyn Washburn, “Invit-
     ing Robust Conversation, but Spelling
     Out a Few Rules,” Des Moines Sunday        1. Avoid negative words and words with negative connotations.
     Register, April 15, 2007.
                                                Figure 3.3 lists some common negative words. If you find one of these words in
                                                a draft, try to substitute a more positive word. When you must use a negative,
                                                use the least negative term that will convey your meaning.
                                                   The following examples show how to replace negative words with positive
                                                words.
                                                       Negative:       We have failed to finish taking inventory.
                                                       Better:         We haven't finished taking inventory.
                                                       Still better:   We will be finished taking inventory Friday.
                                                       Negative:        If you can’t understand this explanation, feel free to call me.
                                                       Better:          If you have further questions, just call me.
                                                       Still better:   Omit the’sentence.
                                                               Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                   Chapter 3   Building Goodwill                                      65


                                                                                                               Truly Friendly Skies
Figure 3.3          Negative Words to Avoid
eS                                                                                                             United    pilot Denny
afraid              impossible                 Some dis- words:             Many un- words:                    Flanagan goes out
 anxious            lacking                    disapprove                   unclear                            of his way to create
 avoid              loss                       dishonest                    unfair                 goodwill with his passengers and
 bad                neglect                    dissatisfied                 unfortunate            customers. He takes pictures of
 careless           never                                                   unfortunately          pets in cargo compartments and
 damage             no                                                      unpleasant             shows their owners that the pets
 delay              not                       ’ Many in- words:             unreasonable           are safely onboard. He phones
 delinquent         objection                   inadequate                  unreliable             the parents of unaccompanied
 deny               problem                     incomplete                  unsure                 minors to keep them up-to-date
 difficulty         reject                      inconvenient                                       on delays. He hands out his busi-
 eliminate          sorry                       insincere                                          ness cards to all passengers, and
 error              terrible                   injury                                              the lucky ones with his signature
 except             trivial                                                                        on the back get free books,
 fail               trouble                                                                        wine, or discount          coupons.
 fault              wait                       Some mis- words:                                    When his flights are delayed or
 fear               weakness                   misfortune                                           diverted, he tries to find snacks
 hesitate           worry                      missing                                              like McDonald’s hamburgers for
 ignorant           wrong                      mistake                                             his passengers. Before some of
 ignore                                                                                            his delayed flights he is in the
                                 RRRRERRRnRN
eeeee EE EEaEEIISnERRRREEEERREEE                                                                   passenger lounge using his cell-
                                                                                                   phone to help passengers with
   Omit double negatives.                                                                          their connections. . . .      3
                                                                                                     Captain Flanagan says, “I just
   Negative:        Never fail to back up your documents.                                          treat everyone like it’s the first
   Better:          Always back up your documents.                                                 flight they've ever flown. . . . The
                                                                                                   customer deserves a good travel
   When you must use a negative term, use the least negative word that is                          experience.”
accurate.                                                                                             One of those customers noted,
   Negative:        Your balance of $835 is delinquent.                                            “lf other folks in the airline indus-
                                                                                                   try had the same attitude, it
   Better:          Your balance of $835 is past due.                                              would go a long way to mitigating
   Getting rid of negatives has the added benefit of making what you write                         some of the negative stuff that

easier to understand. Sentences with three or more negatives are very hard to
                                                                                                    has come about in the last four
                                                                                                    or five years.”
understand.®
2. Beware of hidden negatives.        Some words are not negative in                                Quoted from Scott McCartney, “To a
                                                                                                    United Pilot, The Friendly Skies Are a
themselves but become negative in context. But and however indicate a                               Point of Pride,” Wall Street Journal,
shift, so, after a positive statement, they are negative. | hope and I trust                        August 28, 2007, A1, A11. Copyright

that suggest that you aren’t sure. Patience may sound like a virtue, but it
                                                                                                    © 2007 by Dow Jones & Company,
                                                                                                    Inc. Reproduced with permission
is a necessary virtue only when things are slow. Even positives about a                             of Dow Jones & Company, Inc. via
service or product may backfire if they suggest that in the past the service                        Copyright Clearance Center.

or product was bad.
   Negative:        | hope this is the information you wanted. [Implication: I’m not sure. |
   Better:          Enclosed is a brochure about road repairs scheduled for 2012.
   Still better:    The brochure contains a list of all roads and bridges scheduled for repair
                    during 2012, specific dates when work will start, and alternate routes.
    Negative:       Please be patient as we switch to the automated system. (Implication: You
                    can expect problems.]
    Better:         If you have questions during our transition to the automated system, call
                     Melissa Morgan.
    Still better:    You'll be able to get information instantly about any house on the market
                     when the automated system is in place. If you have questions during the
                     transition, call Melissa Morgan.
    Negative:        Now Crispy Crunch tastes better. [Implication: it used to taste terrible.]
    Better:          Now Crispy Crunch tastes even better.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




66                                         Part1      The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


              Truth Can Be                    Removing negatives does not mean being arrogant or pushy.
              Spoken in Different
              Ways                            Negative:           | hope that you are satisfied enough to place future orders.

             “One Iranian told a              Arrogant:           | look forward to receiving all of your future business.
             fable of an ancient              Better:             Whenever you need computer chips, a call to Mercury is all it takes for fast
king who had an ominous                                           service.
dream. In the dream the king
saw himself aged and afflicted,               When you eliminate negative words, be sure to maintain accuracy. Words
with decaying and falling teeth.           that are exact opposites will usually not be accurate. Instead, use specifics to
Calling together his court astrol-         be both positive and accurate.
ogers for an interpretation, the
shaken king heard the first say,
                                              Negative:           The exercycle is not guaranteed for life.
“Your Majesty, | regret to tell you           Not true:           The exercycle is guaranteed for life.
that the interpretation must be
                                              True:               The exercycle is guaranteed for 10 years.
bad. The dream means that you
will die within a year.” In a rage            Legal phrases also have negative connotations for most readers and should
the king threw the brash astrolo-          be avoided whenever possible.
ger out of his court and turned to
the second man.
                                           3. Focus on what the audience can do rather than on limitations.       When
   The second astrologer said,
“Your Majesty, it is good news,            there are limits, or some options are closed, focus on the alternatives that
the very best. It means that all           remain.
your programs and projects will
                                               Negative:          We will not allow you to charge more than $5,000 on your VISA account.
 live on after you, and all your
sons and daughters will survive                Better:            You can charge $5,000 on your new VISA card.
you.” The king, who was old and               or:                 Your new VISA card gives you $5,000 in credit that you can use at thou-
 knew he might die soon, never-                                    sands of stores nationwide.
 theless was pleased with this
 interpretation and richly rewarded           As you focus on what will happen, check for you-attitude. In the last example,
 the astrologer.”                          “We will allow you to charge $5,000” would be positive, but it lacks you-attitude.
                                              When you have a benefit and a requirement the audience must meet to get
 Quoted from John P. Fieg and John G.
 Blair, There Is a Difference: 12 Inter-   the benefit, the sentence is usually more positive if you put the benefit first.
 cultural Perspectives (Washington,
 DC: Meridian House International,             Negative:           You will not qualify for the student membership rate of $55 a year unless
 1975), 83.                                                        you are a full-time student.
                                               Better:             You get all the benefits of membership for only $55 a year if you're a full-
                                                                   time student.


                                           4. Justify negative information by giving a reason or linking it to an
                                           audience benefit. Areasoncan help your audience see that the information
                                           is necessary; a benefit can suggest that the negative aspect is outweighed by
                                           positive factors. Be careful, however, to make the logic behind your reason
                                           clear and to leave no loopholes.
                                               Negative:           We cannot sell individual pastel sets.
                                               Loophole:           To keep down packaging costs and to help you save on shipping and han-
                                                                   dling costs, we sell pastel sets in packages of 12.

                                              Suppose the customer says, “I'll pay the extra shipping and handling. Send
                                            me six.” If you truly sell only in packages of 12, you need to say so:
                                                   Better:   To keep down packaging costs and to help customers save on shipping and han-
                                                             dling costs, we sell pastel sets only in packages of 12.

                                                If you link the negative element to a benefit, be sure it is a benefit your
                                            audience will acknowledge. Avoid telling people that you're doing things “for
                                            their own good.” They may have a different notion of what their own good
                                            is. You may think you're doing customers a favor by limiting their credit so
                                            they don’t get in over their heads and go bankrupt. They may think they’d
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                            Chapter3   Building Goodwill                                        67


                                                                                                        Four Ways to Say
                                                                                                        “Yes” Instead of
                                                                                                        “No”

                                                                                                         “Yes, | want to help.’
                                                                                            Even if you have to say no per-
                                                                                            sonally, there is usually an alter-
                                                                                            native yes. By helping to solve
                                                                                            someone’s      problem—say,      by
                                                                                            referring them to someone who
                                                                                            might be able to help them—
                                                                                            you keep the positive energy in
                                                                                            motion.

                                                                                            ‘Yes, you can do better.’
                                                                                             Rather than say, “This is terrible,”
                                                                                             it’s a lot more motivating to say,
                                                                                             “You do such terrific work. I’m
                                                                                             not sure this is up to your caliber.”

                                                                                            ‘Yes, | see you.’
                                                                                             It only takes a minute to send a
                                                                                             thank-you note or respond to an
                                                                                             unsolicited resumé.

                                                                                            ‘Yes, your talents lie elsewhere.’
                                                                                             Warren Buffet says that he’s
                                                                                             never fired anyone. He has just
                                                                                             helped them to find the right job.”

                                                                                             Quoted from Linda Kaplan Thaler and
                                                                                             Robin Koval, The Power of Nice: How
Some stores might say, “Put books you don’t want here.” But bookseller Joseph-Beth in        to Conquer the Business World with
Lexington, KY, uses positive emphasis.                                                       Kindness (New York: Currency, 2006),
                                                                                             84-87.


be better off with more credit so they could expand in hopes of making more
sales and more profits.

5. Put the negative information in the middle and present it
compactly.      Put negatives at the beginning or end only if you want to
emphasize    the  negative. To deemphasize a written negative, put it in the
middle of a paragraph rather than in the first or last sentence and in the middle
of the message rather than in the first or last paragraphs.
    When a letter or memo runs several pages, remember that the bottom of the
first page is also a position of emphasis, even if it is in the middle of a para-
graph, because of the extra white space of the bottom margin. (The first page
gets more attention because it is on top and the reader’s eye may catch lines
of the message even when he or she isn’t consciously reading it; the tops and
bottoms of subsequent pages don’t get this extra attention.) If possible, avoid
placing negative information at the bottom of the first page.
    Giving a topic lots of space emphasizes it. Therefore, you can de-empha-
size negative information by giving it as little space as possible. Give negative
information only once in your message. Don’t list negatives with bulleted or
numbered lists. These lists take space and emphasize material.

 How to Check Positive Emphasis
All five of the strategies listed above help create positive emphasis. However,
you should always check to see that the positive emphasis is appropriate, sin-
cere, and realistic.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




68                                         Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages

                                                                           CLOSETOHEMEOMAC CP
            So’s Yer Old Man
            It may not come       as a                                                ALL        OF OUR
                                                                                COMPUTER         TECHNICIANS
            surprise to you, but a                                          ARE CURRENTLY BUSY. WA/LE
                                                                           YOU WAIT PLEASE Any    OUR
            Harvard     professor's                                         EXCLUSIVE           PRESENTATION
            computerized — study                                                   OF ‘WAR
                                                                                        AND PEACE,
 of congressional communica-
                                                                                         AS READ BY
 tions reveals that 27% of the time
 members of Congress are taunt-
 ing each other.
   The three categories the study
 expected to find were well-
 known to political scientists:
 claiming credit, taking a posi-
 tion, and “advertising” someone
 or something to get one’s name
 out there. That members of
 Congress also spend a quarter
 of their time taunting each other
 came as a surprise. Taunting was                                     CLOSE TO HOME © 2007 John McPherson. Reprinted
 most common among members                                            with permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights
 with a relatively safe position.                                     reserved.

 Adapted from David A. Fahrenthold,
 “27% of Communication by Members
 of Congress |s Taunting, Professor Con-
 cludes,” Washington Post, April6, 2011,      As you read at the beginning of this section, positive emphasis is not always
 http://www.washingtonpost.com/            appropriate. Some bad news is so serious that presenting it with positive tone
 politics/27 percent-of-communication-
                                           is insensitive, if not unethical. Layoffs, salary cuts, and product defects are all
 by-members-of-congress-is-taunting-
 professor-concludes/2011/04/06/           topics in this category.
 AF1no2qC_story.html.                         Some positive emphasis is so overdone that it no longer seems sincere.
                                           The used-car sales rep selling a rusting auto is one stereotype of insincerity. A
                                           more common example for most business people is the employee who gushes
                                           praise through gritted teeth over your promotion. Most of us have experienced
                                           something similar, and we know how easy it is to see through the insincerity.
                                              Positive emphasis can also be so overdone that it clouds the reality of the
                                           situation. If your company has two finalists for a sales award, and only one
                                           award, the loser does not have second place, which implies a second award.
                                           On the other hand, if all sales reps win the same award, top performers will
                                           feel unappreciated. Too much praise can also make mediocre employees think
                                           they are doing great. Keep your communications realistic.
                                              Restraint can help make positive emphasis more effective. Conductor Otto
                                           Klemperer was known for not praising his orchestra. One day, pleased with
                                           a particularly good rehearsal, he spoke a brusque “good.” His stunned musi-
                                           cians broke into spontaneous applause. Klemperer rapped his baton on his
                                           music stand to silence them and said, “Not that good.”

                                            TONE, POWER, AND POLITENESS
                                            Tone is the implied attitude of the communicator toward the audience. If
                                            the words of a document seem condescending or rude, tone is a problem.
                                            Norms for politeness are cultural and generational; they also vary from office
                                            to office.
                                               Tone is tricky because it interacts with context and power. Language that is
                                            acceptable within one group may be unacceptable if used by someone outside
                                            the group. Words that might seem friendly from a superior to a subordinate
                                            may seem uppity if used by the subordinate to the superior. Similarly, words
                                            that may be neutral among peers may be seen as negative if sent by a superior
                                            to subordinate.
                                                               Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                     Chapter3   Building Goodwill                                           69


  Paul Goward, the former police chief of Winter Haven, Florida, discovered                                       Solving an Ethical
this lesson about the connection between power and tone. Goward sent an                                           Dusmmasing
e-mail to about 80 employees asking “Are You a Jelly Belly?” In the e-mail, he                                    cael
provided 10 reasons why his employees should be in better shape; the reasons                                      Most      ethical    dilem-
ranged from health risks to department image. The e-mail added, “If you are —M8 boil down to people, bal-
unfit, do yourself and everyone else a favor. . . . See a professional about a ancing   the needs or desires of
                                                                                 one constituency against those
proper diet. . .. Stop making excuses. . . We didn’t hire you unfit and we don’t
                                                                                 of another: Management ver-
want you working unfit.” The e-mail so offended employees that Goward was        sus staff, stockholders versus
forced- to resign.’                  :                                            Ls                 customers.
   Using the proper tone with employees can have huge economic impact for                              “ro, maker of lawnmowers.
a business. A Litigation Trends Survey, based on reports from 310 in-house                           faced such a dilemma. One of
                                                                                                            very
counsel, found employee lawsuits to be the top litigation concern of corpo- __ its popular riding mowers is
rate lawyers. Disgruntled employees are suing more than ever before, and dis-                        hard to overturn, but when it
putes over wages or hours frequently can be brought as class actions, making                         does, it can seriously injure the
them even more expensive.”                                                                           driver. Toro decided to install roll

   The desirable tone for business writing is businesslike but not stiff, friendly _a's behind the drivers seat on
but not phony, confident but not arrogant, polite but not groveling. Several        ™™ machines Ou bor abe (ie
guidelines will help you achieve the tone you want.                                                  Oe                     eas          ere
                                                                                                     added for safety.
                                                                 s                                     Then   an     even     harder    issue
                         3
Use Courtesy Titles for People You Don’t Know Well                                                   arose.    Shouldn't        the same
                             f                                                          :            ethical treatment be offered on
Most U.S. organizations use first names for everyone, whatever their age Or — jachines already owned? Those
                Os  8

rank. But many people don’t like being called by their first names by people — owners would be protected but
they don’t know or by someone much younger. When you talk or write to                                the cost would adversely affect
people outside your organization, use first names only if you’ve established                         shareholders.
a personal relationship. If you don’t know someone well, use a courtesy title | What would you do? Toro
(see pages 71-72 for more on courtesy titles):                                 installed the bars for all mowers,
                                                                               new and used, a decision they

   Dear Mr.  Reynolds:                                                         believed would best serve users
                                                                                                     and shareholders           in the long
   Dear Ms. Lee:
                                                                                                     term.

Be Aware of the Power Implications of the Words You Use                                              Adapted from Kevin Cashman, “What
                                                                                                     Exactly Is Ethics?” Forbes, March 3,

“Thank you for your cooperation” is generous coming from a superior to a                             2007, _http://www.forbes.com/2007/
subordinate; , it’s not appropriate                         superior. Different ways
                                    in a message 8 to ofyour P                     Ms
                                                                                                     03/03/leadership-cashman-ethics-
                                                                                                     leadership-citizen-cx_kc_0305ethics.
                         Pprop
of asking for action carry different levels of politeness.”                                           html.

   Order: (lowest politeness)                     Turn in your time card by Monday.

    Polite order: (midlevel politeness)           Please turn in your time card by Monday.

    Indirect request: (higher politeness)         Time cards should be turned in by Monday.

    Question: (highest politeness)                Would you be able to turn in your time card by
                                                  Monday?

    Higher levels of politeness may be unclear. In some cases, a question may
 seem like a request for information to which it’s acceptable to answer, “No, I
 can’t.” In other cases, it will be an order, simply phrased in polite terms.
    You need more politeness if you’re asking for something that will inconve-
 nience the audience and help you more than the person who does the action.
 Generally, you need less politeness when you’te asking for something small,
 routine, or to the audience’s benefit. Some discourse communities, however,
 prefer that even small requests be made politely.
    Lower politeness:             To start the scheduling process, please describe your availabil-
                                  ity for meetings during the second week of the month.
    Higher politeness:            Could you let me know what times you'd be free for a meeting
                                  the second week of the month?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




70                                       Part1     The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


               Attempts To Create
               a Unisex Pronoun          REDUCING BIAS IN BUSINESS COMMUNICATION
            For more than 150            According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the United States now has more women
           years, people have            than men, and more women than men are attending college and attaining
            attempted   to coin          postsecondary degrees. The Hispanic population is the fastest growing in the
 a unisex pronoun. None of the           country; it numbered 50.5 million in the 2010 census. Four states (California,
 attempts has been successful.
                                         Hawaii, New Mexico, and Texas) plus the District of Columbia have a
                                         “majority-minority” population, where more than 50% are part of a minority
         heor       hisor    himor       group. The number of people 65 and older is also growing; that population
 Date    she        her      her
                                         now numbers over 40 million, and 6.5 million of them are still in the work-
 1850    ne         nis      nim
                                         force.'? These figures highlight the growing diversity of the workplace and the
 1884    le         lis      lim
 1938    se         sim      sis
                                         need to communicate with appropriate language.
 1970    ve         vis      ver            Bias-free language is language that does not discriminate against people on
 1977    e          e’s      em          the basis of sex, physical condition, race, ethnicity, age, religion or any other
 1988    ala        alis     alum        category. It includes all audience members, helps to sustain goodwill, is fair
                                         and friendly, and complies with the law.
 Adapted from Dennis E. Baron, “The
                                            Check to be sure that your language is bias-free. Doing so is ethical; it can
 Epicene Pronoun: Word That Failed,”     also avoid major problems and lawsuits.
 American Speech 56 (1981): 83-97;
 and Ellen Graham, “Business Bul-        m       Josef Ackermann, chief executive of Deutsche Bank, was mocked                            in the
 letin,” Wall Street Journal, December           international news when he said at a news conference that including
 29, 1988, A1.
                                                 women on the bank’s all-male executive board would make it “more col-
                                                 orful and prettier too.” The publicity added to mistrust of the bank at an
                                                 awkward time when it was lobbying to dissuade German policy makers
                                                 from imposing restrictions.'*
                                         =       Conservative advice expert Dr. Laura Schlessinger resigned abruptly from
                                                 her syndicated radio show after a controversy arising from her multiple
                                                 use of a racial epithet while talking to an African American caller.
                                         =       Famous radio personality Don Imus was fired by CBS after making racist
                                                 comments about the Rutgers University women’s basketball team.

                                          Making Language Nonsexist
                                          Nonsexist language treats both sexes neutrally. Check to be sure that your
                                          messages are free from sexism in four areas: job titles, courtesy titles and
                                          names, pronouns, and other words and phrases.

                                          Job titles Use neutral titles which do not imply that a job is held only by
                                          men or only by women. Many job titles are already neutral: accountant, banker,
                                          doctor, engineer, inspector, manager, nurse, pilot, secretary, technician, to name a
                                          few. Other titles reflect gender stereotypes and need to be changed.

                                             Instead of              Use

                                             Businessman             A specific title: executive, accountant, department head, owner of a
                                                                        small business, men and women in business, businessperson
                                             Chairman                Chair, chairperson, moderator
                                             Fireman                 Firefighter
                                             Foreman                 Supervisor
                                             Mailman                 Mail Carrier
                                             Salesman                Salesperson, sales representative
                                             Waitress                Server
                                             Woman lawyer            Lawyer
                                             Workman                 Worker, employee. Or use a specific title: crane operator, bricklayer, etc.
                                             ee
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                   Chapter3   Building Goodwill                        71


Courtesy titles and names         E-mails to people you know normally do not
use courtesy titles. However, letters, memos, and e-mails to people with whom
you have a more formal relationship require courtesy titles in the salutation
unless you're on a first-name basis with your reader. (See Appendix A for
examples of memo and letter formats.)
   When you know your reader’s name and gender, use courtesy titles that do
not indicate marital status: Mr. for men and Ms. for women. Ms. is particularly
useful when you do not know what a woman’s marital status is. However,
even when you happen to know that a woman is married or single, you still
use Ms. unless you know that she prefers another title. There are, however,
two exceptions:
1. If the woman         has a professional title, use that title if you would use it
    for a man.
   Dr. Kristen Sorenson is our new company physician.
   The Rev. Elizabeth Townsley gave the invocation.
2. If the woman prefers to be addressed as Mrs. or Miss, use the title she pre-
    fers rather than Ms. (You-attitude takes precedence over nonsexist lan-
    guage: address the reader as she—or he—prefers to be addressed.) To find
         out if a woman prefers a traditional title,



 =        Check the signature block in previous correspondence. If a woman types
          her name as (Miss) Elaine Anderson or (Mrs.) Kay Royster, use the title she
          designates.
 =        Notice the title a woman uses in introducing herself on the phone. If she
          says, “This is Robin Stine,” use Ms. when you write to her. If she says,
          “I’m Mrs. Stine,” use the title she specifies.
 =        When you're writing job letters or crucial correspondence, call
          the company and ask the receptionist which title your reader
          prefers.


In addition to using parallel courtesy titles, use parallel forms for names.


     Not Parallel                               Parallel

     Members of the committee will be           Members of the committee will be
       Mr. Jones, Mr. Yacone, and Lisa.           Mr. Jones, Mr. Yacone, and
                                                  Ms. Melton.
                                                        or
                                                Members of the committee will be Irving,
                                                  Ted, and Lisa.
 a

 When you know your reader’s name but not the gender, either

     =     Call the company and ask the receptionist, or
     m     Use the reader’s full name in the salutation:
           Dear Chris Crowell:
           Dear J. C. Meath:
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




72                                         Part1     The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                 Booming Business          When you know neither the reader’s name nor gender, you have three options:
              As the 78 million
            , U.S. baby boomers             =      Omit the salutation and use a subject line in its place. (See Figure A.4,
               age, more and more                  Simplified Format.)
               companies are mak-                  SUBJECT: RECOMMENDATION FOR BEN WANDELL
 ing products with adaptations for
                                            =      Use the reader’s position or job title:
 physical infirmities:
 =     Appliance control panels with
                                                   Dear Loan Officer:
       adjustable typefaces and                    Dear Registrar:
       color combinations.
                                             =     Usea general group to which your reader belongs:
 =     Ovens, dishwashers, and
       washer/dryer sets mounted
                                                   Dear Investor:
       higher so people have to                    Dear Admissions Committee:
       bend over less.
 =     Sink fixtures with levers           Pronouns             When you refer to a specific person, use the appropriate gender
       instead of knobs, for hands         pronouns:
       with limited mobility.
 =     Cellphones with large keys
                                                 In his speech, John Jones said that. . .
       and large numbers on the                  In her speech, Judy Jones said that.          . .
       screen.
   Nissan and Ford Motor Com-
                                              When you are referring not to a specific person but to anyone who may be
 panies fit their design engineers
                                           in a given job or position, traditional gender pronouns are sexist.
 with special body suits that                    Sexist:   a. Each supervisor must certify that the time sheet for his department is correct.
 mimic aging bodies. The suits
                                                 Sexist:   b. When the nurse fills out the accident report form, she should send one copy to
 have an expanded waist, limited
                                                                the Central Division Office.
 mobility in key joints, and goggles
 that mimic the effect of cataracts.
                                              Business communication uses four ways to eliminate sexist generic pro-
   Marketing these new features
                                           nouns: use plurals, use second-person you, revise the sentence to omit the
                                           pronoun, or use pronoun pairs. Whenever you have a choice of two or more
 requires a delicate touch, because
 no one likes to be reminded that
 their body is failing.
                                           ways to make a phrase or sentence nonsexist, choose the alternative that is the
                                           smoothest and least conspicuous.
     Reproduced with permission of Dow        The following examples use these methods to revise sentences 4 and b
     Jones & Company, Inc. via Copyright
     Clearance Center.
                                           above.
                                            1. Use plural nouns and pronouns.
                                                   Nonsexist:     a. Supervisors must certify that the time sheets for their departments are
                                                                    correct.

                                                   Note: When you use plural nouns and pronouns, other words in the sen-
                                                   tence may need to be made plural too. In the example above, plural super-
                                                   visors have plural time sheets and departments.
                                                        Avoid mixing singular nouns and plural pronouns.
                                                   Nonsexist but lacks agreement:        b. When the nurse fills out the accident report, they
                                                                                            should send one copy to the Central Division Office.

                                                   Since nurse is singular, it is incorrect to use the plural they to refer to it. The
                                                   resulting lack of agreement is acceptable orally but is not yet acceptable in
                                                   writing. Instead, use one of the other ways to make the sentence nonsexist.
                                            2. Use you.

                                                   Nonsexist:     a. You must certify that the time sheet for your department is correct.
                                                   Nonsexist:     b. When you fill out an accident report form, send one copy to the Central
                                                                     Division Office.

                                                   You is particularly good for instructions and statements of the responsibili-
                                                   ties of someone in a given position.
                                                                  Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                      Chapter3   Building Goodwill                                     73


3. Substitute an article (a, an, or the) for the pronoun, or revise the sentence so
   that the pronoun is unnecessary.
   Nonsexist:    a. The supervisor must certify that the time sheet for the department is correct.
   Nonsexist:    b. The nurse will
                 1. Fill out the accident report form.
                 2. Send one copy of the form to the Central Division Office.

4. When you must focus on the action of an individual, use pronoun pairs.
    Nonsexist:   a. The supervisor must certify that the time sheet for his or her department is
                    correct.

    Nonsexist:   b. When the nurse fills out the accident report form, he or she should send
                    one copy to the Central Division Office.



Other words and phrases                    If you find any terms similar to those in the first
column in Figure 3.4 in your messages or your company’s documents, replace
them with terms similar to those in the second column.
  Not every word containing man is sexist. For example, manager is not sexist.
The word comes from the Latin manus meaning hand; it has nothing to do with
maleness.
   Avoid terms that assume that everyone is married or is heterosexual.
   Biased:   You and your husband or wife are cordially invited to the reception.
   Better:   You and your guest are cordially invited to the reception.



Making Language Nonracist and Nonageist
Language is nonracist and nonageist when it treats all races and ages fairly,
avoiding negative stereotypes of any group. Use the following guidelines to
check for bias in documents you write or edit.
   Give someone’s race or age only if it is relevant to your story. When you
do mention these characteristics, give them for everyone in your story—not
just the non-Caucasian, non-young-to-middle-aged adults you mention.


 Figure 3.4           Getting Rid of Sexist Terms and Phrases
  Instead of                         Use                                   Because

  The girl at the front              The woman’s name                      Call female employees women just as you call male
  desk                                 orjob title: “Ms. Browning,”           employees men. When you talk about a specific
                                       “Rosa,” “the receptionist”             woman, use her name, just as you use a man’s
                                                                              name to talk about a specific man.

  The ladies on our staff            The women on our staff                Use parallel terms for males and females. Therefore,
                                                                             use ladies only if you refer to the males on your staff
                                                                             as gentlemen. Few businesses do, since social
                                                                             distinctions are rarely at issue.

  Manpower                           Personnel                             The power in business today comes from both women
  Manhours                           Hours or worker hours                   and men.
                                     Staffing                                                                ;
  Manning

  Managers and their                 Managers and their                    Managers may be female; not everyone is married.
  wives                                guests
 a                             a
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




74                                       Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


              New Technology
              Access for People
              with Visual
              and Hearing
              Impairments

 In October      2010,   President
 Obama signed into law a Dill
 aimed    at making       technolo-
 gies that are staples of life more
 accessible. The law mandates
 =   Easier Internet connections
     on smart phones.
 =   Audible descriptions of action
     on TV.
 =   Captions for dialogue on TV.
 =   TV remotes with buttons or
     switches for easier access to
     closed captioning.
 =   Equipment compatible with
     hearing aids for Internet
     phone calls.
                                         Organizations are making their business sites more accommodating to people with
 Adapted from “Bill Will Improve Tech-   disabilities.
 nology Access for Blind, Deaf,” Des
 Moines Register, October 9, 2010, 3A.

                                            Refer to a group by the term it prefers. As preferences change, change
                                         your usage. Fifty years ago, Negro was preferred as a more dignified term than
                                         colored for African Americans. As times changed, Black and African American
                                         replaced it. Gallup polls show that the majority of black Americans (about
                                         60%) have no preference between the two terms. However, among those who
                                         do care, polls show a slight trend toward African American.
                                            Oriental has now been replaced by Asian.
                                            The term Latino is the most acceptable group term to refer to Mexican
                                         Americans, Cuban Americans, Puerto Ricans, Dominicans, Brazilianos, and
                                         other people with Central and Latin American backgrounds. (Latina is the
                                         term for an individual woman.) Better still is to refer to the precise group. The
                                         differences among various Latino groups are at least as great as the differences
                                          among Italian Americans, Irish Americans, Armenian Americans, and others
                                          descended from various European groups.
                                             Baby boomers, older people, and mature customers are more generally accepted
                                          terms than Senior Citizens or Golden Agers.
                                             Avoid terms that suggest that competent people are unusual. The state-
                                          ment “She is an intelligent purple woman” suggests that the writer expects
                                          most purple women to be stupid. “He is an asset to his race” suggests that
                                          excellence in the race is rare. “He is a spry 70-year-old” suggests that the
                                          writer is amazed that anyone that old can still move.

                                          Talking about People with Disabilities and Diseases
                                          A disability is a physical, mental, sensory, or emotional impairment that inter-
                                          feres with the major tasks of daily living. According to the U.S. Census Bureau,
                                          19% of Americans currently have a disability; of those, about 48% who were
                                          21-64 and had a “nonsevere disability” were employed full-time.'° The num-
                                          ber of people with disabilities will rise as the population ages.
                                             To keep trained workers, more and more companies are making accommo-
                                          dations for disabilties. Companies such as Sylvania, American Express, and
                                                              Business and Administrative Communication,
                                                                                                      Tenth Edition




                                                                  Chapter3    Building Goodwill                                        75



General Motors are offering accommodations such as telecommuting, flexible                                    R-E-S-P-E-C-T
hours, workshift changes, and assignment changes.’”                                                =          “Most    major     airlines
   When talking about people with disabilities, use people-first language to                       wai i      and      hotel     chains
focus on the person, not the condition. People-first language names the person                             provide             disability
first, then adds the condition. Use it instead of the traditional noun phrases                     training to employees. .. . |
that imply the condition defines the person. In 2010, President Obama signed                       recognize when someone has

Rosa’s Law, which replaces “mentally retarded” with “an individual with an
                                                                                                   been trained—to offer me a
intellectual disability,” in most federal statutes.’®                                              Braille menu, use my name
                                                                                                   when addressing me, or take a
                                                                                                   moment to orient me to a new
 Instead of                  Use                               Because                             environment. What | appreciate
                                                               The condition does not              even more, though, is . . . simple,
 The mentally retarded       People with an
                               intellectual disability           define the person or his or       common courtesy.
                                                                 her potential.                       “| don’t care how many pages
                                                                                                    in an employee manual some-
 Cancer patients             People being treated
                                                                                                   where are devoted to. . . the
                               for cancer
                                                                                                    dos and don'ts of interacting with
a                                                                                                   someone who is deaf, blind, or
                                                                                                    mentally retarded. Among hun-
   Avoid negative terms, unless the audience prefers them. You-attitude takes                       dreds of experiences in airports
precedence over positive emphasis: use the term a group prefers. People who                         and hotels, the one distinction
lost their hearing as infants, children, or young adults often prefer to be called                  that separates the (mostly) pleas-
deaf, or Deaf in recognition of Deafness as a culture. But people who lose their                    ing from the (occasionally) painful
hearing as older adults often prefer to be called hard of hearing, even when                        in my encounters has been the

their hearing loss is just as great as that of someone who identifies him- or                       honest friendliness and respect
                                                                                                    with which | have or have not
herself as part of the Deaf culture.
   Using the right term requires keeping up with changing preferences. If your
                                                                                                     been treated.
                                                                                                      “Ask me where |’d like to sit,
target audience is smaller than the whole group, use the term preferred by that                     whether | need help getting there,
audience, even if the group as a whole prefers another term.                                        and what other kinds of help |
    Some negative terms, however, are never appropriate. Negative terms such                        need.
as afflicted, suffering from, and struck down also suggest an outdated view of any                    “Please, assume that | know
illness as a sign of divine punishment.                                                             more about my disability than
                                                                                                    anyone else ever could.
                                                                                                      “Respect me as you do any
  Instead of                    Use                      Because
                                                                                                    other customer who is paying for
  Confined to a wheelchair      Uses a                   Wheelchairs enable people to               the same service, and have the
            :                     wheelchair               escape confinement.                      grace to apologize if something
                                Person with              Someone can have a disease                 does go wrong.
  AIDS victim
                                   AIDS                    without being victimized by it.            “Too many companies, it seems

                                Atypical                 People with disabilities are atypical —    to me, are busy shaking in their
  Abnormal
                                                           but not necessarily abnormal.            boots over the imagined high
                                                                                                    cost of accommodating people
 Ee
                                                                                                    with disabilities when, in many
                                                                                                    instances, a good old-fashioned
 Choosing Bias-Free Photos and Illustrations                                                        refresher course     in manners
                                                                                                    would cover most bases.”
 When you produce a document with photographs or illustrations, check the
 visuals for possible bias. Do they show people of both sexes and all races? Is                     Quoted    from   Deborah    Kendrick,

 there a sprinkling of various kinds of people (younger and older, people using
                                                                                                    “Disabled Resent Being Patronized,”
                                                                                                    Columbus Dispatch, July 21, 1996,
 wheelchairs, etc.)? It’s OK to have individual pictures that have just one sex or                  3B. Reprinted with permission.
 one race; the photos as a whole do not need to show exactly 50% men and 50%
 women. But the general impression should suggest that diversity is welcome
 and normal.
    Check relationships and authority figures as well as numbers. If all the men
 appear in business suits and the women in maids’ uniforms, the pictures are
 sexist even if an equal number of men and women are pictured. If the only
 nonwhites pictured are factory workers, the photos support racism even when
 an equal number of people from each race are shown.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




76                                  Part1        The Building Blocks of Effective Messages




                                    =       You-attitude is a style of communication that looks at things from the
                                            audience’s point of view, emphasizing what the audience wants to know,
                                            respecting the audience’s intelligence, and protecting the audience’s ego.
                                            1.    Talk about the audience, not about yourself.
                                            2. Refer to the audience’s request or order specifically.
                                            3. Don’t talk about feelings except to congratulate or offer sympathy.
                                            +  In positive situations, use you more often than I. Use we when it includes
                                               the audience.
                                            5. In negative situations, avoid the word you. Protect the audience’s ego.
                                               Use passive verbs and impersonal expressions to avoid assigning blame.
                                    =       Apply you-attitude beyond the sentence level by using organization and
                                            content as well as style to build goodwill.
                                    =       Positive emphasis means focusing on the positive rather than the negative
                                            aspects of a situation. To create positive emphasis
                                            1. Avoid negative words and words with negative connotations.
                                      2. Beware of hidden negatives.
                                      3. Focus on what the audience can do rather than on limitations.
                                      4 Justify negative information by giving a reason or linking it to an audi-
                                          ence benefit.
                                      5. Put the negative information in the middle and present it compactly.
                                    = Check to see that your positive emphasis is appropriate, sincere, and clear.
                                     =      The desirable tone for business communication is businesslike but not stiff,
                                            friendly but not phony, confident but not arrogant, polite but not groveling.
                                     =      Bias-free language is fair and friendly; it complies with the law. It includes
                                            all members of your audience; it helps sustain goodwill.
                                     =      Check to be sure that your language is nonsexist, nonracist, and nonageist.
                                     =      Communication should be free from sexism in four areas: job titles, cour-
                                            tesy titles and names, pronouns, and other words and phrases.
                                        =   Ms. is the nonsexist courtesy title for women. Whether or not you know a
                                            woman’s marital status, use Ms. unless the woman has a professional title
                                            or unless you know that she prefers a traditional title.
                                        =   Four ways to make pronouns nonsexist are to use plurals, to use you, to
                                            revise the sentence to omit the pronoun, and to use pronoun pairs.
                                        =   When you talk about people with disabilities or diseases, use the term they
                                            prefer.
                                        =   When you produce newsletters or other documents with photos and illus-
                                            trations, picture a sampling of the whole population, not just part of it.

                                                                                                           *Go to www.mhhe.com/locker10e for

           CHAPTER         3            Exer cises              and      Problems                         additional Exercises and Problems.



 3.1           Reviewing the Chapter

     1.   What are five ways to create you-attitude? (LO 3-1)                4.   What are different categories to keep in mind when
     2.   What are five ways to create positive emphasis?                         you are trying to reduce bias in business messages?
          (LO 3-2)                                                                (LO 3-4)
     3.   How can you improve the tone of business                           5.   What techniques can you use when you are trying
          messages? (LO 3-3)                                                      to reduce bias in business messages? (LO 3-4)
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                               Chapter3     Building Goodwill


3.2        Evaluating the Ethics of Positive Emphasis

The first term in each pair is negative; the second is a           nervousness                        adrenaline
positive term that is sometimes substituted for it. Which          problem                            challenge
of the positive terms seem ethical? Which seem unethi-             price increase                     price change
cal? Briefly explain your choices.
                                                                   for-profit hospital                tax-paying hospital
   cost                             investment
   second mortgage                  home equity loan               used car                           pre-owned car
   tax                              user fee                       credit card fees                   usage charges



3.3         Eliminating Negative Words and Words with Negative Connotations

Revise each of the following sentences to replace nega-          3: When you write a report, do not make claims that
tive words with positive ones. Be sure to keep the mean-            you cannot support with evidence.
ing of the original sentence.                                    4. Don’t drop in without an appointment. Your coun-
 1. You will lose customer goodwill if you are slow in               selor or case worker may be unavailable.
     handling returns and issuing refunds.                         . Tam anxious to discuss my qualifications in an
 2. Do not put any paper in this box that is not                       interview.
     recyclable.



3.4         Focusing on the Positive

Revise each of the following sentences to focus on the             . Asa     first-year employee, you are not eligible for
options that remain, not those that are closed off.                    dental insurance.

 1. Scholarship applications that arrive December 1 or             . I will be out of the country October 25 to November
    later cannot be processed.                                       10 and will not be able to meet with you then.
 2. You cannot use flextime unless you have the consent            . You will not get your first magazine for at least four
    of your supervisor.                                                weeks.




 3.5        Identifying Hidden Negatives

 Identify the hidden negatives in the following sentences          .  [hope you find the information in this brochure
 and revise to eliminate them. In some cases, you may                beneficial to you and a valuable reference as you
 need to add information to revise the sentence effectively.         plan your move.
  1. The seminar will help you become a better manager.            . In thinking about your role in our group, I
                                                                     remember two occasions where you contributed
  2. Thank you for the confidence you have shown in us               something.
     by ordering one of our products. It will be shipped
       to you soon.                                               6. [In job letter] This job in customer service is so good
                                                                       for me; I am so ready to take on responsibility.
  3. This publication is designed to explain how your
     company can start a recycling program.



 3.6         Improving You-Attitude and Positive Emphasis

 Revise these sentences to improve you-attitude and               2: Although I was only an intern and didn’t actually
 positive emphasis. Eliminate any awkward phrasing. In                make presentations to major clients, |was required
 some cases, you may need to add information to revise                to prepare PowerPoint slides for the meetings and
 the sentence effectively.                                            to answer some of the clients’ questions.
  1. You'll be happy to learn that the cost of tuition will         . At DiYanni Homes we have more than 30 plans that
                                                                      we will personalize just for you.
     not rise next year.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




78                                 Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


 4. Please notify HR of your bank change as soon as                       buy items for resale. To prevent any abuse of the
    possible to prevent a disruption of your direct                       discount privilege, you may be asked to justify your
    deposit.                                                              purchase.
                                                                        . Lapologize for my delay in answering your inquiry.
 5. I’m sorry you were worried. You did not miss the                      The problem was that I had to check with our sup-
    deadline for signing up for a flexible medical
                                                                          pliers to see whether we could provide the item in
    spending account.                                                     the quantity you say you want. We can.
 6. We are in the process of upgrading our website.
                                                                     10. If you mailed a check with your order, as you claim,
    Please bear with us.
                                                                          we failed to receive it.
 7. You will be happy to hear that our cellphone plan
                                                                     11. This job sounds perfect for me.
    does not charge you for incoming calls.
 8. The employee discount may only be used for pur-
    chases for your own use or for gifts; you may not



3.7          Eliminating Biased Language

Explain the source of bias in each of the following, and                . Parenting 2012 shows you how to persuade your
revise to remove the bias.                                                husband to do his share of child care chores.
 1. We recommend hiring Jim Ryan and Elizabeth                          . Mr. Paez, Mr. O’Connor, and Tonya will represent
     Shuman. Both were very successful summer interns.                    our office at the convention.
     Jim drafted the report on using rap music in ads,                  . Sue Corcoran celebrates her 50th birthday today.
     and Elizabeth really improved the looks of the                       Stop by her cubicle at noon to get a piece of cake
     office.                                                              and to help us sing “The Old Grey Mare Just Ain’t
 2. All sales associates and their wives are invited to the               What She Used to Be.”
     picnic.
                                                                      10. Because older customers tend to be really picky, we
     3. Although he is blind, Mr. Morin is an excellent                   will need to give a lot of details in our ads.
        group leader.
     4. Unlike many blacks, Yvonne has extensive experi-
        ence designing web pages.                                             wake up on the bright side”
     5. Chris Renker
        Pacific Perspectives
        6300 West Corondad Blvd.
        Los Angles, CA
        Gentlemen:
     6. Enrique Torres has very good people skills for a man.



 3.8          Analyzing You-Attitude
 Your book gives some examples of occasions when you-
 attitude is inappropriate. What are some other exam-
 ples? Why are they inappropriate? How would you fix
 them?



 3.9          Analyzing Positive Tone
                                                                                  “WELL   .. . LOOKS   LIKE MY LAPTOPS   FRIED.   BUT WHAT A
                                                                                 FANTASTIC OPPORTUNITY FOR A LITTLE VENTRILOQUISM.”
 LaQuinta ran a series of ads using cartoons, like the one
 on this page, featuring people making the best of disas-
 ters. You can see the whole series at this website: http: //
 www.lq.com/lq/brightside /index.jsp.                                          For reservations, visit LO.com
     What do you think of these ads? Does the use of nega-                                                          tAQUINTA
                                                                                                                         INNS     &@ SUITES
 tives help or hinder them? What overall impression of
 LaQuinta do the ads leave with you?                                          Reprinted with permission.
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                   Chapter3    Building Goodwill


3.10     Analyzing Goodwill
A recent study by a law professor shows that credit                     In small groups, discuss whether you think this practice
card companies make offers to people fresh out of bank-             is ethical. Why or why not? What reasons exist for not offer-
ruptcy. In the study of 341 families, almost 100% received          ing new credit to people who have just gone through bank-
credit card offers within a year after completing bank-             ruptcy? Why might such people need new credit cards?
ruptcy proceedings, and 87% of those offers mentioned               Adapted from Marie Beaudette, “Study: Credit Card Offers
the bankruptcy proceedings. In fact, 20% of the offers              Flood Once-Bankrupt Consumers,” Des Moines Register,
came from companies the family had owed before the                  August 10, 2007, 6D.
bankruptcy.


3.11      Analyzing Ethics

[Female lawyers and their female corporate clients recently            “Still, holding women-only networking events raises
had a “shoe event” at a Manhattan boutique to network.]             some complicated issues. Are these single-sex events
   “Such women-only networking events are proliferat-               just as exclusionary as the traditional spectator sports
ing at law firms and an array of other companies, includ-           events and steak-and-cigar dinners have been for men?
ing [accounting, investing, and industrial companies].              What about women who have male clients and vice
There are spa retreats, conferences at resorts, evenings at         versa?”
art galleries and cooking demonstrations, all organized                 How do you feel about women-only events? Are they
by women who want to network and socialize with clic                ethical?
ents in their own way—at least some of the time.
                                                                    Quoted from Carol Hymowitz, “High Power and High Heels:
    “The top brass at such companies support the events             Companies Move beyond Sports, Steak and Scotch to Cultivate
for several reasons, most notably, they help to boost the           New Clients,” Wall Street Journal, March 26, 2007, B1.
bottom line. .. .


3.12.     Analyzing a Form Letter
Analyze the following form letter.                                      Evaluate the use of positive tone.
   Is it a goodwill message?                                            What is your overall impression of the letter?
   Where does it show you-attitude? Where does it need
   more you-attitude?

                    Debbie Harrington
                    1436 Gooden Road
                    Lincoln, NE 54367

                    THE FOLLOWING         INFORMATION         IS    TIME      SENSITIVE;    PLEASE     REVIEW
                    CAREFULLY

                                                                                             replen-
                    James Honda of Lincoln has partnered with Automobile Resellers, Inc., to
                    ish drastically reduced vehicle inventories. James Honda of Lincoln is in need of a
                    number of high-demand pre-owned vehicles and records indicate that you may own
                                                                                                     d
                    one of these vehicles. Your 2007 Honda Civic has been classified as a high-deman
                                             this letter is to request the opportunity to BUY BACK your
                    vehicle. The purpose of
                    vehicle for perhaps more than you thought possible.

                                                                                                      rep-
                    Bring this letter for admittance to this event. Simply present it to a dealership
                                                     in this BUY  BACK  process. Also, you  may  have won
                    resentative who will assist you
                    up to $20,000. To see if your claim number is a guaranteed cash prize winner, simply
                    visit James Honda of Lincoln on the event date and claim your prize.
                                                                                                    y price
                    During thisexciting event, James Honda of Lincoln has agreed to aggressivel
                                                                                                       With
                    its entire inventory of new and pre-owned cars, trucks, vans, and sport utilities.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




80                              Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


                   rates as low as 0% and rebates up to $5,000, we are confident that you can upgrade
                   your 2007 Honda Civic and in many cases reduce your current monthly payment
                   with little out-of-pocket expense.

                   Due to the nature of this event it will not be advertised to the general public. Your
                   status as a customer as well as your possession of a high-demand vehicle entitles
                   you to attend this exciting event.

                   Appointments are recommended due to the anticipated response of this event. To
                   schedule an appointment or if you are unable to attend on the below event date,
                   please contact James Honda of Lincoln toll-free at 800.123.4567.

                   EVENT DATE:
                   Saturday, Nov 21st—9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.


                   EVENT SITE:
                   JAMES HONDA OF LINCOLN
                   220 Kitty Hawk
                   Lincoln, NE 54367

As your instructor directs,                                        =   Post your findings in an e-mail to the class.
= Share your findings orally with a small group of                 =   Summarize your findings in a memo to your
   students.                                                           instructor.
m Share your findings orally with the class.




 3.13     Revising a Form Letter

 Revise this form letter to improve positive tone and you-
 attitude (and to catch spelling and punctuation errors):

                    Dear customer,

                    We wish you a Happy New Year from Happy Catalog. Its been awhile since we heard
                    from you. We have a special offer to welcome you back.

                    Our customers are the focus of what we do. All of our efforts center on exceeding
                    our customer expectations.

                    Happy Catalog stands behind everything we sell, as we have since 1986. We will
                    provide you with even better service, tailored to meet you needs and guaranteed
                    to offer more of the helpful, unique and hard to find merchandise we're known for.
                    Whether you choose to shop by phone, mail, or e-mail us, we promise to continually
                    improve our process to better serve you. If you have been disappointed in any way,
                    please accept our sincerest apology.

                    We have a special offer, exclusively for you, to welcome you back. When you use the
                    enclosed coupon, you’ll save 20% on any order, regardless of order size. Hurry, this
                    offer will expire the beginning of February.

                    Welcome back! Thank you for your business.

                    Sincerly,
                    |. M. President
                    Happy Catalog.
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                               Chapter3   Building Goodwill                            81


3.14     Advising a Hasty Subordinate

Three days ago, one of your subordinates forwarded              Southern when ... ,” the message poked fun at South-
to everyone in the office a bit of e-mail humor he’d            ern speech, attitudes, and lifestyles. Today you get this
received from a friend. Titled “You know you're                 message from your subordinate:

                    Subject: Should | Apologize?

                    I’m getting flamed left and right because of the Southern message. | thought it was
                    funny, but some people just can’t take a joke. So far I’ve tried not to respond to
                    the flames, figuring that would just make things worse. But now I’m wondering if |
                    should apologize. What do you think?


Answer the message.

3.15      Responding to a Complaint                |

You’re   Director   of Corporate    Communications;     the
employee newsletter is produced by your office. Today
you get this e-mail message from Caroline Huber:

                    Subject: Complaint about Sexist Language

                    The article about the “Help Desk” says that Martina Luna and | “are the key cus-
                    tomer service representatives ’manning’ the desk.” | don’t MAN anything! |WORK.


Respond to Caroline. And send a message to your staff,
reminding them to edit newsletter stories as well as
external documents to replace biased language.

3.16       Exploring the Positive Effects of Negative Messages

In 2004, Gap Inc. (Gap, Old Navy, and Banana Repub-              Can you find the current status of the company and its
lic) released a social responsibility report that acknowl-       recovery?
edged wage, health, and safety violations in many of             As your instructor directs,
its overseas factories. Rather than hiding this informa-         a. Share your findings orally with a small group of
tion, Gap chose to go public and address the problem.                students.
In 2006, Ford Motor Company released a series of online
documentaries about the company’s turnaround efforts             b. Post your findings in an e-mail to the class.
which included a film about the company stock receiv-             c. Summarize your findings ina memo to your instructor.
ing a “sell” rating from industry analysts.                      d. Join with a group of students to create a written re-
    Find an example of a company that has shared its                 port summarizing negative corporate news.
problems and its plans to solve those problems with
the public. What went wrong? How did the company                 Adapted from Cheryl Dahl, “Gap’s New Look: The See-
respond? How did the company report the problem?                 Through,” Fast Company, September 2004, 69-70.


 3.17      Evaluating Bias in Visuals

 Evaluate the portrayals of people in one of the following:      As your instructor directs,
 = Ads in one issue of a business magazine                       a. Share your findings orally with a small group of
                                                                      students.
 = Acompany’s annual report
                                                                 b. Post your findings in an e-mail to the class.
 = Acompany’s web page
                                                                  ie) Summarize your findings in a memo to your instructor.
 Do the visuals show people of both sexes and all races?
 Is there a sprinkling of people of various ages and physi-      d. Present your findings in an oral presentation to the
 cal conditions? What do the visuals suggest about who                class.
 has power?                                                       e. Join witha small group of students to create a written
                                                                      report.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




82                                  Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


3.18         Revising      a Memo for Positive Tone

Revise the following memo to improve positive tone.

                     TO:                      All Staff

                      SUBJECT:                Decorating Your Work Area

                      With the arrival of the holiday season,         3.     Don’t forget to turn off and/or unplug
                      employees who wish to decorate                         all lights at the end of your workday.
                      their work areas should do so only              4.     Do not use hot lights; they can burn
                      with great caution. Don’t do some-                     your countertop so it is imperative that
                      thing stupid that might burn down the                  everyone take care in selecting your
                      entire office. If you wish to decorate,                lights.
                      don’t forget the following guidelines:          5.     Do not use decorations which will of-
                      1.   If using decorative lights, don’t                 fend people of other religions.
                           place them in obstructive places.          6.   Absolutely no candles are allowed.
                      2.   Do not overload your workstation              Don’t forget these guidelines, and
                           with decorations that will interfere       we'll have a great holiday season. Thank
                           with your daily duties.                    you for your cooperation.




 3.19        Dealing with Negative Clients

 An executive at one of your largest client companies                      In small groups, discuss at least four ways to handle
 is known for his negative attitude. He is feared for his              Mr. Bully. Write up your two best to share with the whole
 sharp tongue and scathing attacks, and he bullies every-              class. Also write up the reasons you think these two
 one. Everyone you know, including yourself, is afraid                 approaches will work. Share your two approaches with
 of him. Unfortunately, he is also the one who decides                     the whole class, as a short oral presentation or online.
 whether or not you get your annual contract. Your con-                       As a class, select the two best approaches from those
 tract is up for renewal, and you have some new services                   offered by the small groups. Discuss your criteria for
 you think his company would like.                                         selection and rejection.


 3.20         Writing Business Thank-You Notes

 Some businesses make a practice of sending goodwill                         who might become long-term customers? How will
 messages to some of their customers.                                        you identify your categories?
    Pick a business you patronize that might logically                     = What tone did you select? What words and phrases
 send some thank-you notes. Write a suitable note and                        help produce that tone? What words and phrases
 design a tasteful visual for it. In a separate document,                    did you avoid? What diction choices did you make
 write a memo to your instructor explaining your design                      to convey sincerity?
 and content decisions.                                                    = What content did you choose? Why? What content
    Questions you might want to consider:                                    choices did you discard?
 = Whois your audience? Will you write to everyone?                        = What design features did you choose? Why? What
     Will you target big spenders? Trend setters? People                     design features did you discard?


     3.21     Evaluating You-Attitude and Positive Emphasis in University Websites
     As they plan their college visits, many students begin                students with the text on several sites targeted for cur-
     by visiting university websites. Imagine you are a high               rent students. Does the tone change? In what ways?
     school senior and a prospective student. Go to the “Pro-              What information increases or decreases you-attitude?
     spective Students” part of your school’s website and                     Now visit the website of another university. Review
     read about housing, course offerings, and student life.               the same type of information for prospective students
     Evaluate the information you find for you-attitude and                and compare it to that of your own school. Which school
     positive emphasis. Compare the text for prospective                   does a better job? Why?
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                 Chapter3   Building Goodwill                             83

As your instructor directs,                                       =   Post your findings in an e-mail to the class.
=   Share your findings orally with a small group of              =   Summarize your findings in a memo to your
    students.                                                         instructor.
=   Share your findings orally with the class.

3.22.     Evaluating You-Attitude and Positive Emphasis at IRS

The IRS has a page called “Where’s My Refund?” In
2007, the page read like this:

                   “Where’s My Refund?”

                   “You filed your tax return and you’re expecting a refund. You have just one question
                   and you want the answer now—Where’s My Refund?”

                   “Whether you split your refund among several accounts, opted for direct deposit to
                   one account or asked IRS to mail you a check, you can track your refund through
                   this secure Web site. You can get refund information even if you filed just to request
                   the telephone excise tax refund.”

                   “To get to your personal refund information, be ready to enter your:”

                   =    Social Security Number (or IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number)
                   =    Filing status (Single, Married Filing Joint Return, Married Filing Separate Return,
                        Head of Household, or Qualifying Widow(er))
                   m=   Exact refund amount shown on your return

                   “If you don’t receive your refund within 28 days from the original IRS mailing date
                   shown on Where’s My Refund?, you can start a refund trace online.”

                   If Where’s My Refund? shows that IRS was unable to deliver. your refund, you can
                   change your address online.

                    “Where’s My Refund? will prompt you when these features are available for your
                    situation. ”

                    “Okay now, Where’s My Re-fund?”


    Now read their current “Where’s My Refund” page               Quoted from “Where’s My Refund?” U.S. Department of
on their website. What changes have they made? Which _ the Treasury, updated April 6, 2011, http://www.irs.gov/
version has more you-attitude and positive emphasis?   _individuals/article/0,,id=96596,00.html.
Which version do you like better? Why? Write your
answers in a memo to your instructor or classmates.

3.23      Designing for People with Disabilities
Reread the sidebar on page 75. In small groups discuss            _™ What are some changes companies should make to
these questions:                                                     their advertising and product information for easier
                                                                                         ith disabilities?
=   What are some other products you can think of that               SCN         Ase RUNG relate
    could be redesigned for easier use by people with             As your instructor directs, in small groups
    disabilities?                                                 = Summarize your discussion in a memo for your
=   What themes would you use to advertise these prod-               instructor.
    ucts? Remember that no one likes to be reminded               =   Summarize your discussion in a memo for your class
    that they are losing physical capacities.                         list serve.
                                                                  =   Prepare a short presentation for your classmates.
 PROFESSIONAL WRITING




84                                 Part1   The Building Blocks of Effective Messages


3.24      Revising a “Goodwill Disaster”

Li, an intern at All-Weather,    a window manufacturer, has
been asked to write a letter to a recent young customer
asking him if some new engineers can tour his gallery to
see the products in use. Here is his draft:


                    Dear Mr. Mason,
                    Executive Director,
                    Iconic Art Gallery, St. Paul, MN

                    You must be glad that you chose All-Weather’s energy efficient bow windows, hori-
                    zontal sliders, and fiberglass doors for your art gallery. As everyone who is any-
                    one knows, we offer the finest quality wood, vinyl, aluminum, steel, and fiberglass
                    composite windows and doors you can find in the US of A. As you also know, our
                    customer service representatives are ready to assist you 24/7 (and more!) with any
                    installation or maintenance needs you may have (even if it’s your responsibility or
                    fault, | might add). After doing so much for an important customer such as you, we
                    have a small favor to ask of you, which we’re sure you will not deny us. We just hired
                    some new engineers who will join our manufacturing division to continue to make
                    the fine products that we make. Unfortunately, they have never seen how our fin-
                    ished products look outside or inside actual homes or offices. (On a personal note, |
                    confess | don’t know what they can learn from one visit to a home or an office.) Our
                    VP (Manufacturing), an asset to All-Weather, says that we should send these engi-
                    neers out on a field visit. And he should know, shouldn’t he, being the VP and all?
                    That is why I’m writing to you (the pleasure is mine, though).

                   These fresh minds need exposure to actual conditions in actual markets. We think
                   that if they visit your art gallery, they will see how our products are helping you get
                   results your art gallery could never dream of before. If you don’t believe me, take a
                   peek inside your exhibits room, whose space seems to have expanded thanks to
                   our bow window that you have installed. | myself remember what a cramped-looking
                   room it was before. No, I’m not asking you to share your admission fees with us,
                   though free exhibition tickets wouldn’t hurt (I’m kidding, sir). Also, you should per-
                   haps buy more windows and doors from us (and attract more visitors as a result!).
                   Also, don’t forget to mention us favorably to your patrons.

                   Oh, and by the way, will you please let us know the day and time suitable to you
                   when we might send those engineers to your art gallery? Our orientation program
                   begins in three weeks time. Looking forward to your prompt acceptance of our
                   request (with or without free exhibition tickets).

                    Sincerely,
                    Li


   Li was trying for a breezy tone which he thought                      or “more politeness.” Point to places in the draft
appropriate for a young art gallery owner but obviously                  where these strategies might be useful. Also,
went overboard.                                                          rephrase relevant sentences or paragraphs for more
   Based on your reading of Chapter 3, complete the fol-                 you-attitude or more politeness, whichever is the
lowing tasks:                                                            case.
= List problems in Li’s draft.                                       =   What is the primary purpose of the letter? The
= Prepare another list of changes that would improve                     secondary purpose?
    the draft. Be specific in your suggestions. For                  =   Revise the draft.
    instance, it’s insufficient to say “more you-attitude”
 Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




 ——                                                                      or




                                                                                                                                                         ‘
                                                                ‘




                                                                                                                                                                              ,


             ¥


                                                                                                                                                F

                                                                                                                                                        aa
                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‘


S                                                                   i                 =                                                                                                                        ot


                                                                    we                             =                                                                                      ¢




     —                 )                    me:                                                                                         “                                 *
                                                                                  —                    -                                            4                                                                   2
                                                            *
                                       =ae                                    ’
                                                                                          »                 : Ve                7           ¥                -
                                                                                                                                                                     cs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7
                                                9                             4                             a                       -                                             “4
                                   Y   is                                         [                                 1                                            .                        =            &




                                   ‘
                                                                                                                        i                                        *

——                                      <                   a                                              at
         =                                                                                                      a                                                         -
         a.                                                                                    r                    .                                                                              ;
 ie                                                     é                                              -                    =
         os                                                                                                                                                                   as              Md           a



              ¢                                                                       .                                     -                                                     ‘
                                                            -                     -
 S                                                                                        ie



oe                     i




                                                >

                               *            -
                           «




                           :




                                                                                                                                                                                      +




                       =




                                   ;




                  n™
 PROFESSIONAL WRITING




C’H:
  Ac Ph Eek




Working and Writing
in Teams

(Gia¥-Joy d=) @lUhal lars
Team Interactions                                        Effective Meetings
   ®   Roles in Teams
                                                         Collaborative Writing
       Leadership in Teams
                                                           Lwerdtlalaliareimeetcm's cole er-lave lnaal=
       Decision-Making Strategies                              Document
       Feedback Strategies                                 ® Composing the Drafts
       Characteristics of Successful Student               ® Revising the Document
       Teams
                                                           Lie ehaavem-]ale medcoleyag-r-lellare magi)
   ®@ Peer Pressure and Groupthink                             Document
Working on Diverse Teams                                   ® Making the Team Process Work

Conflict Resolution                                      Summary of Key Points
   ® Steps in Conflict Resolution
   ®   Criticism Responses
   Len (olUce-Vadiaule (Milam @olatdi(el a.<-ce)
                                             (01aco)a)
                                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




NEWSWORTHY                         COMMUNICATION


A Team Disaster




         omplex operations like deepwater oil drill-                            critical minutes when the rig caught fire attempt-
         ing involve hundreds of people and, some-                              ing to decide whether they could shut off the well.
         times, multiple corporations working in                                As the captain of the rig and 10 other managers
close cooperation. The Deepwater Horizon disaster                               and crew members discussed the situation, Andrea
in April 2010 exposed the failures of the corporate                             Fleytas, a 23-year-old rig worker, took charge and
and individual teams who were involved with the                                 radioed a distress signal to the Coast Guard. She
operation.                                                                      was promptly reprimanded for doing so without
    In a report released in early 2011, the presiden-                           the captain’s permission.
tial commission on the Deepwater Horizon disaster            As the disaster unfolded, larger issues emerged
placed responsibility for the massive oil spill on well surrounding the cooperation of the companies that
owner BP and two of its contractors, Transocean and should have been working together on the Hori-
Halliburton. But the problems                                                    zon. The commission report
that led to the disaster are not “Successful teams, whether composed             found that all three compa-
confined to the companies                                                        nies had failed to communi-
                                    of individuals or corporations, must
involved in the Gulf spill.                                                      cate with each other or with
                                    be built on excellent cooperation and        their employees about dan-
Commission cochairman Wil-
liam K. Reilly stated that what     communication.”                              gers, procedures, and similar
the commission observed was                                                      situations.
“a system-wide problem” exemplified by commu-                Successful teams, whether composed of individu-
nication failures at every level.                         als or corporations, must be built on excellent coop-
    At the most basic level, the workers on the rig did eration and communication. People on the teams
not understand who had authority during an emer- must be aware of correct procedures and their own
gency. Written safety guidelines on the rig required roles and responsibilities. In the case of the Deepwa-
multiple people to make decisions about respond-                                ter Horizon disaster, failures in teamwork at all lev-
ing to emergencies, but crew members wasted                                     els ended up in a human and environmental tragedy.
Sources: Stephen Power and Ben Casselman, “White House Probe Blames BP, Industry in Gulf Blast,” Wall Street Journal, January 6, 2011, A2; and
Douglas A. Blackmon, Vanessa O'Connell, Alexandra Berzon, and Ana Campoy, “There Was ‘Nobody in Charge,” Wall Street Journal, May 28, 2010, A6-A7.
 PROFESSIONAL WRITING




206                                   Part 2   The Communication Process



                                      Learning Objectives
                                      After studying this chapter, you will know
                                                    Different kinds of productive and nonproductive roles in teams.
                                                    Group decision-making strategies.

                                                    Characteristics of successful teams.
                                                   Techniques for resolving conflict.

                                                   Techniques for making meetings effective.
                                      LO 8-6       Techniques for collaborative writing.



                                      Teamwork is crucial to success in an organization. Some teams produce prod-
                                      ucts, provide services, or recommend solutions to problems. Other teams—
            http://www.team
            technology.co.uk/
                                      perhaps in addition to providing a service or recommending a solution—also
                                      produce documents. Today teamwork is facilitated by technology tools such
             Log on to this           as wikis, Google Docs, chats, Skype, and teleconferencing.
             website to find a wide      Teamwork comes into play when a job is too big or the time is too short
range of articles and resources
about interacting effectively in
                                      for one person to do the work, and again when no one person has the needed
team settings. More specifically,     knowledge and skills. High stakes also call for teamwork, both because the
click on “Team Roles” to find         efforts of multiple talented people are needed and because no one person
some interactive links to aid in      wants the sole responsibility for a possible failure.
assessing yourself as a team
                                         Interpersonal communication, communication between people, is crucial
member as well as determining
roles of your fellow group
                                      for good teamwork. It relies heavily on interpersonal skills such as listen-
members.                              ing and networking. Chapter 4 discusses interpersonal skills vital for good
                                      teamwork. Skills in conflict resolution, meeting organization, and collabora-
                                      tive writing also help teamwork. These skills will make you more successful
                                      in your job, social groups, community service, and volunteer work. On writ-
                                      ing teams, giving careful attention to both teamwork and writing process
                                      (see Chapter 5) improves both the final product and members’ satisfaction
                                      with the team.

                                      TEAM INTERACTIONS
                                      Teams can focus on different dimensions. Informational dimensions focus
                                      on content: the problem, data, and possible solutions. Procedural dimensions
                                      focus on method and process. How will the team make decisions? Who will
Log onto EffectiveMeetings.com
                                      do what? When will assignments be due? Interpersonal dimensions focus on
for articles offering advice about    people, promoting friendliness, cooperation, and team loyalty.
making meetings effective. What          Different kinds of communication dominate during these stages of the life
advice offered in these articles      of a task team: formation, coordination, and formalization.
do you think would be helpful for        During formation, when members meet and begin to define their task,
conducting meetings with your
fellow group members?
                                      teams need to develop some sort of social cohesiveness and to develop proce-
                                      dures for meeting and acting. Interpersonal and procedural comments reduce
                                      the tension that always exists in a new team. Insistence on information in this
                                      first stage can hurt the team’s long-term productivity.
                                          Teams are often most effective when they explicitly adopt ground rules.
                                      Figure 8.1 lists some of the most common ground rules used by workplace teams.
                                          During formation, conflicts frequently arise when the team defines tasks
                                      and procedures. Successful teams clarify what each member is supposed to do.
                                      They also set procedures: When and how often will they meet? Will decisions
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                     Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                                    207


Figure 8.1        Possible Team Ground Rules                                                                Developing Team
                                                                                                            Cohesiveness
   Start team meetings on time; end on time.                                                                  In The Five Dysfunc-
   Attend regularly.                                                                                          tions of a Team, Pat-
   Come to the meeting prepared.                                                                rick Lencioni suggests a simple
   Leave the meeting with a clear understanding of what each member is to do next.              method for helping to estab-
   Focus comments on the issues.                                                                lish social cohesiveness in a
                                                                                                new team. His low-risk exercise
   Avoid personal attacks.
                                                                                                involves having everyone on the
   Listen to and respect members’ opinions.
                                                                                                team answer a short list of ques-
   Everyone speaks on key issues and procedures.
                                                                                                tions about themselves.
   Address problems as you become aware of them. If you have a problem with
                                                                                                  The questions, while personal,
   another person, tell that person, not everyone else.                                         are not particularly probing, and
 e Do your share of the work.                                                                   the group could create the list of
 ¢ Communicate immediately if you think you may not be able to fulfill an agreement.            questions together. He suggests
 e Produce your work by the agreed-upon time.                                                   questions about hometown, num-
                                                                                                ber of siblings, a few facts about
                                                                                                one’s childhood, hobbies, first job,
                                                                                                and worst job.
                                                                                                   Simply by answering even innoc-
be made by a leader, as is the case with many advisory groups? By consensus                     uous questions about themselves,
or vote? Will the team evaluate individual performances? Will someone keep                      team members begin to relate to
minutes? Interpersonal communication is needed to resolve the conflict that                     each other and see each other
surfaces during this phase. Successful teams analyze their tasks thoroughly                     as interesting people. This in turn
                                                                                                encourages greater empathy and
before they begin to search for solutions.
                                                                                                understanding.
   Coordination is the longest phase and the phase during which most of
                                                                                                   Have you tried Lencioni’s tech-
the team’s work is done. While procedural and interpersonal comments help                       nique in a team you belonged to?
maintain direction and friendliness, most of the comments need to deal with                     Did it help in team formation? What
information. Good information is essential to good decisions. Successful teams                  questions do you think would work
deliberately seek numerous possible solutions. Conflict may occur as the team                   best?
debates these solutions. Successful teams carefully consider as many solutions
                                                                                                Adapted from Patrick Lencioni, The
as possible before choosing one. They particularly avoid the temptation of                      Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Lead-
going with the first solution that arises.                                                      ership Fable (San Francisco: Jossey-
   In formalization, the group finalizes its work. The success of this phase                    Bass, 2002), 198.

determines how well the group’s decision will be implemented. In this stage,
the group seeks to forget earlier conflicts.

Roles in Teams
Individual members can play multiple roles within teams, and these roles can
change during the team’s work. Roles can be positive or negative.
   Positive roles and actions that help the team achieve its task goals include
the following.

 =   Seeking information and opinions—asking questions, identifying gaps
     in the team’s knowledge.
 =   Giving information and opinions—answering questions, providing
     relevant information.
 =   Summarizing—restating major points, summarizing decisions.
 =   Synthesizing—pulling ideas together, connecting different elements of
     the team’s efforts.
 =   Evaluating—comparing team processes and products to standards and
     goals.
 =   Coordinating—planning work, giving directions, and fitting together
     contributions of team members.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




208                                    Part2     The Communication Process


            Teamwork Myths                   Positive roles and actions that help the team build loyalty, resolve conflicts,
                                       and function smoothly include the following behaviors (also see the list in
               Myth: Harmony — is      Figure 8.2):
                      good.
  Reality: Well-managed conflict
           can generate more cre-        =     Encouraging participation—demonstrating openness and acceptance,
           ative solutions and help            recognizing the contributions of members, calling on quieter team
           a group's performance.              members.
  Myth: Add new members for
                                         =     Relieving tensions—joking and suggesting breaks and fun activities.
          fresh ideas and energy.
  Reality: The longer group mem-         =     Checking feelings—asking members how they feel about team activi-
           bership stays stable, the           ties and sharing one’s own feelings with others.
           better groups perform.        =     Solving interpersonal problems—opening discussion of interpersonal
  Myth: With today’s technol-                  problems in the team and suggesting ways to solve them.
            ogy, in-the-room team
                                        =      Listening actively—showing team members that they have been heard
            meetings are no longer
           necessary.
                                               and that their ideas are being taken seriously.
  Reality: Long-distance       teams
           have a_ considerable           Negative roles and actions that hurt the team’s product and process include
           disadvantage. So much       the following:
           so that many busi-
           nesses pay the money
           to bring them together       =      Blocking—disagreeing with everything that is proposed.
           at key times.                =      Dominating—trying to run the team by ordering, shutting out others,
  Myth: Larger teams are better,               and insisting on one’s own way.
           particularly when they
                                        =      Clowning—making unproductive jokes and diverting the team from
           include representatives
           of all constituencies.
                                               the task.
  Reality: Large size is one of the     =      Overspeaking—taking every opportunity to be the first to speak; insist-
           worst impediments to                ing on personally responding to everyone else’s comments.
           team effectiveness. It       =      Withdrawing—being silent in meetings, not contributing, not helping
           allows individuals _ to             with the work, not attending meetings.
           shirk their share of the
           workload and requires
           more effort poured into        Some actions can be positive or negative depending on how they are
           coordinating activities.    used. Active participation by members helps teams move forward, but too
                                       much talking from one member blocks contributions from others. Criticiz-
Adapted from J. Richard Hackman,
“Six Common Misperceptions about
                                       ing ideas is necessary if the team is to produce the best solution, but criti-
Teamwork,” Harvard Business Review     cizing every idea raised without ever suggesting possible solutions blocks
(blog), June 7, 2011, http://blogs     a team. Jokes in moderation can defuse tension and make the team work
-hbr.org/cs/201 1/06/six_common_
misperceptions_abou.html.
                                       more fun. Too many jokes or inappropriate jokes can make the team’s work
                                       more difficult.

                                       Leadership in Teams
                                       You may have noted that “leader” was not one of the roles listed above. Being
                                       a leader does not mean doing all the work yourself. Indeed, someone who


                                       Figure 8.2              The Five Characteristics of an Effective Team
                                              They trust one another.
                                           They engage in unfiltered conflict around ideas.
                                           They commit to decisions and plans of action.
                                           They hold one another accountable for delivering against those plans.
                                        OU
                                        OO They focus on the achievement of collective results.

                                       Quoted from Patrick Lencioni, The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership Fable (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass,
                                       2002), 189-90.
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                  Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                                       209


implies that he or she has the best ideas and can do the best work is likely                              Make the Most of
playing the negative roles of blocking and dominating.                                                    Your Brainstorming
   Effective teams balance three kinds of leadership, which parallel the three                            Matt Bowen, president
team dimensions:                                                                                          of the Aloft Group Inc.
                                                                                              marketing and PR agency, has
                                                                                              advice on running successful brain-
 =    Informational leaders generate and evaluate ideas and text.
                                                                                              storming meetings:
 =    Interpersonal leaders monitor the team’s process, check people’s feel-                  =   Identify a clear, concrete
      ings, and resolve conflicts.                                                                goal before you start. That
 =    Procedural leaders set the agenda, make sure that everyone knows                            allows you to establish some
      what’s due for the next meeting, communicate with absent team mem-                          boundaries for ideas—about
      bers, and check to be sure that assignments are carried out.                                practicality or cost, for
                                                                                                  example—and helps you
                                                                                                  keep your brainstorming ses-
   While it’s possible for one person to assume all these responsibilities, in                    sion focused.
many teams, the three kinds of leadership are taken on by three (or more) dif-
                                                                                              =   Let everyone involved in the
ferent people. Some teams formally or informally rotate or share these respon-                    meeting know what the goal
sibilities, so that everyone—and no one—is a leader.                                              is ahead of time. That gives
   Studies have shown that people who talk a lot, listen effectively, and respond                 everyone a chance to have
nonverbally to other members of the team are considered to be leaders.’                           ideas ready when they come
                                                                                                  to the meeting: if people “pre-
                                                                                                  brainstorm,” you can focus
Decision-Making Strategies                                                                        your meeting on refining
                                                                                                  ideas.
Probably the least effective decision-making strategy is to let the person who
talks first, last, loudest, or most determine the decision. Most teams instead                =   Set limits on meeting size
                                                                                                  and duration. Bowen recom-
aim to air different points of view with the objective of identifying the best
                                                                                                  mends limiting a brainstorm-
choice, or at least a choice that seems good enough for the team’s purposes.
                                                                                                  ing meeting to one hour,
The team discussion considers the pros and cons of each idea. In many teams,                      with no more than five to
someone willingly plays devil’s advocate to look for possible flaws in an idea.                   seven participants. An hour
To give ideas a fair hearing, someone should also develop an idea’s positive                      is enough time for a focused
aspects.                                                                                          discussion, and it’s easier for
   After the team has considered alternatives, it needs a method for picking                      everyone to participate and
one to implement. Typical selection methods include voting and consensus.                         be heard in a small team.
Voting is quick but may leave people in the minority unhappy with and                         =   Let the ideas flow freely.
uncommitted to the majority’s plan. Coming to consensus takes time but usu-                       Bowen recommends practic-
ally results in speedier implementation of ideas. Airing preferences early in                     ing active listening skills that
the process, through polls before meetings and straw votes during meetings,                       encourage people both to
can sometimes help teams establish consensus more quickly. Even in situa-                         share their ideas and to build
                                                                                                  on each other's ideas.
tions where consensus is not possible, good teams ensure everyone’s ideas are
considered. Most people will agree to support the team’s decision, even if it                 =   Remember that there are no
                                                                                                  bad ideas: any idea, however
was not their choice, as long as they feel they have been heard.
                                                                                                  impractical, might inspire the
   Business people in different nations have varying preferences about these
                                                                                                  best solution, and spending
two methods. An international survey of 15,000 managers and employees                             time weeding out weak ideas
found that four-fifths of the Japanese respondents preferred consensus, but                       can stifle creativity.
a little more than one-third of the Americans did. Other nations in which                     =   Brainstorm with a diverse
consensus was preferred included Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, and                           team. The best ideas come
France.”                                                                                          out of teams made up of
   Two strategies that are often useful in organizational teams are the standard                  people with very different
problem-solving process and dot planning.                                                         perspectives.
   The standard problem-solving process has multiple steps:
                                                                                              Adapted from Kelly K. Spors, “Pro-
1. Identify the task or problem. What is the team trying to do?                               ductive Brainstorms Take the Right
                                                                                              Mix of Elements,” Wall Street Journal,
2. Understand what the team has to deliver, in what form, by what due date.                   July 24, 2008, B5.
     Identify available resources.
3. Gather      information,   share   it with all team   members,      and   examine     it
     critically.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




210                    Part 2   The Communication Process


                       4. Establish criteria. What would the ideal solution include? Which elements
                          of that solution would be part of a less-than-ideal but still acceptable solu-
                          tion? What legal, financial, moral, or other limitations might keep a solu-
                          tion from being implemented?
                       5. Generate alternate solutions. Brainstorm and record ideas for the next step.
                       ex Measure the alternatives against the criteria.
                       7. Choose the best solution.
                           Dot planning offers a way for large teams to choose priorities quickly. First,
                       the team brainstorms ideas, recording each on pages that are put on the wall.
                       Then each individual gets two strips of three to five adhesive dots in different col-
                       ors. One color represents high priority, the other lower priority. People then walk
                       up to the pages and stick dots by the points they care most about. Some teams
                       allow only one dot from one person on any one item; others allow someone who
                       is really passionate about an idea to put all of his or her dots on it. The dots make
                       it easy to see which items the team believes are most and least important.
                           What happens if your team can’t agree, or can’t reach consensus? Team-
                       building expert Bob Frisch suggests some strategies for working through a
                       team-decision deadlock. In addition to using standard group techniques (set-
                       ting clear goals, brainstorming solutions, and weighing the pros and cons of
                       each solution), you should

                         = Use the current sticking point as the start for anew round of brainstorm-
                           ing. If there are two solutions that your team can’t choose between,
                           break the deadlock by brainstorming new solutions that combine the
                           old ones. That will get the team making progress again and get new
                           ideas on the table.
                         = Instead of rushing to a decision, allow time for team members to con-
                           sider the options. Sometimes people refuse to compromise in order to
                           avoid making a bad snap decision. Giving your team time to consider
                           the options will take the pressure off. For especially complex decisions,
                           schedule multiple meetings with time in between to do some research
                           and to digest the pros and cons of each solution.
                         m Allow team members to make their decisions confidentially. People
                           might refuse to state an opinion—or change an opinion—if they feel
                           their opinions and reasoning will be judged negatively by the group. A
                           secret ballot or other confidential form of “discussion” can help break a
                           deadlock by giving team members an opportunity to voice their opin-
                                ions without being judged or embarrassed.”

                        Feedback Strategies
                        As soon as the team begins to put its decisions into play, it needs to begin
                        generating and heeding feedback. Sometimes this feedback will be external; it
                        will come from supervisors, suppliers, clients, and customers. It should also,
                        however, come from within the team. Teams frequently evaluate individual
                        team members’ performances, team performance, task progress, and team
                        procedures.
                           Feedback should be frequent and regular. Many teams have weekly feed-
                        back as well as feedback connected to specific stages of their task. Regular
                        feedback is a good way to keep team members contributing their share of the
                        work in a timely fashion. While feedback needs to be honest and incorporate
                        criticism, such critiques can be phrased as positively as possible (“please get
                        your figures in for the Wednesday update” rather than “do you think you
                        can make the Wednesday deadline this time?”). And don’t forget to praise.
                                                        Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                 Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                                     211


Research shows that teams with a higher ratio of positive-to-negative interac-                             Who Does What
tions do better work.*                                                                           "     _   Working successfully
   One form of feedback that has been gaining popularity with organizations is              —_       “S    on a team depends
360-degree feedback. This is a form of employee-development assessment in                                  on being open about
which a team member receives feedback from peers, managers, subordinates,                    preferences, constraints, and skills
customers, suppliers—from anyone touched by that person’s work. Organiza-                    and then using creative problem-
tions or teams that use this model successfully typically apply it to everyone on            solving techniques.
the team, including team leaders. Research has shown this method is particu-                   A person who prefers to outline
larly effective when workers believe they can improve from the feedback. The                 the whole project in advance may
                                                                                             be on a team with someone who
method is also more effective when the feedback is positive and constructive.”
                                                                                             expects to do the project at the
                                                                                             last minute. Someone who likes
                                                                                             to talk out ideas before writing
Characteristics of Successful Student Teams                                                  may be on a team with someone
Studies of student teams completing class projects have found that students in               who wants to work on a draft in
successful teams were not necessarily more skilled or more experienced than                  silence and revise it before show-
                                                                                             ing it to anyone. By being hon-
students in less successful teams. Instead, successful and less successful teams
                                                                                             est about your preferences, you
communicated differently.                                                                    make it possible for the team to
                                                                                             find a creative solution that builds
 =   Successful teams assign specific tasks, set clear deadlines, and schedule               on what each person can offer.
     frequent meetings. They also regularly communicate as a team about                        In one team, Rob wanted to
     each member’s progress. In less successful teams, members are not sure                  wait to start the project because
     what they are supposed to be doing or when it is needed. Less success-                  he was busy with other class
     ful teams meet less often.                                                              work. David and Susan, how-
                                                                                             ever, wanted to go ahead now
 =   Successful teams recognize that they have to build trust with each other                because their schedules would
     through goodwill, active listening, and consistent participation. Teams                 get busier later in the term. A cre-
     who trust each other tend to work together to solve problems that impact                ative solution would be for David —
     the whole team. Less successful teams expect members to complete their                  and Susan to do most of the
     own parts, and fail to bring those parts together into a coherent whole,                work on parts of the project that
     behaviors which also appear in unsuccessful workplace teams.®                           had to be completed first (such
 =   Successful teams recognize the contribution of every team member to                     as collecting data and writing the
                                                                                             proposal) and for Rob to do work
     the team’s success, and take time to acknowledge each member during
                                                                                             that had to be done later (Such as
     team meetings. When team members know that their efforts are noticed
                                                                                             creating tables, revising, editing,
     and appreciated by their peers, they’re much more willing to contrib-                   proofreading, and making bound
     ute to the team. Less successful teams take individual contributions for                copies).
     granted.                                                                                  What are your work prefer-
 =   Successful teams listen carefully to each other and respond to emotions                 ences? What are the preferences
     as well as words. Less successful teams pay less attention to what is said              of other people on your team?
     and how it is said.                                                                     How can you work together to
                                                                                             accommodate everyone's sched-
 m   In successful teams members work more evenly and actively on the
                                                                                             ules and preferences?
     project.’ Successful teams even find ways to use members who don’t
     like working in teams. For example, a student who doesn’t want to be a
     “team player” can be a freelancer for her team, completing assignments
     by herself and e-mailing them to the team. Less successful teams have a
     smaller percentage of active members and frequently have some mem-
     bers who do very little on the final project.
 =   Successful teams make important decisions together. In less successful
     teams, a subgroup or an individual makes decisions.
 =   Successful teams listen to criticism and try to improve their performance
     on the basis of it. In less successful teams, criticism is rationalized.
 =   Successful teams deal directly with conflicts that emerge; unsuccessful
     teams try to ignore conflicts.

   Research has shown that student teams produce better documents when
they disagree over substantive issues of content and document design. The
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




212                                       Part 2   The Communication Process


             Checklists for Teams         disagreement does not need to be angry: someone can simply say, “Yes, and
                                          here’s another way we could do it.” Deciding among two (or more) alterna-
      ae     As knowledge contin-
      7     ues to grow, more and
                                          tives forces the proposer to explain the rationale for an idea. Even when the
            more tasks have to            team adopts the original idea, considering alternatives rather than quickly
be accomplished by teams. One             accepting the first idea produces better writing.®
person no longer has the knowl-              As you no doubt realize, these characteristics of good teams actually apply
edge or skills to do them. Indeed,        to most teams, not just student teams. A survey of engineering project teams
one person may not know enough            found that 95% of the team members thought that good communication was the
to even supervise them. Teams             reason for team success, and poor communication the reason for team failures.”
 perform organ transplants, run
 marketing campaigns, and create
 proposals for billion dollar projects.   Peer Pressure and Groupthink
   Construction is a good exam-
                                          Teams that never express conflict may be experiencing groupthink. Group-
 ple. In the past, construction on
 grand edifices, such as palaces
                                          think is the tendency for teams to put such a high premium on agreement that
 and cathedrals, was overseen by          they directly or indirectly punish dissent.
 a master builder. Now skyscrap-             Many people feel so much reluctance to express open disagreement that
 ers are constructed by 16 different      they will say they agree even when objective circumstances would suggest
 trades. To coordinate their work,        the first speaker cannot be right. In a series of classic experiments in the 1950s,
 the structural engineering firm in       Solomon Asch showed the influence of peer pressure. People sitting around
 charge uses enormous checklists          a table were shown a large card with a line and asked to match it to the line
 for work to be done and dates.           of the same length on another card. It’s a simple test: people normally match
 The checklists are created by a          the lines correctly almost 100% of the time. However, in the experiment, all
 team, with at least one person
                                          but one of the people in the group had been instructed to give false answers
 from each of the 16 trades. As
                                          for several of the trials. When the group gave an incorrect answer, the focal
 work is completed, or problems
 arise, new checklists are created.
                                          person accepted the group’s judgment 36.8% of the time. When someone else
    McNamara/Salvia, a large con-         also gave a different answer—even if it was another wrong answer—the focal
 struction firm in Boston, also uses      person accepted the group’s judgment only 9% of the time.°
 a communication checklist. After            The experimenters varied the differences in line lengths, hoping to create a
 each major step in construction,         situation in which even the most conforming subjects would trust their own
 for instance elevator installation,      senses. But some people continued to accept the group’s judgment, even when
 all trades involved meet to dis-         one line was seven inches longer than the other.
 cuss progress. When questions               A classic example of groupthink, and one illustrating the sometimes con-
 or problems arise, more items            straining influence of a powerful team leader, occurred during President
  are added to the checklist. Prob-
                                          Kennedy’s administration. The deliberations of Kennedy and his advisers
  lems are discussed and resolved
                                          illustrated classic characteristics of groupthink such as premature agreement
  by representatives of the relevant
  trades, who then sign off on pro-
                                          and suppression of doubts. Kennedy guided the discussions in a way that
 posed solutions.
                                          minimized disagreements. The result was the disastrous decision to launch
                                          the Bay of Pigs invasion, whose failure led to the Cuban Missile Crisis. How-
 Adapted from Atul Gawande, The           ever, Kennedy subsequently analyzed what had gone wrong with the decision
 Checklist Manifesto: How to Get
 Things Right (New York: Henry Holt,
                                          process, and he had his advisers do likewise. He used these analyses to change
 2009), chap. 3.                          the process for the Cuban Missile Crisis. Although the team again included
                                          Kennedy and many of the same advisers, it avoided groupthink. Kennedy
                                          ordered the team to question, allowed free-ranging discussions, used separate
                                          subteam meetings, and sometimes left the room himself to avoid undue influ-
                                          ence of the discussions."
                                              Teams that “go along with the crowd” and suppress conflict ignore the full
                                           range of alternatives, seek only information that supports the positions they
                                           already favor, and fail to prepare contingency plans to cope with foreseeable
                                           setbacks. A business suffering from groupthink may launch a new product
                                           that senior executives support but for which there is no demand. Student
                                           teams suffering from groupthink turn in inferior documents.
                                              The best correctives to groupthink are to consciously search for additional
                                           alternatives, to test one’s assumptions against those of a range of other people,
                                           and to protect the right of people on a team to disagree. When power roles are
                                           a factor, input may need to be anonymous.
                                                                 Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter 8       Working and Writing in Teams                                      213



WORKING           ON DIVERSE TEAMS                                                                               Here a Team, There
                                                                                                                 a Team

In any organization, you will work with people whose backgrounds and work-                            =          At ICU Medical, any
ing styles differ from yours. Residents of small towns and rural areas have dif-                        ;      worker can form a
ferent notions of friendliness than do people from big cities. Marketing people                     team to tackle any problem he
tend to have different values and attitudes than researchers or engineers. In                       or she wishes. What’s more, the
addition, differences arise from gender, class, race and ethnicity, religion, age,                  CEO has never vetoed a team
sexual orientation, and physical ability. Even people who share some of these                       decision.
characteristics are likely to differ in personality type.                                             Teams elect their own      leaders,
   These differences affect how people behave on teams and what they expect                         assign tasks, set meetings and
                                                                                                    deadlines. Most teams have 5 to 7
from teams. For example, in a business negotiation, people from Asia are more
                                                                                                    people, and 12 to 15 teams gen-
likely to see the goal of negotiation as development of a relationship between the
                                                                                                    erally finish a project each quarter.
parties. In contrast, American negotiators (especially the lawyers on the team) are                 Teams have changed the compa-
more likely to see the purpose of a negotiation as producing a signed contract.                      ny’s production process and set up
Such differences are likely to affect what people talk about and how they talk.                      a 401(k) plan.
Some western cultures use direct approaches; other cultures, especially eastern                        Serving on a team is voluntary,
cultures, consider such approaches rude and respond by withholding information.                      although some employees with
   Other pitfalls of team differences exist. Sometimes people who sense a dif-                       special expertise get invited to join
ference may attribute problems in the team to prejudice, when other factors                         teams frequently. But team partic-
may be responsible. Also, a significant body of research shows that accurate                         ipation does not give employees a
interpretation of emotions in diverse teams is influenced by factors such as                         break from their regular job duties,
                                                                                                     which still must be performed
gender, nationality, race, and status.'* On the other hand, another body of
                                                                                                     satisfactorily.
                                                                                                       To      help   teams     function
                                                                                                     smoothly, ICU has a team hand-
                                                                                                     book, created—you guessed it—
                                                                                                     by yet another team. The 25-page
                                                                                                     handbook addresses issues like
                                                                                                     what to do at the first meeting
                                                                                                     and other frequently asked ques-
                                                                                                     tions. Teams also must post notes
                                                                                                     about their meetings on the com-
                                                                                                     pany intranet, where all employ-
                                                                                                     ees can offer feedback.
                                                                                                       As a final team incentive, ICU
                                                                                                     rewards successful teams, with
                                                                                                     the size of the reward reflecting
                                                                                                     the importance of the project.
                                                                                                       Would you like to work at ICU?

                                                                                                     Adapted from Erin White, “How a
                                                                                                     Company Made Everyone a Team
                                                                                                     Player,” Wall Street Journal, August
                                                                                                     13, 2007, B1.




                                          pees    pace   6 oes

Diverse teams can extend the range of group efforts and ideas.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




214                                         Part2    The Communication Process


                 Team Stats                 research shows that ethnically diverse teams produce more and higher-quality
       a         Most     white-collar
                                            ideas.'* Research has also found that over time, as team members focus on
      7a      workers have to               their task, mission, or profession, cultural differences become less significant
              collaborate,   but            than the role of being a team member."
they are not always happy about                Sometimes the culture to which the team belongs is a distinct asset, uniting
doing so. Here are some team                strangers in positive ways and giving them strengths to use in high-stakes sit-
statistics.                                 uations. With their team skills enhanced by the organizational culture, airline
 =    The majority of workers (64%)         crews and emergency teams may perform heroically in a crisis.
      prefer working in groups of              Savvy team members play to each other’s strengths and devise strate-
      three.                                gies for dealing with differences. These efforts can benefit the whole team. A
 =    10% of workers prefer to              study of multicultural teams published in the Harvard Business Review found
      work alone.                           acknowledging cultural gaps openly and cooperatively working through
 =    82% of workers collaborate,           them an ideal strategy for surmounting cultural differences. For example, a
      and 42% do so constantly.             U.S. and U.K. team used their differing approaches to decision making to cre-
 = Women (61%) like working                 ate a higher-quality decision. The U.K. members used their slower approach
      collaboratively to learn more         to analyze possible pitfalls, and the U.S. members used their “forge ahead”
      than men (40%) do.                    approach to move the project along. Both sides appreciated the contributions
 =    Men (86%) like working col-           of the other members.!
      laboratively to perform a task
      more than women (25%) do,
      but obviously neither group is
      close to a majority.
                                            CONFLICT RESOLUTION
 =    Younger workers (18-24) like          Conflicts are going to arise in any group of intelligent people who care about
      working collaboratively to            their task. Yet many of us feel so uncomfortable with conflict that we pretend
      learn (60%).                          it doesn’t exist. However, unacknowledged conflicts rarely go away: they fes-
   Do you see any of these statis-          ter, making the next interchange more difficult.
 tics reflected in your teams?                    To reduce the number of conflicts in a team,
 Adapted from Matt Vella, “Indata: White-
 Collar Workers Shoulder Together—Like              Make responsibilities and ground rules clear at the beginning.
 It or Not,” BusinessWeek, April 28,
 2008, 58.                                    =     Discuss problems as they arise, rather than letting them fester till
                                                    people explode.
                                              =     Realize that team members are not responsible for each others’
                                                    happiness.

                                               In spite of these efforts, some conflict is a part of any team’s life and that
                                            conflict needs to be resolved. When a conflict is emotionally charged, people
                                            will need a chance to calm themselves before they can arrive at a well-rea-
                                            soned solution. Meeting expert John Tropman recommends the “two-meeting
                                            rule” for emotional matters: Controversial items should be handled at two dif-
                                            ferent meetings. The first meeting is a chance for everyone to air a point of
                                            view about the issue. The second meeting is the one at which the team reaches
                                            a decision. The time between the two meetings becomes a cooling-off period.”
                                               Figure 8.3 suggests several possible solutions to conflicts that student teams
                                            experience. Often the symptom arises from a feeling of not being respected or
                                            appreciated by the team. Therefore, many problems can be averted if people
                                            advocate for their ideas in a positive way. One way to do this is to devote as much
                                            effort to positive observations as possible. Another technique is to state analysis
                                            rather than mere opinions. Instead of “I wouldn't read an eight-page brochure,”
                                            the member of a team could say, “Tests we did a couple of years ago found a bet-
                                            ter response for two-page brochures. Could we move some of that information
                                            to our website?” As in this example, an opinion can vary from person to person;
                                            stating an opinion does not provide a basis for the team to make a decision. In
                                            contrast, analysis provides objective information for the team to consider.
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                  Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                                   215


Figure 8.3        Troubleshooting Team Problems
Symptom                           Possible solutions
We can’t find a time to meet      a. Find out why people can’t meet at certain times. Some reasons suggest their own
  that works for all of us.          solutions. For example, if someone has to stay home with small children, perhaps
                                     the team could meet at that person’s home.
                                  b. Assign out-of-class work to “committees” to work on parts of the project.
                                  c. Use technology (¢.g., Skype, wikis, e-mail) to share, discuss, and revise drafts.

One person isn’t doing his or     a. Find out what is going on. Is the person overcommitted? Does he or she feel
  her fair share.                    unappreciated? Is he or she unprepared? Those are different problems you’d solve
                                     in different ways.
                                  b. Early on, do things to build team loyalty. Get to know each other as writers
                                     and as people. Sometimes do something fun together.
                                  c. Encourage the person to contribute. “Mary, what do you think?” “Jim, which part
                                     of this would you like to draft?” Then find something to praise in the work.
                                     “Thanks for getting us started.”
                                  d. lf someone misses a meeting, assign someone else to bring the person up to speed.
                                     People who miss meetings for legitimate reasons (job interviews, illness) but don’t
                                     find out what happened may become less committed to the team.
                                  e. Consider whether strict equality is the most important criterion. On a given
                                      project, some people may have more knowledge or time than others.
                                      Sometimes the best team product results from letting people do different
                                      amounts of work.
                                  f. Even if you divide up the work, make all decisions as a team: what to write about,
                                    which evidence to include, what graphs to use, what revisions to make. People
                                    excluded from decisions become less committed to the team.
 | seem to be the only one on     a. Find out why other members “don’t care.” If they received low grades on early
    the team who cares about          assignments, stress that good ideas and attention to detail can raise grades.
    quality.                          Perhaps the team should meet with the instructor to discuss what kinds of work
                                      will pay the highest dividends.
                                  SS. Volunteer to do extra work. Sometimes people settle for something that’s just OK
                                      because they don’t have the time or resources to do excellent work. They might
                                      be happy for the work to be done—if they don’t have to do it.
                                  c. Be sure that you’re respecting what each person can contribute. Team members
                                      sometimes withdraw when one person dominates and suggests that he or she
                                     is “better” than other members.
                                  d. Fit specific tasks to individual abilities. People generally do better work in areas
                                     they see as their strengths. A visual learner who doesn’t care about the written
                                     report may do an excellent job on the accompanying visuals.
 People in the team don’t         a. Brainstorm so you have multiple possibilities to consider.
   seem willing to disagree. We   b. After an idea is suggested, have each person on the team suggest a way it could
   end up going with the first        be improved.
   idea suggested.                c. Appoint someone to be a devil’s advocate.
                                  d. Have each person on the team write a draft. It’s likely the drafts will be different,
                                      and you'll have several options to mix and match.
                                  e. Talk about good ways to offer criticism. Sometimes people don’t disagree
                                      because they’re afraid that other team members won't tolerate disagreement.
 One person just criticizes       a. Ask the person to follow up the criticism with a suggestion for improvement.
   everything.                    b. Talk about ways to express criticism tactfully. “I think we need to think about x”
                                     is more tactful than “You’re wrong.”
                                  c. If the criticism is about ideas and writing (not about people), value it. Ideas
                                      and documents need criticism if we are to improve them.
a
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




216                                        .Part2   The Communication Process


               A Team of Rivals             Steps in Conflict Resolution
              A major focus of Doris        Dealing successfully with conflict requires attention both to the issues and
              Kearns | Goodwin’s            to people’s feelings. The following techniques will help you resolve conflicts
              book Team of Rivals
                                            constructively.
 is Abraham Lincoln's leadership
 style, particularly the way he built
                                            1. Make sure the people involved really disagree. Sometimes different
                                            conversational styles, differing interpretations of data, or faulty inferences
 his leadership team. President
 Obama said if he could take only
 one book, apart from the Bible,
                                            create apparent conflicts when no real disagreement exists.
 with him to the White House it                Someone who asks “Are those data accurate?” may just be asking for source
 would be this book. The follow-            information, not questioning the conclusions the team drew from the data.
 ing are some of Goodwin's key                 Sometimes someone who’s under a lot of pressure may explode. But the
 points:                                    speaker may just be venting anger and frustration; he or she may not in fact be
 =     Lincoln chose his cabinet            angry at the person who receives the explosion. One way to find out if a per-
       from his most able rivals, men       son is just venting is to ask, “Is there something you'd like me to do?”
       who were guaranteed to hold
       different views. His ability to      2. Check to see that everyone’s information is correct. Sometimes
       weave these men into an              people are operating on outdated or incomplete information. People may also
       effective team showed great          act on personal biases or opinions rather than data.
       emotional intelligence.
 =     These men were confident             3. Discover the needs each person is trying to meet. Sometimes
       enough that they were not            determining the real needs makes it possible to see a new solution. The
       afraid to question Lincoln or        presenting problem that surfaces as the subject of dissension may or may not
       argue with him. The resulting        be the real problem. For example, a worker who complains about the hours
       exchange of ideas strength-          he’s putting in may in fact be complaining not about the hours themselves
       ened Lincoln's decision
                                            but about not feeling appreciated. A supervisor who complains that the
       making.
                                            other supervisors don’t invite her to meetings may really feel that the other
 =     These men also had tem-
                                            managers don’t accept her as a peer. Sometimes people have trouble seeing
                                            beyond the presenting problem because they’ve been taught to suppress
       peraments different from Lin-
       coln’s, helping Lincoln find a
       balanced approach to leading
                                            their anger, especially toward powerful people. One way to tell whether the
       the war.                             presenting problem is the real problem is to ask, “If this were solved, would
 =     Lincoln shared both credit for
                                            I be satisfied?” If the answer is no, then the problem that presents itself is not
       successes and responsibility         the real problem. Solving the presenting problem won't solve the conflict.
       for failures, including failures     Keep probing until you get to the real conflict.
       of others. Goodwin calls this
       tactic creating “a reservoir of       4. Search for alternatives: Sometimes people are locked into conflict
       good feeling.” Through this           because they see too few alternatives. People tend to handle complexity by
       approach Lincoln earned the           looking for ways to simplify. In a team, someone makes a suggestion, so the
       intense loyalty of his team.          team members discuss it as if it is the only alternative. The team generates
                                             more alternatives only if the first one is unacceptable. As a result, the team’s
  Adapted from Doris Kearns Goodwin,
     “Leadership Lessons from Abraham
                                             choice depends on the order in which team members think of ideas. When a
     Lincoln,” Harvard Business   Review     decision is significant, the team needs a formal process to identify alternatives
     87, no.4 (2009): 43-47.                 before moving on to a decision. Many teams use brainstorming when they
                                             search for alternatives.

                                             5. Repair negative feelings. Conflict can emerge without anger and
                                             without escalating the disagreement, as the next section shows. But if people’s
                                             feelings have been hurt, the team needs to deal with those feelings to resolve
                                             the conflict constructively. Only when people feel respected and taken
                                             seriously can they take the next step of trusting others on the team.


                                             Criticism Responses
                                             Conflict is particularly difficult to resolve when someone else criticizes or
                                             attacks us directly. When we are criticized, our natural reaction is to defend
                                             ourselves—perhaps by counterattacking. The counterattack prompts the
                                                               Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                        Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                                        217


critic to defend him- or herself. The conflict escalates; feelings are hurt; issues                               Scientific Teams

become muddied and more difficult to resolve.                                                                   For centuries Western
   Just as resolving conflict depends on identifying the needs each person is                               B innovation has been
trying to meet, so dealing with criticism depends on understanding the real                              SF       ed by individuals, lke
concern of the critic. Constructive ways to respond to criticism and get closer                                   Da Vinci, Darwin, and

to the real concern include paraphrasing, checking for feelings, checking infer-                    Einstein. But in recent years, team-
                                                                                                    work has become the model that
ences, and buying time with limited agreement.
                                                                                                    drives innovation, especially in the
Paraphrasing To paraphrase, repeat in your own words the verbal content                             sciences.
                                                                                                       Benjamin Jones, a professor at
of the critic’s message. The purposes of paraphrasing are (1) to be sure that
                                                                                                    Northwestern University’s Kellogg
you have heard the critic accurately, (2) to let the critic know what his or her
                                                                                                    School of Management, analyzed
statement means to you, and (3) to communicate that you are taking the critic                       19.9 million papers and 2.1 mil-
and his or her feelings seriously.                                                                  lion patents, and found that 99%
   Criticism:            You guys are stonewalling my requests for information.                     of scientific subfields have seen
                                                                                                    not only increased levels of team-
   Paraphrase:           You think that we don’t give you the information you need.                 work but also increases in the
                                                                                                    sizes of teams.
Checking for feelings           When you check the critic’s feelings, you identify                     According to Jones, the best
the emotions that the critic seems to be expressing verbally or nonverbally. The                    research now comes from teams.
purposes of checking feelings are to try to understand (1) the critic’s emotions,                   Among the most cited studies,
(2) the importance of the criticism for the critic, and (3) the unspoken ideas                       papers authored by teams are
and feelings that may actually be more important than the voiced criticism.                         cited more than twice as often
                                                                                                     as papers by individual authors.
   Criticism:            You guys are stonewalling my requests for information.                      Papers cited more than one
   Feelings check:       You sound pretty angry, yes?                                                thousand      times—“home — run
                                                                                                     papers” —are more than six times
Always ask the other person if you are right in your perception. Even the best                       as likely to be the result of team
reader of nonverbal cues is sometimes wrong.                                                         research.
                                                                                                        What is behind this shift toward
Checking for inferences When you check the inferences you draw from                                  teamwork? In part, Jones claims,
criticism, you identify the implied meaning of the verbal and nonverbal content                      researchers      develop      narrow
of the criticism, taking the statement a step further than the words of the critic                   expertise during years of gradu-
to try to understand why the critic is bothered by the action or attitude under                      ate study, requiring them to rely
discussion. The purposes of checking inferences are (1) to identify the real (as                     on colleagues in other fields to
opposed to the presenting) problem and (2) to communicate the feeling that                           provide connections between
you care about resolving the conflict.                                                               areas of study. Additionally, the
                                                                                                     complex nature of twenty first-
   Criticism:            You guys are stonewalling my requests for information.                      century problems demands col-
                         Are you saying that you need more information from our team?                 laborative efforts in order to truly
   Inference:
                                                                                                     transform our understanding of
Inferences can be faulty. In the above interchange, the critic might respond,                        those problems.
“I don’t need more information. I just think you should give it to me without
my having to file three forms in triplicate every time I want some data.”
                                                                                                     Adapted from Jonah Lehrer, “Sun-
                                                                                                     set of the Solo Scientist,” Wall Street
                                                                                                     Journal, February 5, 2011, C12.
Buying time with limited agreement                      Buying time is a useful strategy
for dealing with criticisms that really sting. When you buy time with limited
agreement, you avoid escalating the conflict (as an angry statement might do)
but also avoid yielding to the critic’s point of view. To buy time, restate the
part of the criticism you agree to be true. (This is often a fact, rather than the
interpretation or evaluation the critic has made of that fact.) Then let the critic
respond, before you say anything else. The purposes of buying time are (1) to allow
you time to think when a criticism really hits home and threatens you, so that
you can respond to the criticism rather than simply reacting defensively, and
(2) to suggest to the critic that you are trying to hear what he or she is saying.
    Criticism:           You guys are stonewalling my requests for information.
    Limited agreement:   It’s true that the cost projections you asked for last week still aren’t
                         ready.
      PROFESSIONAL WRITING




218                                                 Part2    The Communication Process


                    International Teams             DO NOT go on to justify or explain. A “Yes, but . . .” statement is not a
      >            IBM       programmer
                                                    time-buyer.
                   Rob Nicholson has
                   50 colleagues from
                   three — countries—
                                                    You-Attitude in Conflict Resolution
      England, India, and Canada—on                 You-attitude means looking at things from the audience’s point of view,
      his software team.                            respecting the audience, and protecting the audience’s ego. The you state-
        Global teams such as his have to
                                                    ments that many people use when they’re angry attack the audience; they do
      work to overcome language and
                                                    not illustrate you-attitude. Instead, substitute statements about your own feel-
      cultural barriers. Workers worried
      about having their jobs outsourced
                                                    ings. In conflict, I statements show good you-attitude!
      have to learn to share informa-                  Lacks you-attitude:    You never do your share of the work.
      tion. Workers from more polite or
                                                       You-attitude:           | feel that |’m doing more than my share of the work on this project.
      reserved cultures have to conquer
      their reluctance to interrupt people             Lacks you-attitude:   |Even you should be able to run the report through a spelling checker.
      and instead contact colleagues                   You-attitude:           I'm not willing to have my name on a report with so many spelling
      immediately with questions.                                              errors. | did lots of the writing, and | don’t think | should have to do
        The team collaborates through
                                                                               the proofreading and spell checking, too.
      sophisticated electronic communi-
      cations. Team wikis allow members
"to        post reports on their own prog-
      ress and comment on the work of               EFFECTIVE MEETINGS
      other team members. Team mem-
      bers get automatic alerts when
                                                    Meetings have always taken a large part of the average manager’s week.
      major components of their project             Although technology has eliminated some meetings, the increased number of
      change. Completed program seg-                teams means that meetings are even more frequent. In spite of their advan-
      ments are put into a shared data-             tages for communication, meetings are not always good. Many productive
      base. Phones display photos and               workers see them as all too often a waste of time, interrupting valuable work,
      personal details of team members              while less productive workers see them as a pleasant break. However, meet-
      so new      programmers       can     learn   ings can easily be made more effective.
      about their teammates and where                  Meetings can have multiple purposes:
      to go for help. Instant messaging
      keeps team members in touch.
        A vital task for this team is                       To share information.
      dividing the work into small                          To brainstorm ideas.
      pieces. Most projects are divided
                                                            To evaluate ideas.
      into two-week chunks; those
      chunks are further divided into                       To develop plans.
      pieces that one programmer can                        To make decisions.
      complete in one or two days. The                      To create a document.
      task list is kept on the team wiki.
                                                            To motivate members.
       As programmers complete their
       tasks, they take the top task from
       the wiki list.                                   When meetings combine two or more purposes, it’s useful to make the pur-
                                                     poses explicit. For example, in the meeting of a company’s board of direc-
         When the software fails a test,
       the entire team stops program-
       ming and focuses on finding the
                                                     tors, some items are presented for information. Discussion is possible, but the
       problem. In fact, the British office          group will not be asked to make a decision. Other items are presented for
       has rigged a red emergency light              action; the group will be asked to vote. A business meeting might specify that
       on its testing machine.                       the first half hour will be time for brainstorming, with the second half hour
         Clear and frequent communi-                 devoted to evaluation.
       cations among team members                        Formal meetings are run under strict rules, like the rules of parliamentary
       are a vital key for the success of            procedure summarized in Robert's Rules of Order. Motions must be made for-
       the project.                                  mally before a topic can be debated. Each point is settled by a vote. Minutes
       Adapted     from   Phred   Dvorak,   “How
                                                     record each motion and the vote on it. Formal rules help the meeting run
       Teams Can Work Well Together                  smoothly if the group is very large or if the agenda is very long. Informal
       from Far Apart,” Wall Street Journal,         meetings, which are much more common in the workplace, are run more
          September 17, 2007, B4.
                                                     Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                              Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                                      219


loosely. Votes may not be taken if most people seem to agree. Minutes may                             Fun at Berkshire
                                                                                                      Hathaway’s Annual
not be kept. Informal meetings are better for team-building and problem
                                                                                                      Meeting
solving.
   Planning the agenda is the foundation of a good meeting. A good agenda                            {In his 2011 letter to
                                                                                         the shareholders of Berkshire
indicates
                                                                                         Hathaway, Warren Buffett gives
                                                                                         a three-page preview of what to
 = A list of items for consideration.                                                    anticipate at the annual meeting.
 m Whether each item is presented for information, for discussion, or fora               Here are some colorful excerpts.]
    decision.                                                                               If you decide to leave during
                                                                                            the day’s question periods,
 =   Whois sponsoring or introducing each item.
                                                                                            please do so while Charlie is
 =   How much time is allotted for each item.                                               talking. (Act fast; he can be
                                                                                            terse.)
    Although a time schedule on an agenda is frequently not followed exactly,               On Sunday, around 1 p.m.,
it does inform participants about the relative importance of the agenda items.              | will be at Borsheims with a
In general, the information on an agenda should be specific enough that par-                smile and a shoeshine, selling
ticipants can come to the meeting prepared with ideas, background informa-                  jewelry. . . . I've told Susan
                                                                                            Jacques, Borsheims’ CEO,
tion, and any other resources they need for completing each agenda item.
                                                                                            that I’m still a hot shot sales-
    Many groups start their agendas with routine items on which agreement                   man. But | see doubt in her
will be easy. Doing so gets the meeting off to a positive start. However, it may            eyes. So cut loose and buy
also waste the time when people are most attentive. Another approach is to                  something from me for your
put routine items at the end. If there’s a long list of routine items, sometimes            wife or sweetheart (presum-
you can dispense with them in an omnibus motion. An omnibus motion                          ably the same person). Make
allows a group to approve many items together rather than voting on each                     me look good.
separately. A single omnibus motion might cover multiple changes to opera-                   Gorat's and Piccolo’s will
tional guidelines, or a whole slate of candidates for various offices, or vari-              again be open exclusively for
ous budget recommendations. It’s important to schedule controversial items                   Berkshire shareholders on
early in the meeting, when energy levels are high, and to allow enough time                  Sunday. . . . These restau-
for full discussion. Giving a controversial item only half an hour at the end                rants are my favorites and—

of the day or evening makes people suspect that the leaders are trying to                    still being a growing boy—|
                                                                                             will eat at both of them on
manipulate them.
                                                                                             Sunday evening.
    Pay attention to people and process as well as to the task at hand. At infor-
mal meetings, a good leader observes nonverbal feedback and invites every-               Quoted from Warren Buffett, “Let-
one to participate. If conflict seems to be getting out of hand, a leader may            ters 2010,” Berkshire Hathaway Inc.,

want to focus attention on the group process and ways that it could deal with            accessed May 24, 2011, http://
                                                                                         www.berkshirehathaway.com/
conflict, before getting back to the substantive issues. Highly sensitive topics         letters/201 Oltr.pdf.
may require two or more meetings, the first to air the subject and people’s feel-
ings and the second to vote. The time between the two gives participants time
to cool off and informally discuss the issues involved.
    If the group doesn’t formally vote, the leader should summarize the group’s
consensus after each point. At the end of the meeting, the leader should sum-
marize ali decisions and remind the group who is responsible for implement-
ing or following up on each item. If no other notes are taken, someone should
record the decisions and assignments. Long minutes will be most helpful if
assignments are set off visually from the narrative.
    If you’re planning a long meeting, for example, a training session or a
 conference, recognize that networking is part of the value of the meeting.
 Allow short breaks at least every two hours and generous breaks twice a
 day so participants can talk informally to each other. If participants will be
 strangers, include some social functions so they can get to know each other.
 If they will have different interests or different levels of knowledge, plan
 concurrent sessions on different topics or for people with different levels of
 expertise.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




220                                       Part 2    The Communication Process


             Write Meeting
             Minutes Minutes              COLLABORATIVE WRITING
             Later (not Months)
                                          Whatever your career, it is likely that some of the documents you produce will
              During — congressio-        be written with a team. Collaborative writing is often prompted by one of the
nal hearings on the cholesterol           following situations:
drug     Vytorin,   representatives
from Merck and Schering-Plough
(the drug's manufacturers) were            =       The task is too big or the time is too short for one person to do all the
grilled by lawmakers over a set of                 writing.
meeting minutes.                            =      Noone person has all the knowledge required to do the writing.
  The minutes were from a
                                            =      The stakes for the task are so high that the organization wants the best
                                                   efforts of as many people as possible; no one person wants the sole
meeting held between the drug
manufacturers and the outside
                                                   responsibility for the success or failure of the document.
contractors who had researched
 the drug's effectiveness. Accord-
 ing to the minutes, those consul-
                                             Collaborative writing can be done by two people or by a much larger group.
                                          The team can be democratic or run by a leader who makes decisions alone. The
 tants had recommended changing
 the way they evaluated the results
 of their research to “fudge” the
                                          team may share or divide responsibility for each stage in the writing process.
 data and make it seem that Vyto-         There are several ways teams commonly divide the work. One person might
 rin was more effective than it           do the main writing, with others providing feedback. Another approach is to
 really is. But when they testified       divide the whole project into smaller tasks and to assign each task to a different
 before Congress, the researchers         team member. This approach shares the workload more evenly but is harder to
 claimed that Vytorin’s manufactur-       coordinate, although technology, such as wikis or Google docs, helps. Some-
 ers had suggested that change            times team members write together simultaneously, discussing and responding
 in their research process—and            to each other’s ideas. This approach helps consensus but is time-consuming.
 that those minutes had been writ-           Research in collaborative writing suggests strategies that produce the best
 ten by Merck employees almost
                                          writing. As noted earlier, research has found that student teams that voiced
 a year after the meeting. In fact,
 those minutes hadn’t been written
                                          disagreements as they analyzed, planned, and wrote a document produced
 until after the congressional inves-
                                          significantly better documents than those that suppressed disagreement, going
 tigation began—a delay which
 made it look like Vytorin’s manu-
 facturers   were    “fudging”   more
 than test data.
   Meeting minutes serve two main
 purposes: they preserve a record
 of what happened and what was
 decided, and they capture the
 facts so that if there’s a dispute
 later, it's easier to untangle the
 truth. In either case, the best prac-
 tice is to write the minutes right
 after the meeting, so that every-
 thing is still remembered correctly:

  Adapted from Alica Mundy and Ron
  Winslow, “Accuracy of Vytorin Min-
  utes Raises Doubt,” Wall Street Jour-
  nal, April 12, 2008, A3.




                                           Many important historical documents resulted from collaborative efforts. Thomas
                                           Jefferson may have written the foundation for the Declaration of Independence, but he
                                           received many suggestions and changes from other key players, including John Adams
                                           and Benjamin Franklin. The document underwent 47 alterations before it was finalized
                                           and presented to Congress.
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                     Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                                           221


along with whatever was first proposed.’® A case study of two collaborative                                       Being Taken
writing teams in a state agency found that the successful team distributed                                        Seriously
power in an egalitarian way, worked to soothe hurt feelings, and was careful                               ==     t's     frustrating   to
to involve all team members. In terms of writing process, the successful team                              ~ speak in a meeting
understood the task as a response to a rhetorical situation (with a specific audi-              —_and have people ignore what you
ence, purpose, and situation), planned revisions as a team, saw su                 ervisors’      say. Here are some tips for being
comments as legitimate, and had a positive attitude toward revision.”               Ede and _ taken seriously:
Lunsford’s detailed case studies of collaborative teams in business, govern-                      = Link your comment to the
ment, and science create a description of effective collaborative writers: “They                     comment of a powerful per-
are flexible; respectful of others; attentive and analytical listeners; able to speak                son, even if logic suffers a bit.
and write clearly and articulately; dependable and able to meet deadlines; able                       For example, say, “John is
to designate and share responsibility, to lead and to follow; open to criticism                       eT         ue es oe
                                                                        1720                          on excellence, AND | think
but confident in their own abilities; ready to engage in creative conflict.                           we can become stronger by
                                                                                                      encouraging diversity.”
Planning the Work and the Document                                                                Geet                  alte coc ton
Collaborative writing is most successful when the team articulates its under-                            Otteaa Sate,
                                                                                                      POON
standing of the document's purposes, audiences, and contexts, and explicitly                          = Se
discusses the best way to achieve rhetorical goals. Businesses neschedule formal                      Sno ey ee
      :       ?                 :                5    ;                5        e                       question is highly techni-
                                                                                                      first
planning 4 sessions for large projects  to set up a: time line specifying: intermedi-                       ee
                               ;                                                                      cal: “In footnote three of the
ate and final due dates,  meeting isdates,a who will attendi each meeting, 5
                                                                             and who
                                                                                   ‘                  10K, you indicate... .”
   ‘                S                                                                                 Fingan Shige occ
will do what. Putting the plan in writing reduces misunderstandings during.
                                   ;           oS.    :                                               tion and agree ahead of time
the project.                                                                                          to acknowledge each other's
      When you plan a collaborative writing project,
                                                                                                      contributions to the meet-

 =     Make your analysis of the problem, audience, context, and purposes                             set ee ee OC
       explicit so you know where you agree and where you disagree. It usu-                           disagree with the point being
        ally helps to put these in writing.                                                           cee                aea eine
 =      Plan the organization, format, and style of the document before anyone                        ee taking seriously:
        begins to write to make it easier to blend sections written by different                      “Duane has pointed out. . . ,
        authors. Decide who is going to do what and when each piece of the                           but | think that... .”
        project will be due.                                                                       = Use the style of language that
 =      Consider your work styles and other commitments when making a                                 powerful people in your orga-
        timeline. A writer working alone can stay up all night to finish a single-                    nization use.
        authored document. But members of a team need to work together to                       —_™_- Repeat your ideas. Put
        accommodate each other’s styles and to enable members to meet other                           important ideas in a memo
        commitments.                                                                                      before the meeting.

  =     Decide how you will give constructive feedback on each person's work.                      Adapted fromucan © Fladon: “Mane
  =     Build some leeway into your deadlines. It’s harder for a team to finish adoc-              299g Your Cares’ Wall Street Journal,
        ument when one person’s part is missing than it is for a single writer to fin-                     te
                                                                                                   eS“Spotting
                                                                                                   sen,        Value Takes Smarts,
        ish the last section of a document on which he or she has done all the work.               Not Sight, Laura Sloate Shows,” Wall
                                                                                                   Street Journal, December 10, 1987.
                                           3          F                    P   :                   Ai, A14; and Anne Fisher, “Ask Annie:
                                       4                                                           Putting Your Money Where Your Mouth
      All team members need to give input on important planning issues, espe-
cially to analysis and organization.                                                               Is,” Fortune, September 3, 2001, 238.


 Composing the Drafts
When you draft a collaborative writing project,

  =     Decide who will write what. Will one person write an entire draft? Will
        each team member be assigned a portion of the draft? Will the whole
        team write the draft together? Most writers find that composing alone
        is faster than composing in a group. However, composing together may
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                          Part2     The Communication Process


              Corporate Annual
              Meetings                             reduce revision time later, since the group examines every choice as it
                                                   is made. Even so, it is still generally faster to have individuals compose
               Corporate    annual
                                                   drafts.
               meetings have be-
come more interesting as activ-            m       Decide how you will share drafts. Will you use wikis or Google docs so
ists become more vocal. PETA                       everyone can work on a draft? International teams particularly need to
representatives press restaurant                   use electronic media to compose drafts.
operators on the ethical treat-            =       Carefully label and date drafts so everyone is working on the most cur-
ment of the animals slaughtered                    rent version. Make sure everyone knows the date of the latest draft.
for them. Environmentalists pres-
                                           =       Ifthe quality of writing is crucial, have the best writer(s) draft the docu-
sure manufacturers about their
water treatments. Shareholders                     ment after everyone has gathered the necessary information.
confront executive compensa-
tion plans they believe to be out
of line.                 E
                                          Revising the Document
   All the action is moving corpo-        Revising a collaborative document requires attention to content, organization,
rate officials to stage-manage
                                          and style. The following guidelines can make the revision process more
their annual meetings. Com-
                                          effective:
panies have been assigning
“escorts” to activists, requiring
questions to be submitted ahead             = Evaluate the content and discuss possible revisions as a team. Brain-
of time in writing, setting speaker           storm ways to improve each section so the person doing the revisions
time limits of one to three min-              has some guidance.
utes, and using stationary micro-           = Evaluate the organization and discuss possible revisions as a team.
phones, rather than roving ones,
                                              Would a different organization make the message clearer?
to ensure orderly proceedings.
Many companies are googling                 = Recognize that different people favor different writing styles. If the style
the sponsors of shareholder res-              satisfies the demands of standard English and the conventions of busi-
olutions. Some firms are moving               ness writing, accept it even if you wouldn't say it that way.
meeting locations to out-of-the-            = When the team is satisfied with the content of the document, one
way   locations:     U-Haul’s   parent        person—probably the best writer—should make any changes necessary
company held one annual meet-                 to make the writing style consistent throughout.
ing in a tiny Nevada town. Home
Depot hired several dozen beefy
“greeters” to enforce speaker
                                           Editing and Proofreading the Document
time limits. Some activists find
they are greeted by an official           Since writers’ mastery of standard English varies, a team report needs careful
who sits by them at the meet-             editing and proofreading.
ing and escorts them to the door
 afterward.
    Some companies are going too            =      Have at least one person check the whole document for correctness
 far. Walmart had to apologize after               in grammar, mechanics, and spelling and for consistency in the way
 areport that they had investigated                that format elements (particularly headings), names, and numbers are
 some resolution sponsors. And                     handled.
 some companies still believe in
                                               =   Run the document through a spell checker.
 showing courtesy to shareholders
 as a way to generate goodwill.                =   Even if you use a computerized spell checker, at least one human being
                                                   should proofread the document too.
 Adapted from Erin White, “Stage-
 Managing the Annual Meeting: Com-
 panies Keep Tight Rein on Activists,         Like any member of the writing team, those handling the editing tasks need
 Limit Speeches; Beefy ‘Greeters’ at
 the Depot,” Wall Street Journal, April
                                           to consider how they express their ideas. In many situations, the editor plays
 16, 2007, B1, B3.                         the role of diplomat, careful to suggest changes in ways that do not seem to
                                           call the writer’s abilities into question. Describing the reason for a change
                                           is typically more helpful than stating an opinion. Writers are more likely to
                                           allow editing of their prose if they know a sentence has a dangling modifier,
                                           or a paragraph needs work on parallel structure. Using words like could and
                                           should to modify a direction can add a tone of politeness.
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                  Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                                    223


                                                                                                         Blue Man Group
                                                                                                         Work

                                                                                                           The Blue Man Group
                                                                                                           started in 1988 as a
                                                                                                           trio of performance
                                                                                             artists doing street theater in
                                                                                             New York City. Today, Blue Man
                                                                                             Group is an entertainment fran-
                                                                                             chise with about 70 Blue Men
                                                                                             employed in nine theater shows
                                                                                             plus touring concerts. They fill
                                                                                             stadiums, they’ve founded their
                                                                                             own creativity-based early child-
                                                                                             hood program, and they've been
                                                                                             nominated for a Grammy. How
                                                                                             did they do it? Teamwork.
                                                                                                 As Matt Goldman, one of the
                                                                                             founding Blue Men, notes, “Three
                                                                                              is the smallest unit where you can
                                                                                              have an outsider.” The Blue Man
                                                                                              Group uses consensus to create
                                                                                              their music, original instruments,
                                                                                              and shows—and to run their busi-
                                                                                              ness. They discuss decisions until
                                                                                              they reach a point where all three
                                                                                              members can agree. That lets
                                                                                              each member bring his/her own
                                                                                              unique contributions to the pro-
                                                                                              cess, while ensuring that the whole
                                                                                              team is satisfied with the result.
The Blue Man Group uses consensus to create their shows and run their business.                “It takes longer, but we find if you
                                                                                               keep talking things through, you
                                                                                               reach a better choice.”
                                                                                                  Working as part of a team is
Making the Team Process Work                                                                   one of the most challenging com-
                                                                                               munication tasks you can face in
The information in this chapter can help your team interact effectively, run                   a professional setting. As a team
meetings efficiently, and deal with conflict constructively. The following sug-                member, you'll use your audience
gestions apply specifically to writing teams:                                                  analysis skills to build goodwill
                                                                                               with people inside and outside
                                                                                               of your team, and your organi-
 = Give yourselves plenty of time to discuss problems and find solutions.                      zational skills to keep both your
   Writing a team report may require hours of discussion time in addition                      communication and your work
   to the time individuals spend doing research and writing drafts.                           moving smoothly.
 = Take the time to get to know team members and to build team loyalty.
   Team members will work harder and the final document will be better if
                                                                                              Sources: Liz Welch, “How We Did It:
                                                                                              The Blue Man Group, from Downtown
   the team is important to members.                                                          Performance Art to Global Entertain-

 = Bea responsible team member. Produce your drafts on time.
                                                                                              ment Empire,” /Inc., August 2008,
                                                                                              410-12; and “What Is Blue Man
 = Be aware that people have different ways of expressing themselves in                       Group?” Blue Man Productions, Inc.,
                                                                                              accessed May 31, 2011, http://www
      writing.                                                                                .blueman.com/about/whatis.
  =   Because talking is “looser” than writing, people on a team can think
      they agree when they don’t. Don’t assume that because the discus-
      sion went smoothly, a draft written by one person will necessarily be
      acceptable.
  =   Allow more time at all stages of the writing process than you would if
      you were writing the document by yourself.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




224                             Part 2   The Communication Process




                                    Effective teams balance information leadership, interpersonal leadership,
                                    and procedural team management.
                                    Successful teams set clear deadlines, schedule frequent meetings, deal
                                    directly with conflict, have an inclusive decision-making style, and have a
                                    higher proportion of members who worked actively on the project.
                                    Groupthink is the tendency for groups to put such a high premium on
                                    agreement that they directly or indirectly punish dissent. The best correc-
                                    tives to groupthink are to consciously search for additional alternatives,
                                    to test one’s assumptions against those of a range of other people, and to
                                    protect the right of each person in the group to disagree.
                                    To resolve conflicts, first make sure that the people involved really dis-
                                    agree. Next, check to see that everyone’s information is correct. Discover
                                    the needs each person is trying to meet. The presenting problem that sur-
                                    faces as the subject of dissension may or may not be the real problem.
                                    Search for alternatives. Repair negative feelings.
                                    Constructive ways to respond to criticism include paraphrasing, checking
                                    for feelings, checking inferences, and buying time with limited agreement.
                                    Use statements about your own feelings to own the problem and avoid
                                    attacking the audience. In conflict, | statements are good you-attitude!
                                     To make meetings more effective,
                                     = State the purpose of the meeting at the beginning.
                                     = Distribute an agenda that indicates whether each item is for informa-
                                          tion, discussion, or action, and how long each is expected to take.
                                     = Allow enough time to discuss controversial issues.
                                        Pay attention to people and process as well as to the task at hand.
                                     = If you don’t take formal votes, summarize the group’s consensus after
                                        each point. At the end of the meeting, summarize all decisions and
                                        remind the group who is responsible for implementing or following up
                                        on each item.
                                     Collaborative writing means working with other writers to produce a sin-
                                     gle document. Writers producing a joint document need to pay attention
                                     not only to the basic steps in the writing process but also to the processes of
                                     team formation and conflict resolution. They also need to allow more time
                                     than they would for single-authored documents.


                                                                                            *Go to www.mhhe.com/locker10e for
       CHAPTER           8       Exercises and Problems                                     additional Exercises and Problems.




 8.1       Reviewing the Chapter

       What are 10 kinds of productive roles in teams?               What is groupthink? Have you ever experienced
       Which roles do you prefer to play? (LO 8-1)                   it? (LO 8-2)
       What are five kinds of nonproductive roles in                 What are some techniques for resolving conflict?
       teams? (LO 8-1)                                               (LO 8-4)
       What are some team decision-making strategies?                What are some techniques for responding to
       (LO 8-2)                                                      criticism? (LO 8-4)
       Name five characteristics of successful teams.                What are some techniques for making meetings
       (LO 8-3)                                                      effective? (LO 8-5)
                                                               Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                       Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                             225


 9. What are some techniques for collaborative writ-                     out pieces? If so, how did the process work for
    ing? (LO 8-6)                                                        your team? (LO 8-6)
10. Have you ever been part of a team that wrote a
    document as a whole group rather than assigning



8.2           Brainstorming Ways to Resolve Conflicts

Suggest one or more ways that each of the following                     medical school. She says she’d rather do the lion’s
teams could deal with the conflict(s) it faces.                         share of the work so that she knows it’s good.
  1. Mike and Takashi both find writing hard. Elise has              4. Jessie’s father is terminally ill. This team isn’t very
     been getting better grades than either of them, so                 important in terms of what's going on in her life,
     they offer to do all the research if she’ll organize               and she knows she may have to miss some team
          the document and write, revise, edit, and proof-              meetings.
          read it. Elise thinks that this method would leave         5. Sherry is aware that she is the person on her team
          her doing a disproportionate share of the work.               who always points out the logical flaws in argu-
          Moreover, scheduling the work would be difficult,             ments: she’s the one who reminds the team that
          since she wouldn’t know how good their research               they haven't done all the parts of the assignment.
          was until the last minute.                                    She doesn’t want her team to turn in a flawed
    2.    Because of their class and work schedules, Lars               product, but she wonders whether the other team
          and Andrea want to hold team meetings from 8 to               members see her as too critical.
          10 pm, working later if need be. But Juan’s wife           6. Jim’s team missed several questions on their team
          works the evening shift, and he needs to be home              quiz. Talking to Tae-Suk after class, Jim learns that
          with his children, two of whom have to be in bed              Tae-Suk knew all the answers. “Why didn’t you
          before 8. He wants to meet from 8 to 10 am, but the            say anything?” Jim asks angrily. Tae-Suk responds
       others don’t want to meet that early.                             quietly, “Todd said that he knew the answers. I
    3. Lynn wants to divide up the work exactly equally,                 did not want to argue with him. We have to work
       with firm due dates. Marcia is trying to get into                 together, and I do not want anyone to lose face.”



8.3           Comparing Meeting Minutes

Have two or more people take minutes of each class or                As your instructor directs,
team meeting for a week. Compare the accounts of the                 a. Discuss your findings with your team.
same meeting.                                                        b. Share your team findings orally with the class.
= To what extent do they agree on what happened?                     c. Describe and analyze your findings in a memo to
= Does one contain information missing in other                          your instructor.
         accounts?
=        Doany accounts disagree on a specific fact?
=        How do you account for the differences you find?



8.4            Learning about Annual Meetings
                                                                     =  What is the tone of the conference preview?
The sidebar on page 219 previewed the annual meeting
of Berkshire Hathaway. Read Buffett's complete three-                ®  Does it give useful hints?
page preview at http:// www berkshirehathaway.com/                   =  What activities will occur at the meeting?
letters/2010ltr.pdf. Prepare to discuss the preview in                  Which meeting would you rather attend, Buffett's
small groups by answering these questions:                           or that of your professional society? Why? Discuss the
= What is the tone of the preview?                                   answers to these questions in small groups.
= What useful hints does Buffett give to his
    shareholders?
= What activities will occur at the meeting?
Now look up the announcement for the annual confer-
ence of a professional society to which you belong.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




226                                 Part 2   The Communication Process



8.5         Recommending a Policy on Student Entrepreneurs

Assume that your small team comprises the officers in
student government on your campus. You receive this
e-mail from the Dean of Students:

                      As you know, campus policy says that no student may use campus resources to
                      conduct business-related activities. Students can’t conduct business out of dorm
                      rooms or use university e-mail addresses for business. They can’t post business
                      web pages on the university server.

                      On the other hand, a survey conducted by the Kauffman Center for Entrepreneurial
                      Leadership showed that 7 out of 10 teens want to become entrepreneurs.

                      Should campus policy be changed to allow students to use dorm rooms and univer-
                      sity e-mail addresses for business? (And then what happens when roommates com-
                      plain and our network can’t carry the increased e-mail traffic?) Please recommend
                      what support (if any) should be given to student entrepreneurs.


      Your team will be writing a report recommending                You need to
what (if anything) your campus should do for student                 =   Send e-mail messages to team members describing
entrepreneurs and supporting your recommendation.                        your initial point of view on the issue and discussing
 Hints:                                                                  the various options.
                                                                         Help your team write the report.    ‘           ;
=     Does your campus offer other support for entrepre-                    i                 4
                                                                         Write a memo to your instructor telling how satis-
      neurs (courses, a business plan competition, a start-
      up incubator)? What should be added or expanded?                   fied you are with
 =    Is it realistic to ask alumni for money to fund stu-                =   The decision your team reached.
      dent start-ups?                                                     =   The process you used to reach it.
 =    Are campus dorms, e-mail, phone, and delivery ser-                  =   The document your team produced.
      vices funded by tax dollars? If your school is a public
       institution, do state or local laws limit business use?



 8.6         Recommending a Fair Way to Assign Work around the Holidays

 Assume that your team comprises a hospital’s Labor-
 Management Committee. This e-mail arrives from the
 hospital administrator:

                       Subject: Allocating Holiday Hours

                       it’s that time of year again, and we're starting to get requests for time off from every
                       department. We have shifts where every physician and half the nurses want time
                       off. Don’t these people realize that we can’t close down over a holiday? And what’s
                       worse is that some of the shift leads are giving preferential treatment to their friends.
                       The head of the nurses’ union has already started complaining to me.

                       We need a comprehensive, hospital-wide procedure for assigning holiday vacation
                       time that doesn’t make us shut down wards. It needs to be flexible, because people
                       like to take a week off around Christmas. But we have to set limits: no more than
                       one-quarter of the staff can take time off at any one time. And those nurses like to
                       swap shifts with each other to arrange their days off into larger blocks, so we need
                       to cover that too.
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                     Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams


                   Write up a policy to keep these people in line. Be sure to throw in the safety concerns
                   and regulatory stuff.

Your team will be performing these tasks:                            You personally need to
a. Write a team response recommending a new policy                    Send e-mail messages to team members describing
    and supporting your recommendations. Include two                  your initial point of view on the issue and discussing
    transmittal e-mails: one to the hospital administrator,           the various options.
    and one to the hospital’s medical and nursing staff.              Help your team write the documents.
    Take care to address the two audiences’ different                 Write a memo to your instructor telling how
    needs and expectations with good you-attitude and                 satisfied you are with
    positive emphasis.
b. Create a one-page notice describing your new policy.               =   The decisions your team reached.
    This notice should be suitable for posting at the duty            ®   The process you used to reach them.
    desk for each ward: that is, in full view of both your            =   The documents your team produced.
    employees and your customers (the patients). Create
    an effective visual design that emphasizes and orga-
    nizes the text.



8.7       Recommending a Dress Policy

Assume that your small team comprises your organiza-
tion’s Labor-Management Committee
   This e-mail arrives from the CEO:

                    In the last 10 years, we became increasingly casual. But changed circumstances
                    seem to call for more formality. Is it time to reinstate a dress policy? If so, what
                    should it be?


   Your team will be writing a response recommend-                    You need to
ing the appropriate dress for employees and supporting                Send e-mail messages to team members describing
your recommendation.                                                  your initial point of view on the issue and discussing
                                                                      the various options. —
Hint:
                                                                      Help your team write the response.
Agree on an office, factory, store, or other workplace to
use for this problem.                                                 Write a memo to your instructor telling how
                                                                      satisfied you are with
                                                                      ® The decision your team reached.
                                                                      = The process you used to reach it.
                                                                      ® The document your team produced.




 8.8       Responding to an Employee Grievance

 Assume that your small team comprises the Labor-Man-
 agement committee at the headquarters of a chain of gro-
 cery stores. This e-mail arrives from the vice president
 for human resources:

                    As you know, company policy requires that employees smile at customers and make
                    eye contact with them. In the past 9 months, 12 employees have filed grievances
                    over this rule. They say they are being harassed by customers who think they are
                    flirting with them. A produce clerk claims customers have propositioned her and
                    followed her to her car. Another says “Let me decide who | am going to say hello to
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




228                             Part2   The Communication Process



                   with a big smile.” The union wants us to change the policy to let workers not make
                   eye contact with customers, and to allow workers to refuse to carry groceries to a
                   customer’s car at night. My own feeling is that we want to maintain our image as
                   a friendly store that cares about customers, but that we also don’t want to require
                   behavior that leads to harassment. Let’s find a creative solution.


   Your team will be writing a group response recom-            =         Help your team write the response.
mending whether to change the policy and supporting                       Write a memo to your instructor telling how satis-
your recommendation.                                                      fied you are with
   You need to                                                            = The decision your team reached.
m Send e-mail messages to team members describing                         = The process you used to reach it.
    your initial point of view on the issue and discussing                = The document your team produced.
    the various options.


8.9       Answering an Ethics Question

Assume that your team comprises your organization’s
Ethics Committee. You receive the following anonymous
note:

                   People are routinely using the company letterhead to write letters to members of
                   Congress, senators, and even the president stating their positions on various issues.
                   Making their opinions known is of course their right, but doing so on letterhead sta-
                   tionery implies that they are speaking for the company, which they are not.

                   | think that the use of letterhead for anything other than official company business
                   should be prohibited.


    Your team will be determining the best solution to the      =         Help your team write the message.
 problem and then communicating it in a message to all          =         Write a memo to your instructor telling how satis-
 employees.                                                               fied you are with
    You need to                                                           =     The decision your team reached.
 = Send e-mail messages to team members describing                        &     The process you used to reach it.
     your initial point of view on the issue and discussing               =     The document your team produced.
     the various options.



 8.10      Interviewing Workers about Collaborating

 Interview someone who works in an organization about               =      How do you handle unexpected problems? Illness?
 his or her on-the-job collaboration activities. Possible                  Injury? Broken equipment?
 questions to ask include the following:                            m      What advice can you give about effectively collabo-
 = How often do you work on collaborative projects?                        rating on projects?
 = Do your collaborative projects always include people             As your instructor directs,
     who are in your immediate office? How often do you             a.        Share your information with a small team of students
     collaborate with people via technology?                                  in your class.
 = How do you begin collaborative projects? What are                b.        Present your findings orally to the class.
     the first steps you take when working with others?
                                                                    ie)       Present your findings in a memo to your instructor.
 = How do you handle disagreements?
                                                                    d.        Join with other students to present your findings ina
 = What do you do when someone isn’t doing his/her                            team report.
     share of the work on a collaborative project?
 = What do you do to see every person meets team
     deadlines?
                                                               Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition
                                                                                                                               |




                                                       Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams                                229


8.11             Networking for Team Formation
In this exercise, you are going to participate in a net-            will time the sessions and tell you when to change
working event, an abbreviated “talk and walk.”                      people.
   To prepare for the event,                                           After the event, analyze what you have learned. Here
=       Prepare business cards for yourself, using a com-           are some questions to get you started:
        puter application of your choice.                           = Who was the most interesting? Why?
m       Prepare a list of people in your class whom you             = Who did you like the most? Why?
        would like to meet (give visual descriptions if you         = Who would you most like to have on a team in this
        do not know their names).                                      class? Why?
m       Prepare a list of questions you would like to have          = Did you meet anyone you didn’t want to work with?
        answered.                                                      Explain.
=       Collect materials to use for taking notes during the        = What lessons did you learn about networking?
        event.                                                        Write up your analysis in a memo to your teacher.
During the event, you will have six three-minute ses-
sions to talk with a fellow student. Your instructor


8.12             Writing a Team Action Plan

Before you begin working on a team project, develop a                 are not present. How will you inform team mem-
team action plan to establish a framework that will hold              bers of what occurred at meetings if they were not
your team members accountable for their work.                         present?
   After reading the project assignment sheet and meet-             m Define what “absence” means for your team. Are all
ing your team, decide upon answers for the following                  absences equal? How should a team member who’s
questions:                                                            going to be absent let the team know? How far in
= Will you have a team leader? If so, who? Why is                     advance does your team need to know about an
    that person qualified to be the team leader? What                 absence? How many absences from one team mem-
    are that person’s responsibilities? How will you                  ber will be too many? What are the consequences of
    proceed if the team leader is unable to meet those                too many absences?
    responsibilities?                                               ™ Create a policy dealing with people who don’t
                                                                      attend class -during your preparation days or dur-
= What will be each team member’s role? What is each
    team member’s qualification for that role?                        ing your presentation; people who don’t attend
                                                                      meetings outside class; people who miss deadlines,
= How are you dividing your work? Why did you                          don’t do their work at all or in a timely manner, or
    choose to divide the work the way you did?                         who consistently turn in incomplete or poor-quality
m= Whatare the tasks your team needs to accomplish?                    work. What penalties will you apply? (Some ideas:
   For each task in the assignment, identify a con-                    you might consider loss of points, grade reductions,
   crete deliverable (What do you need to hand in?), a                      failure, a team firing, or a team intervention.)
   concrete measure for success (How will your team                     =   Will you report problem members to your instruc-
   decide if you completed that task well?), and a work                     tor? If so, at what point? What role do you want
         schedule (When does each task need to be done?)                    your instructor to have in dealing with problem
    =    How will you resolve disagreements that may arise                  members?
         while working on the project? How will your team               After your team determines and agrees on an action plan,
         make decisions: By majority? By consensus?                     the team’s secretary should send your answers in a memo
    =    When and where will you hold meetings? Decide                  to your instructor, who will keep the document on file in
         whether you can hold meetings if all team members              case a problem arises.



    8.13         Writing Team Meeting Minutes
                                                                        =   Members who were absent.
    As you work in a collaborative team setting, designate a
    different member to take minutes for each meeting.                      Place, time, and date of meeting.

    As your instructor directs, your minutes should include:            =   Work accomplished, and who did it, during the
                                                                            meeting.
    = Name of the team holding the meeting.
    = Members who were present.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING


                                                                                                                                —




230                              Part 2   The Communication Process


=     Actions that need to be completed, the person               Remember to keep your minutes brief and to the point.
      responsible, and the due date.                              When the minutes are complete, e-mail them to your fel-
                                                                  low team members and cc: them to your instructor.
m     Decisions made during the meeting.
      New issues raised at the meeting but not resolved
      should be recorded for future meetings.
=     Signature of acting secretary.



8.14        Keeping a Journal about a Team

As you work on a team, keep a journal after each team                   Patterns you see.
meeting.                                                                Roles of each team member, including yourself.
m Who did what?                                                         Decision making in your team.
    What roles did you play in the meeting?                             Conflict resolution in your team.
    What decisions were made? How were they made?                       Strengths of your team.
    What conflicts arose? How were they handled?                        Areas where your team could improve.
    What strategies could you use to make the next                      Strengths of the deliverables.
    meeting go smoothly?                                                Areas where the deliverables could be improved.
= Record one observation about each team member.                        Changes you would make in the team and deliver-
At the end of the project, analyze your journals. In a                  ables if you had the project to do over.
memo to your instructor, discuss



8.15        Analyzing the Dynamics of a Team

Analyze the dynamics of a task team of which you were                  8. What were the strengths of the team? Weaknesses?
a member. Answer the following questions:                              9. How did the team’s strengths and weaknesses
  1. Who was the team’s leader? How did the leader                        impact the quality of the work produced?
      emerge? Were there any changes in or challenges                 10. If you had the project to do over again, what
      to the original leader?                                             would you do differently?
  2. Describe the contribution each member made to
                                                                      As you answer the questions,
      the team and the roles each person played.
  3. Did any members of the team officially or unoffi-                = Be honest. You won't lose points for reporting
      cially drop out? Did anyone join after the team had                that your team had problems or did something
      begun working? How did you deal with the loss                      “wrong.”
      or addition of a team member, both in terms of get-             = Show your knowledge of good team dynamics. That
      ting the work done and in terms of helping people                  is, if your team did something wrong, show that
      work together?                                                     you know what should have been done. Similarly, if
  4. What planning did your team do at the start of the                  your team worked well, show that you know why it
      project? Did you stick to the plan or revise it? How               worked well.
      did the team decide that revision was necessary?                = Be specific. Give examples or anecdotes to support
  5. How did your team make decisions? Did you                           your claims.
      vote? reach decisions by consensus?                             As your instructor directs,
   6. What problems or conflicts arose? Did the team                  a. Discuss your answers with the other team members.
       deal with them openly? To what extent did they
                                                                      b. Present your findings in an individual memo to your
       interfere with the team’s task?
                                                                          instructor.
   7. Evaluate your team both in terms of its task and
       in terms of the satisfaction members felt. How did              c. Join with the other team members to write a collab-
                                                                          orative memo to your instructor.
       this team compare with other task teams you've
       been part of? What made it better or worse?
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                   Chapter 8   Working and Writing in Teams


8.16      Dealing with a “Saboteur”

It’s often said that “there’s no I in team” because on the      that “will suffer from all your ‘second-rate’ efforts,” and
best teams, everyone works together for the good of the         tells you that s/he already complained to your instructor
group. What happens when you encounter a team mem-              about the rest of you.
ber who believes that “there’s a me in team” and ignores        As your instructor directs,
or undermines the team’s success in order to achieve            a. Write a memo to your instructor in which you explain
personal goals?                                                     your individual response to this scenario. What
    Consider this scenario. You’re on a team of four stu-
                                                                    would you do? How should your team proceed?
dents, and you've all been working for the past month
to complete a major class project. When you were plan-          b. Work as a group to establish a working policy that
                                                                    might address this scenario before it happens.
ning out your project, one team member—let’s say Lee—
argued with your team’s decisions, but agreed to go             =   What policies would you need to protect the
along with the majority. Lee contributed the bare mini-             group from individual members who are out for
mum to your team’s work, sat silently during meetings,              themselves?
 and when you asked for help overcoming a problem               =   What policies would you need to protect team
with the project, Lee responded with a shrug, “I told you           members from having the team take advantage of
 at the start that I thought this was a bad idea. I guess           them?
 we're all going to get a failing grade.”                       =   What is your instructor’s role in your team’s policy?
    Now you're at your last team meeting before the
                                                                =   How would your team evaluate each member’s
 assignment is due. Lee reveals a decision to quit the team
                                                                    contributions fairly?
 and turn in a separate project. Lee doesn’t want a grade
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




CHAPTER




JJEVababbetoau @xeyveyeensborcam- reve!
Revising

Chapter Outline
The Ways Good Writers Write                               Ten Ways to Make Your Writing Easier to
                                                          Read
Activities in the Composing Process
                                                            ®   As You Choose Words
Using Your Time Effectively                                 ®   As You Write and Revise Sentences
tetaricelaitiale Maalalaiiare Peclace melee tlalra las)     ®   As You Write and Revise Paragraphs
Business Documents                                        Organizational Preferences for Style
Writing Good Business and Administrative                  Revising, Editing, and Proofreading
Documents
                                                            ® What to Look for When You Revise
Half-Truths about Business Writing                          | BaaiV/ay-Ven com Molo) aucolans ig\-lam Coll elia
   @   Half-Truth 1: “Write as You Talk.”                   ® How to Catch Typos
   ®   Half-Truth 2: "Never Use /.”                       Getting and Using Feedback
   ®   Half-Truth 3: “Never Use You.”
   ®   Half-Truth 4: "Never Begin a Sentence              Using Boilerplate
       with And or But.”                                  Readability Formulas
       Half-Truth 5: “Never End a Sentence
                                                          Summary of Key Points
       with a Preposition.”
        Half-Truth 6: “Big Words Impress
        People.”
        Half-Truth 7: “Never Have a Sentence
        with More than 20 Words, or a
        Paragraph with More than 8 Lines.”
                                                                                        Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




             NEWSWORTHY                         COMMUNICATION


             Writing Practice for John Grisham




                       est-selling author John Grisham knows the                                  How do lawyers do it? Freedman writes, “What
                       secret to writing success. His legal thrill-                           lawyers understand better than most writers is that
                       ers have sold more than 250 million cop-                               the really hard work takes place before setting pen to
              ies worldwide, and nine of his novels have been                                 paper.” In other words, to write effectively, lawyers
              adapted into successful films. But before his first                             must first plan effectively. Using the main facts and
              book was published in 1988, Grisham was a work-                                 evidence in the case, lawyers create strategies, plan
              ing lawyer in Southaven, Mississippi. Like fel-                                 organizations, and focus arguments all before they
              low lawyers-turned-writers Scott Turow and Erle                                 start to write. And once they do begin writing, they
             - Stanley Gardner (who created the character Perry                                draft, revise, rework, edit, and redraft, each step tak-
              Mason), Grisham honed his writing skills drafting ing them closer to a strong, well-written legal brief.
              and redrafting legal briefs.                             According to Freedman, a good brief needs a
                 Lawyers learn early to take                         ;                     strong central theme, plain lan-
              special care in writing their                          i              ~~     guage, focused arguments, and
              briefs, which are the writ-
                                              “What  lawyers  understand     better        relentless   revision and edit-
              ten arguments submitted to      than most writers  is that  the  really      ing.  The   same   tips hold true
              judges and opposing lawyers, hard work takes place before setting            for any business document.
              two intimidating audiences. pen to paper.                                    While    most memos, letters,
              Judges study the materials’ ————_——___——                                     and   reports   will not receive
              fairness, and opposing law-                                                  the  same   level  of antagonistic
                                                                                                                        draft-
              yers naturally search for flaws. Each brief must scrutiny as legal briefs, using careful planning,
                                                                    ing, and  revision techniques   will focus  and  improve
              present the lawyer’s arguments clearly, concisely,
              and persuasively.                                     any document.
                                                                                                                         /online.wsj.com/article /SB10001424052748703555804
              Sources: Adam Freedman, “Why Trial Lawyers Say It Better,” Wall Street Journal, January 29, 2011, http:/
                                                                                         May 24, 2011, http:// www,jgrisham.com/ bio/.
              576102384190154812.html; and “John Grisham Bio,” JohnGrisham.com, accessed




 es
ra    yeni
pd § NYS
      ae“
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




118                                        Part 2 The Communication Process



                                           Learning Objectives                                                                    ——

                                           After studying this chapter, you will know

                                                        New information about the activities involved in the composing
                                                        process, and how to use these activities to your advantage.
                                                         New guidelines for effective word choice, sentence construction,
                                                        and paragraph organization.

                                           We)           New techniques to revise, edit, and proofread your
                                                         communications.




                    Ethics and the         Skilled performances look easy and effortless. In reality, as every dancer, musi-
                    Writing Process        cian, and athlete knows, they’re the products of hard work, hours of practice,
      SS             Asyou
                       plan amessage,      attention to detail, and intense concentration. Like skilled performances in
 =       Be sure you have identified
                                           other arts, writing rests on a base of work.
         the real audiences and pur-


 a
         poses of the message.
         In difficult situations, seek
                                           THE WAYS GOOD WRITERS WRITE
         allies in your organization and   No single writing process works for all writers all of the time. However, good
         discuss your options with         writers and poor writers seem to use different processes.’ Good writers are
         them.                             more likely to
  As you compose,
  s      Provide accurate and com-               Realize that the first draft can be revised.
         plete information.
                                                 Write regularly.
  =      Use reliable sources of
         material. Document when                 Break big jobs into small chunks.
         necessary.                              Have clear goals focusing on purpose and audience.
  =      Warn your readers of limits or          Have several different strategies to choose from.
         dangers in your information.            Use rules flexibly.
  =      Promise only what you can
                                                 Wait to edit until after the draft is complete.
         deliver.
  As you revise,
  =      Check to see that your lan-
                                               The research also shows that good writers differ from poor writers in iden-
         guage does not use words           tifying and analyzing the initial problem more effectively, understanding the
         that show bias.                    task more broadly and deeply, drawing from a wider repertoire of strategies,
  =      Use feedback to revise text        and seeing patterns more clearly. Good writers also are better at evaluating
         and visuals that your audi-        their own work.                                         .
         ence may misunderstand.               Thinking about the writing process and consciously adopting the processes
     =   Check your sources.                of good writers will help you become a better writer.
     =   Assume that no document
          is confidential. E-mail docu-
          ments and IMs (instant mes-
                                            ACTIVITIES IN THE COMPOSING PROCESS
          sages) can be forwarded and       Composing can include many activities: planning, brainstorming, gather-
          printed without your knowl-       ing, organizing, writing, evaluating, getting feedback, revising, editing, and
          edge; both electronic and         proofreading. The activities do not have to come in this order. Not every task
          paper documents, including
                                            demands all activities.
          drafts, can be subpoenaed
          for court cases.                    Planning
                                            = Analyzing       the problem,     defining   your purposes,   and analyzing    the
                                               audience.
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                 Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                                     119



=       Brainstorming information to include in the document.                                               MBAs Can‘t Write

=       Gathering the information you need—from the message you're answering,                               The writing and pre-
        a person, printed sources, or the web.                                                              sentation    skills of

=       Selecting the points you want to make, and the examples, data, and argu-                            MBAs      have __ long
                                                                                                been a complaint of employers.
        ments to support them.
                                                                                                Too many words, employers say,
=       Choosing a pattern of organization, making an outline, creating a list.                 and too many big words. Gradu-
                                                                                                ates are particularly inept at
                                                                                                preparing short persuasive com-
        Writing
                                                                                                munications or writing for mul-
=       Putting words on paper or a screen. Writing can be lists, possible headings,            tiple audiences.
        fragmentary notes, stream-of-consciousness writing, incomplete drafts,                     Now MBA programs are act-
        and ultimately a formal draft.                                                          ing on the complaints. The
                                                                                                Wharton School of Business
                                                                                                now requires 12 communication
        Revising                                                                                classes, twice what it required
=        Evaluating your work and measuring it against your goals and the require-               before. Other business schools
         ments of the situation and audience. The best evaluation results from                   are adding writing coaches,
         re-seeing your draft as if someone else had written it. Will your audience              and having the writing coaches
         understand it? Is it complete? Convincing? Friendly?                                    assign writing grades to papers
                                                                                                 for other courses.
=        Getting feedback from someone else. Is all the necessary information
         there? Is there too much information? Is your pattern of organization                  Adapted from Diana Middleton, “Stu-

         appropriate? Does a revision solve an earlier problem? Are there obvious               dents Struggle for Words,” Wall Street
                                                                                                Journal, March 3, 2011, B8.
         mistakes?
=        Adding, deleting, substituting, or rearranging. Revision can be changes in
         single words or in large sections of a document.

        Editing
    =    Checking the draft to see that it satisfies the requirements of standard Eng-
         lish. Here you’d correct spelling and mechanical errors and check word
         choice and format. Unlike revision, which can produce major changes in
         meaning, editing focuses on the surface of writing.
    =    Proofreading the final copy to see that it’s free from typographical errors.
      Note the following points about these activities:
    = The activities do not have to come in this order. Some people may gather
       data after writing a draft when they see that they need more specifics to
       achieve their purposes.
    = You do not have to finish one activity to start another. Some writers plan
         a short section and write it, plan the next short section and write it, and so
       on through the document. Evaluating what is already written may cause a
       writer to do more planning or to change the original plan.
    = Most writers do not use all activities for all the documents they write.
       Youll use more activities when you write more complex or difficult docu-
       ments about new subjects or to audiences that are new to you.
      For many workplace writers, pre-writing is not a warm-up activity to get
    ready to write the “real” document. It’s really a series of activities designed to
                                                                             and
    gather and organize information, take notes, brainstorm with colleagues,
    plan a document before writing a complete draft. And for many people, these
    activities do not include outlining. Traditional outlining may lull writers into
    a false sense of confidence about their material and organization, making it
    difficult for them to revise their content and structure if they deviate from the
    outline developed early in the process.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




120                                      Part2    The Communication Process


                Overcoming Writer's
                Block

        7 ia- According to psychol-
             ogist Robert Boice,
who has made a career study of
writer's block, these actions help
overcome writer’s block:
 1. Prepare for writing. Collect
    and arrange material. Talk to
      people; interact with some
      of your audiences. The more
      you learn about the company,
      its culture, and its context,
      the easier it will be to write—
      and the better your writing
      will be.
 2. Practice writing regularly
      and in moderation. Try to          Not all writing has to be completed in office settings. Some people work better outside, in
      write almost daily. Keep ses-      coffee shops, or from home.
      sions to a moderate length;
      Boice suggests an hour to an
      hour and a half.                   USING YOUR TIME EFFECTIVELY
 3. Talk positively to yourself:
                                         To get the best results from the time you have, spend only one-third of your
                                         time actually “writing.” Spend at least another one-third of your time ana-
    “| can do this.” “If |keep
        working, ideas will come.” “It
        doesn't have to be perfect; |
                                         lyzing the situation and your audience, gathering information, and organiz-
        can make it better later.”       ing what you have to say. Spend the final third evaluating what you've said,
 4. Talk to other people about
                                         revising the draft(s) to meet your purposes and the needs of the audience and
    writing. Value the feedback          the organization, editing a late draft to remove any errors in grammar and
    you get from them. Talking to        mechanics, and proofreading the final copy.
    other people expands your                   Do realize, however, that different writers, documents, and situations may
    repertoire of strategies and          need different time divisions to produce quality communications, especially if
        helps you understand your         documents are produced by teams. Geographic distance will add even more
        writing community.                time to the process.
  Adapted from Robert Boice, Advice
  for New Faculty Members: Nihil
  Nimus (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2000),
                                          BRAINSTORMING, PLANNING, AND ORGANIZING
  ati     t2:                             BUSINESS DOCUMENTS
                                          Spend significant time planning and organizing before you begin to write. The
                                          better your ideas are when you start, the fewer drafts you'll need to produce a
                                          good document. Start by using the analysis questions from Chapter 1 to identify
                                          purpose and audience. Use the strategies described in Chapter 2 to analyze audi-
                                          ence and identify benefits. Gather information you can use for your document.
                                          Select the points you want to make—and the examples and data to support them.
                                             Sometimes your content will be determined by the situation. Sometimes,
                                          even when it’s up to you to think of information to include in a report, you'll
                                          find it easy to think of ideas. If ideas won’t come, try the following techniques:

                                            =     Brainstorming. Think of all the ideas you can, without judging them.
                                                  Consciously try to get at least a dozen different ideas before you stop.
                                                  Good brainstorming depends on generating many ideas.
                                            =     Freewriting.? Make yourself write, without stopping, for 10 minutes or
                                                  so, even if you must write “I will think of something soon.” At the end
                                                  of 10 minutes, read what you’ve written, identify the best point in the
                                                  draft, then set it aside, and write for another 10 uninterrupted minutes.
                                                  Read this draft, marking anything that’s good and should be kept, and
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Ed ition




                                             Chapter5    Planning, Composing, and Revising                                    121




  then write again for another 10 minutes. By the third session, you will
  probably produce several sections that are worth keeping—maybe even
  a complete draft that’s ready to be revised.
= Clustering.’ Write your topic in the middle of the page and circle it. Write
  down the ideas the topic suggests, circling them, too. (The circles are
  designed to tap into the nonlinear half of your brain.) When you  ve filled
  the page, look for patterns or repeated ideas. Use different colored pens
  to group related ideas. Then use these ideas to develop your content.
= Talk to your audiences. As research shows, talking to internal and exter-
  nal audiences helps writers to involve readers in the planning process
  and to understand the social and political relationships among readers.
  This preliminary work helps reduce the number of revisions needed
  before documents are approved.’

   Thinking about the content, layout, or structure of your document can also
give you ideas. For long documents, write out the headings you'll use. For
short documents, jot down key points—information to include, objections to
answer, benefits to develop. For an oral presentation, a meeting, or a docu-
ment with lots of visuals, try creating a storyboard, with a rectangle represent-
ing each page or unit. Draw a box with a visual for each main point. Below the
box, write a short caption or label.


WRITING GOOD BUSINESS
AND ADMINISTRATIVE DOCUMENTS
Good business and administrative writing is closer to conversation and less
formal than the style of writing that has traditionally earned high marks in
college essays and term papers. (See Figure Dal:)
   Most people have several styles of talking, which they vary instinctively
depending on the audience. Good writers have several styles, too. An e-mail to

Figure 5.1        Different Levels of Style
                         Conversational style           Good business style              Traditional term paper style
 Feature

                         Highly informal                Conversational; sounds           More formal than conversation
                                                        like a real person talking       would be, but retains a human voice

                         Many contractions              OK to use occasional             Few contractions, if any
                                                        contractions

                         Uses first- and second-        Uses first- and second-           First- and second-person
                                                        person pronouns                   pronouns kept to a minimum
                         person pronouns

                         Friendly                       Friendly                          No effort to make style friendly

                         Personal; refers to            Personal; may refer to reader   — Impersonal; may generally refer
                         specific circumstances         by name; refers to specific       to readers but does not name them
                         of conversation                circumstances of audiences        or refer to their circumstances

                          Short, simple words;          Short, simple words but           Many abstract words; scholarly,
                          slang                         avoids slang                      technical terms

                          Incomplete sentences;         Short sentences and               Longer sentences and paragraphs
                          no paragraphs                 paragraphs

                          Can be ungrammatical          Uses standard English             Uses more formal standard English

                          Not applicable                Attention to visual impact.       No particular attention to visual
                                                        of document                       impact
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




122                                     Part 2    The Communication Process


            To Clarify or Not to        your boss about the delays from a supplier will be informal, perhaps even chatty;
            Clarify                     a letter to the supplier demanding better service will be more formal.
      7 ia Former Federal Board            Reports tend to be more formal than letters and memos, since they may
             Chair Alan Greenspan       be read many years in the future by audiences the writer can barely imag-
was known for his lack of clar-         ine. Reports tend to avoid contractions, personal pronouns, and second per-
ity. After one speech, a headline       son (since so many people read reports, you doesn’t have much meaning). See
in the Washington Post read             Chapter 18 for more about report style.
“Greenspan Hints Fed May Cut                Keep the following points in mind as you choose a level of formality for a
Interest Rates,” while the cor-
                                        specific document:
responding headline in the New
York Times read “Doubt Voiced
by Greenspan on a Rate Cut.”              =      Usea friendly, informal style to someone you've talked with.
Even his wife joked that he had to        =      Avoid contractions, slang, and even minor grammatical lapses in paper
propose twice before she under-                  documents to people you don’t know. Abbreviations are OK in e-mail
stood what he was saying.                        messages if they’re part of the group’s culture.
   His replacement, Ben Bernanke,
has a different style. As he aims
                                          =      Pay particular attention to your style when you write to people you fear
for more transparent communica-                  or when you must give bad news. Research shows our style changes in
tions, he is trying to make the Fed              stressful contexts. We tend to rely on nouns rather than on verbs and
clearer about goals for economic                 deaden our style when we are under stress or feel insecure.° Confident
growth.                                          people are more direct. Edit your writing so that you sound confident,
                                                 whether you feel that way or not.
 Adapted from Greg Ip, “‘Transparent’
 Vision: New Fed Chairman Hopes to
 Downplay Impact of His Words,” Wall          More and more organizations are trying to simplify their communications.
 Street Journal, September 6, 2006,
 A1; and Daniel Kadlec, “5 Ways the     Alan Greenspan, former chair of the Federal Reserve, was infamously known
 New Fed Chairman Will Be Different,”   for his lack of clarity in communications, but his successor is striving to bring
 Time, November 7, 2005, 49-50.         about new clarity in the board’s communications (see sidebar on this page).
                                            In the financial world, the US Securities and Exchange Commission’s A Plain
                                        English Handbook: How to Create Clear SEC Disclosure Documents asks for short
                                        sentences, everyday words, active voice, bullet lists, and descriptive headings.
                                        It cautions against legal and highly technical terms. Warren Buffett wrote the
                                        preface, saying that the handbook was good news for him, because too often
                                        he had been unable to decipher the documents filed by public companies. He
                                        offers his own writing tip: write to a specific person. He says he pretends he is
                                        writing to his sisters when he writes his Berkshire Hathaway annual reports.
                                        The SEC has more recently applied the handbook standards to the brochures
                                        investment advisers give to clients and has urged them on hedge funds.°
                                            In 2010, the Plain Writing Act became law. It requires all federal agencies
                                        to use clear prose that the public can readily understand. PlainLanguage.gov
                                        explains the law, provides a 112-page manual to help agencies use plain lan-
                                        guage, and offers examples of good federal communication.
                                            Of course, the news is full of examples where these efforts have failed. The
                                        same negative examples, however, also show the great need for clear, simple
                                        style. A major factor in the subprime mortgage disaster was documents writ-
                                        ten in prose so complex that even experts couldn’t understand it. Many home-
                                        owners who signed adjustable rate mortgages and subsequently lost their
                                        homes claim they did not understand all the consequences of what they were
                                        signing. Experts outside the mortgage business agree with the homeowners
                                         that the language was too complex for most people to understand.”
                                            Communication consultants like Gerard Braud urge clients to simplify their
                                         prose. He warns, “All communication affects [the] bottom line. .. . When a
                                         reader, listener, viewer or member of a live audience has to take even a nano-
                                         second to decipher what you are saying because you are making it more com-
                                         plicated than it needs to be, you may lose that person.”®
                                            Good business style allows for individual variation. Figure 5.2 shows the
                                         opening paragraphs from Warren Buffett’s letter to shareholders in Berkshire
                                         Hathaway’s 2010 annual report. Buffett’s direct style suggests integrity and
                                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                              Chapter5      Planning, Composing, and Revising                                                123


Figure 5.2              Opening Paragraphs of Warren Buffett’s 2010 Letter to Shareholders




                                                                    BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC.



                        To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.:

                                                                                                                                  46 years
                           The per-share book value of both our Class A and Class B stock increased by 13% in 2010. Over the last
         .<    jerret         eee                                                           from $19 to $95,453, a rate of 20.2% compound-
 guttet®                (that is, since present management took over), book value has grown
  erat wiih nea         ed annually.* |                            aA:
                                                                                                                                        even
   gnort 08         A       The highlight of 2010 was our acquisition of Burlington Northern Santa Fe, a purchase that’s working out
                                                               that owning this railroad will increase Berkshire’s “normal” earning power
    urine - oe          better than I expected. It now appears
                                                                                                                                 by 6% and
    “he past ye         by nearly 40% pre-tax and by well over 30% after-tax. Making this purchase increased our share count
                                                                                                                               have turned
                        used $22 billion of cash. Since we’ve quickly replenished the cash, the economics of this transaction
                        out very well.
                                                                                                                   of Berkshire and my            Hee        ne
                            A “normal year,” of course, is not something that either Charlie Munger, Vice Chairman
                                                                                                                              earning power, we ro)      .
                        partner, or I can define with anything like precision. But for the purpose of estimating our current
                                                                                                                             climate somewhat      gosum
                        are envisioning a year free of a mega-catastrophe in insurance and possessing a general business
                                                                                                                        several others that I will 0"
                        better than that of 2010 but weaker than that of 2005 or 2006. Using these assumptions, and
                                                                                                                              currently own is
                        explain in the “Investment” section, I can estimate that the normal earning power of the assets we
                                                                                                                           day Charlie and I think
                        about $17 billion pre-tax and $12 billion after-tax, excluding any capital gains or losses. Every
                        about how we can build on this base.
                                                                                                                    environmental
                            Both of us are enthusiastic about BNSF’s future because railroads have major cost and
                                                                                                             freight it carried a record
               efits    advantages over trucking, their main competitor. Last year BNSF moved each ton of
                                                                                                                 than trucking is, which means
  societ nee            500 miles on      a single gallon of diesel fuel. That’s three times more fuel-efficient
                                                                                                                gains because of
                        our railroad owns an important advantage in operating costs. Concurrently, our country
                                                                                                               travels by rail, society                  :
                        reduced greenhouse emissions and a much smaller need for imported oil. When traffic
                        benefits.                                                                                                                      ys
                                                                                                                                                       xa”
                            are
                                                                                                                           Commentators today
                            Money will always flow toward opportunity, and there is an abundance of that in America.
                                                                                                             October 18, 1987, and September
                        often talk of “great uncertainty.” But think back, for example, to December 6, 1941,
                         10, 2001. No matter how serene today may be, tomorrow is always uncertain.
                                                                                                                    have constantly moaned
                             Don’t let that reality spook you. Throughout my lifetime, politicians and pundits
                                                                                                                      times better than when
                         about terrifying problems facing America. Yet our citizens now live an astonishing six
                                born. The  prophets  of doom  have overlooked the all-important factor  that  is certain: Human potential is
                         I was
                                                                                                            system that has worked wonders
                         far from exhausted, and the American system for unleashing that potential—a
                                                                                                             Civil War—remains alive and
                         for over two centuries despite frequent interruptions for recessions and even a
                         effective.
                                                                                                                  work harder. But look around
          you anit           We are not natively smarter than we were when our country was founded nor do we
                                                                                                   1776, 1861, 1932 and 1941, America’s best
  \NOY de “snes?         you and see a world beyond the dreams of any colonial citizen. Now, as in
   ne used               days lie ahead.
    gatee"
                         Performance

                                                                                                                  establish performance goals at
                                                                                                                                                 cao!gnot
                             Charlie and I believe that those entrusted with handling the funds of others should                                  mets  a
                                                          Lacking such  standards,  managements are tempted  to shoot  the arrow of performance
                         the onset of their stewardship.
                         and then paint the bull’s-eye  around wherever   it lands.


                         —————————————
                                                                                                              for the B shares are 1/1500th of those
                         * All per-share figures used in this report apply to Berkshire’s A shares. Figures
                         shown for A.




 Source: Copyrighted material. Reprinted with permission of the author.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




124                                   Part2    The Communication Process


           Evaluating “Rules”         clarity. Later in the letter, Buffett adds some of the colorful prose for which he
           about Writing              is famous:
fe         Some “rules” are gram-
           matical   conventions.      m      We're prepared. Our elephant gun has been reloaded, and my trigger
For example, standard edited Eng-             finger is itchy.
lish requires that each sentence
have a subject and verb, and that
                                       =      [Deriding those who dismiss important facts as anomalies] I always love
the subject and verb agree. Busi-             explanations of that kind: The Flat Earth Society probably views a ship’s
ness writing normally demands                 circling of the globe as an annoying, but inconsequential, anomaly.
standard grammar, but exceptions       =      The fundamental principle of auto racing is that to finish first, you must
exist. Promotional materials such             first finish.
as brochures, advertisements, and
                                       =      Credit is like oxygen. When either is abundant, its presence goes unno-
sales letters may use sentence
                                              ticed. When either is missing, that’s all that is noticed.’
fragments to mimic the effect of
speech.
   Other “rules” may be conven-
tions adopted by an organiza-
                                      HALF-TRUTHS ABOUT BUSINESS WRITING
tion so that its documents will       Many generalizations about business writing are half-truths and must be
be consistent. For example, a         applied selectively, if at all.
company might decide to capi-
talize job titles (e.g., Production
Manager) even though grammar
                                      Half-Truth 1: “Write as You Talk.”
doesn’t require the capitals.         Most of us use a colloquial, conversational style in speech that is too informal
   Still other “rules” are attempts   for writing. We use slang, incomplete sentences, and even grammatical errors.
to codify “what sounds good.”            Unless our speech is exceptionally fluent, “writing as we talk” can create
“Never use /” and “use big words”
                                      awkward, repetitive, and badly organized prose. It’s OK to write as you talk to
are examples of this kind of
“rule.” To evaluate these “rules,”
                                      produce your first draft, but edit to create a good written style.
you must consider your audi-
ence, purposes, and situation. If     Half-Truth 2: “Never Use /.”
you want the effect produced by
                                      Using I too often can make your writing sound self-centered; using it unneces-
an impersonal style and polysyl-
 labic words, use them. But use
                                      sarily will make your ideas seem tentative. However, when you write about
them only when you want the
                                      things you’ve done or said or seen, using I is both appropriate and smoother
 distancing they produce.             than resorting to awkward passives or phrases like this writer.

                                      Half-Truth 3: “Never Use You.”
                                      Certainly writers should not use you in formal reports, as well as other situ-
                                      ations where the audience is not known or you may sound too informal. But
                                      you is widely used in situations such as writing to familiar audiences like our
                                      office mates, describing audience benefits, and writing sales text.

                                      Half-Truth 4: “Never Begin a Sentence with And or But.”
                                      Beginning a sentence with and or also makes the idea that follows seem like an
                                      afterthought. That’s OK when you want the effect of spontaneous speech in a
                                      written document, as you may ina sales letter. If you want to sound as though
                                      you have thought about what you are saying, put the also in the middle of the
                                      sentence or use another transition: moreover, furthermore.
                                         But tells the reader that you are shifting gears and that the point which fol-
                                      lows not only contrasts with but also is more important than the preceding
                                      ideas. Presenting such verbal signposts to your reader is important. Beginning
                                      a sentence with but is fine if doing so makes your paragraph read smoothly.

                                       Half-Truth 5: “Never End a Sentence with a Preposition.”
                                       Prepositions are those useful little words that indicate relationships: with, in,
                                       under, to, at. In job application letters, reports, and important presentations,
                                                     Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                          Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                                 125


                                                                                                  Building a Better
avoid ending sentences with prepositions. Most other messages are less for-                       Style
mal; it’s OK to end an occasional sentence with a preposition. Noting excep-
tions to the rule, Sir Winston Churchill famously scolded an editor who had                   *   To improve your style,
presumptuously corrected a sentence ending with a preposition, “This is the                Try telling someone what you
kind of impertinence up with which I will not put.”1° Analyze your audi-                   really mean. Then write the
ence and the situation, and use the language that you think will get the best              words.
results.                                                                                   Try reading your draft out
                                                                                           loud to someone sitting about
                                                                                           three feet away—about as far
Half-Truth 6: “Big Words Impress People.”                                                  away as you'd sit in casual
Learning an academic discipline requires that you master its vocabulary. After             conversation. If the words

you get out of school, however, no one will ask you to write just to prove                 sound awkward, they’ll seem

that you understand something. Instead, you'll be asked to write or speak to
                                                                                           awkward to a reader, too.

people who need the information you have.                                                  Ask someone else to read

   Sometimes you may want the sense of formality or technical expertise that
                                                                                           your draft out loud. Readers
                                                                                           stumble because the words
big words create. But much of the time, big words just distance you from your              on the page aren’t what they
audience and increase the risk of miscommunication. If you feel you need to                expect to see. The places
use big words, make sure you use them correctly. When people misuse big                    where that person stumbles
words, they look foolish.                                                                  are places where your writing
                                                                                           can be better.
Half-Truth 7: “Never Have a Sentence with More than 20                                      Read widely and write a /ot.

Words, or a Paragraph with More than 8 Lines.”                                              Use the 10 techniques start-
                                                                                            ing on this page to polish
While it is true that long sentences and paragraphs may sometimes be hard                   your style.
to read, such is not always the case. Long sentences with parallel clauses
(see pages 134-135) may be quite clear, and a longer paragraph with a bul-
leted list may be quite readable. Your audience, purpose, and context should
guide length decisions. Instructions for complicated new software may need
shorter sentences and paragraphs, but an instruction paragraph on the six
criteria for legitimate travel expenses may be longer than eight lines and still
quite clear.
   If your audience, however, believes in rigid guidelines, then you should
follow them also.

 TEN WAYS TO MAKE YOUR WRITING
 EASIER TO READ
 Direct, simple writing is easier to read. One study tested two versions of a
 memo report. The “high-impact” version had the “bottom line” (the purpose
 of the report) in the first paragraph, simple sentences in normal word order,
 active verbs, concrete language, short paragraphs, headings and lists, and
 first- and second-person pronouns. The high-impact version took 22% less
 time to read. Readers said they understood the report better, and tests showed
 that they really did understand it better.'’ Another study showed that high-
 impact instructions were more likely to be followed.”

 As You Choose Words
 The best word depends on context: the situation, your purposes, your audi-
 ence, the words you have already used.

 4. Use words that are accurate, appropriate, and familiar. Accurate
 words mean what you want to say. Appropriate words convey the attitudes
 you want and fit well with the other words in your document. Familiar words
 are easy to read and understand.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




126                                    Part2    The Communication Process


            What's in a Name              Sometimes choosing the accurate word is hard. Most of us have word pairs
            (1): Quirky Job Titles     that confuse us. Grammarian Richard Lederer tells Toastmasters that these 10
              Have you noticed the     pairs are the ones you are most likely to see or hear confused."
             fun job titles at some
              companies lately? A
                                             Affect/Effect                             Disinterested / Uninterested
 mortgage company with a Wealth              Among/Between                             Farther / Further
 Creation Specialist, a chamber of           Amount/Number                             Fewer/Less
 commerce with a Director of First           Compose /Comprise                         Imply /Infer
 Impressions (receptionist)?
   McLellan Marketing Group—
                                             Different from/Different than             Lay/Lie
 headed by Top Dog, of course—         For help using the pairs correctly, see Appendix B.
 has a Duchess of Details (project
                                          Some meanings are negotiated as we interact one-on-one with another per-
 manager) and a Warden (accoun-
                                       son, attempting to communicate. Individuals are likely to have different ideas
 tant). The Top Dog says the titles
 give customers an immediate
                                       about value-laden words like fair or empowerment. The Wall Street Journal notes
 impression of the company so
                                       that the Securities and Exchange Commission has upped the ante on the defi-
 they can judge compatibility.         nition of rich as it regulates the net worth requirement for those eligible to
   Even national companies have        invest in hedge funds. That definition is important because it often becomes
 joined in the retitling craze. Best   the government's definition of rich:
 Buy’s      computer-help       Geek
 Squad employs Special Agents,               The SEC. . . . says investors need to have investible assets of at least $2.5 million,
 Field Marshals,       and Mission           excluding equity in any homes or businesses, to be eligible to sign on a hedge fund’s  ~
 Controllers. Build-a-Bear (stores           dotted line. That’s a huge jump from the current requirement, which says individuals _
 where you choose, stuff, and                have to have a net worth of at least $1 million, including the value of primary resi- _
 dress your own teddy bear) has              dences, or an annual income of $200,000 for the previous two years for individuals
 its Chief Executive Bear and
                                             or $300,000 for couples.”                                                          ee
  Database Adminbearstrator.
    Experts say the new titles work
                                             Some word choices have legal implications.
 when they fit the corporate cul-
 ture and company clients.
                                         =     Confusion about the definition of wetlands has reduced these natural
 Adapted from Patt Johnson, “Quirky
 Names Try to Better Match What Peo-
                                               resources by more than half.’°
 ple Do,” Des Moines Register, March     =     Some employees, such as assistant managers in small franchises, are
 10, 2008, 1D.                                 working to be reclassified as nonprofessionals. The word choice affects
                                               the workers’ paychecks, because under labor laws employers are
                                               exempt from paying extra when professionals and administrators work
                                               overtime.
                                         =     Medicare dropped its opposition to defining obesity as an illness, thus
                                               allowing Medicare to cover the payment for some treatments. !”

                                          As the last example indicates, some word choices have major health repercus-
                                       sions. Smokers have sued tobacco companies for duping them into believing
                                       that “light” cigarettes were less harmful. Recall, when used in warnings about
                                       defective pacemakers and defibrillators, causes patients to ask for replacements,
                                       even though the replacement surgery is riskier than the defective device. For
                                       this reason, some physician groups prefer safety advisory or safety alert.'®

                                        Accurate denotations To be accurate, a word’s denotation must match the
                                        meaning the writer wishes to convey. Denotation is a word’s literal or diction-
                                        ary meaning. Most common words in English have more than one denotation.
                                        The word pound, for example, means, or denotes, a unit of weight, a place
                                        where stray animals are kept, a unit of money in the old British system, and
                                        the verb to hit. Coca-Cola spends millions each year to protect its brand names
                                        so that Coke will denote only that brand and not just any cola drink.
                                             When    two people use the same word or phrase to mean, or denote, dif-
                                        ferent things, bypassing occurs. For example, a large mail-order drug com-
                                        pany notifies clients by e-mail when their prescription renewals get stopped
                                        because the doctor has not verified the prescription. Patients are advised to
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                          127


call their doctors and remind them to verify. However, the company’s website
posts a sentence telling clients that the prescription is being processed. The drug
company means the renewal is in the system, waiting for the doctor’s verifica-
tion. The patients believe the doctor has checked in and the renewal is moving
forward. The confusion results in extra phone calls to the company’s customer
service number, delayed prescriptions, and general customer dissatisfaction.
    Problems also arise when writers misuse words.

      The western part of Pennsylvania was transferred from Columbus to Philadelphia.

      (Pennsylvania did not move. Instead, a company moved responsibility for
sales in western Pennsylvania.)

_     Three major divisions of Stiners Corporation are poised to strike out in opposite
    _ directions.

      (Three different directions can’t be opposite each other.)

     - Stiners has grown dramatically over the past five years, largely by purchasing
    _ many smaller, desperate companies.

This latter statement probably did not intend to be so frank. More likely, the
writer relied on a computer’s spell checker, which accepted desperate for dispa-
rate, meaning “fundamentally different from one another.”
Appropriate connotations Words are appropriate when their connotations,
    that is, their emotional associations or colorings, convey the attitude you want.
    A great many words carry connotations of approval or disapproval, disgust or
    delight. Words in the first column below suggest approval; words in the sec-
    ond column suggest criticism.
       Positive word                  Negative word
       assume                         guess
        curious                       nosy
        cautious                      fearful
        firm                          obstinate
        flexible                      wishy-washy
        A supervisor can “tell the truth” about a subordinate’s performance and yet
    write either a positive or a negative performance appraisal, based on the con-
    notations of the words in the appraisal. Consider an employee who pays close
     attention to details. A positive appraisal might read, “Terry is a meticulous team
     member who takes care of details that others sometimes ignore.” But the same
     behavior might be described negatively: “Terry is hung up on trivial details.”
        Advertisers carefully choose words with positive connotations.

      =   Inthis youth-conscious society, hearing aids become personal communi-
          cation assistants.'?
                                                                                  or
      =   Expensive cars are never used; instead, they’re pre-owned, experienced,
          even previously adored.”°
                                                                            your
      =   Insurers emphasize what you want to protect (your home, your car,
          life), rather than the losses you are insuring against (fire damage, auto
          accident, death).
      =   Credit card companies tell about what you can do with the card (charge
          a vacation), not the debt, payments, and fees involved.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




128                                       Part2    The Communication Process


            What's in a Name (2):             Words may also connote categories. Some show status. Both salesperson and
ve          How Local Is “Local”?         sales representative are nonsexist job titles. But the first sounds like a clerk in a
             Some consumers prefer        store; the second suggests someone selling important items to corporate cus-
  =          to purchase food pro-        tomers. Some words connote age: adorable generally connotes young children,
duced locally on the assumption           not adults. Other words, such as handsome or pretty, connote gender.
that the food will be fresher and             Connotations change over time. The word charity had acquired such nega-
contain fewer chemicals. But what         tive connotations by the 19th century that people began to use the term welfare
does local mean? One woman in
                                          instead. Now, welfare has acquired negative associations. Most states have pub-
Washington, D.C., found “local”
                                          lic assistance programs instead.
strawberries whose packaging
indicated they were actually grown
                                          Ethical implications of word choice How positively can we present some-
in California.
                                          thing and still be ethical? Pressure-treated lumber sounds acceptable. But nam-
  Some       states   and _ retailers
have established definitions for
                                          ing the material injected under pressure—arsenic-treated lumber—may lead the
what qualifies as locally grown:
                                          customer to make a different decision. We have the right to package our ideas
Vermont says within state or 30           attractively, but we have the responsibility to give the public or our superiors
miles of sales place; Walmart             all the information they need to make decisions.
says local means produce came                Word choices have ethical implications in other contexts as well. When
from the state where it is being          scientists refer to 100-year floods, they mean a flood so big that it has a 1%
sold. However, definitions vary           chance of happening in any given year. However, a “1% annual chance flood”
widely, and, given the diversity of       is awkward and has not become standard usage. On the other hand, many
crops and their growing regions,          nonscientists believe a 100-year flood will happen only once every hundred
a nationwide standard is unlikely.
                                          years. After a 100-year flood swamped the Midwest in 1993, many people
   So, despite the economic boon
                                          moved back into flood-prone homes; some even dropped their flood insur-
 to retailers of labeling a product
 as locally produced, the advan-
                                          ance. Unfortunately, both actions left them devastated by a second 100-year
 tage to consumers is not always          flood in 2008.7
 clear.                                      Perhaps one of the best-known examples of ethical implications deals with
                                          the interrogation technique of waterboarding. President Bush’s attorney gen-
 Adapted from “Locally Grown Pro-         eral said waterboarding was not torture; President Obama’s attorney general
 duce? It All Depends on How You
 Define It,” Des Moines Register, April   said it was.”
 2, 2011, 8A.
                                          Familiar words         Use familiar words, words        that are in almost everyone’s
                                          vocabulary. Use the word that most exactly conveys your meaning, but when-
                                          ever you can choose between two words that mean the same thing, use the
                                          shorter, more common one. Try to use specific, concrete words. They’re easier to
                                          understand and remember.”
                                             A series of long, learned, abstract terms makes writing less interesting, less
                                          forceful, and less memorable. When you have something simple to say, use
                                          simple words.
                                             The following list gives a few examples of short, simple alternatives:
                                                Formal and stuffy              Short and simple
                                                ameliorate                     improve
                                                commence                       begin
                                                enumerate                      list
                                                finalize                       finish, complete
                                                prioritize                     rank
                                                utilize                        use
                                                viable option                  choice
                                                There are some exceptions to the general rule that “shorter is better”:

                                            =     Use a long word if it is the only word that expresses your meaning
                                                  exactly.
                                            =     Use a long word—or phrase—if it is more familiar than a short word: a
                                                  word in another language for a geographic place or area is better than exonym.
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                            Chapter5    Planning, Composing, and Revising                                   129


                                                                                                        DUTA [Don’t Use
 =   Usea long word if its connotations are more appropriate. Exfoliate is bet-                         That Acronym]
     ter than scrape off dead skin cells.                                                              Used properly, acro-
 =   Usea long word if your audience prefers it.                                                       nyms can be both
                                                                                            convenient and powerful. Mar-

2. Use technical jargon sparingly; eliminate business jargon. There
                                                                                            keters in Washington, D.C., for
                                                                                            example, use mostly unknown
are two kinds of jargon. The first is the specialized terminology of a technical            acronyms in their subway and
field. Many public figures enjoy mocking jargon. Even the Wall Street Journal               billboard advertising to target
does its share, mocking quotes like this one from a computer industry press                 government employees at spe-
release announcing a new “market offering”:                                                 cific agencies. It doesn’t matter
                                                                                            that most people have no idea
 [The] offerings are leading-edge service configuration assurance capabilities              what the ads are about; the signs
  that will help us to rapidly deploy high-demand IP services, such as level 3              are targeted for government pro-
                              multi-cast and quality of service over our IP/MPLS            curement agents and program
i virtual private networks,
                                                                                            managers.
 ~ network.”4                                                                                  But acronyms can fail when
                                                                                            the intended audience doesn't
   A job application letter is one of the few occasions when it’s desirable to               understand what an acronym
use technical jargon: using the technical terminology of the reader’s field                  stands for or when a single
helps suggest that you're a peer who also is competent in that field. In other               acronym has multiple meanings,
kinds of messages, use technical jargon only when the term is essential and                  sometimes even within the same
known to the reader. If a technical term has a “plain English” equivalent, use               organization. In Washington D.C.,
the simpler term.                                                                            even some of the bureaucrats

   The second kind of jargon is the businessese that some writers still use: as              in the intended audience don’t

per your request, enclosed please find, please do not hesitate. None of the words in
                                                                                             understand the ads.

this second category of jargon are necessary. Indeed, some writers call these
                                                                                               To look up the definition of
                                                                                             an   acronym, try using www
terms deadwood, since they are no longer living words. If any of the terms in                .AcronymFinder.com, an acronym
the first column of Figure 5.3.show up in your writing, replace them with more               dictionary used by businesses,
modern language.                                                                             lawyers, students, and savvy writ-
                                                                                             ers seeking acronym definitions.
                                                                                             The site has over 1 million visitors
As You Write and Revise Sentences                                                            and 4 million page views a month.

At the sentence level, you can do many things to make your writing easy to read.
                                                                                             In May 2011, the site listed more
                                                                                             than 750,000 acronyms, includ-

3. Use active voice most of the time.               “Who does what” sentences with           ing 90 SAFEs, 147 FASTs, and
                                                                                             202 CATs. No wonder acronyms
 active voice make your writing more forceful.                                                can be confusing.
    A verb is in active voice if the grammatical subject of the sentence does
 the action the verb describes. A verb is in passive voice if the subject is acted            Adapted from Thomas Catan, “To

 upon. Passive voice is usually made up of a form of the verb to be plus a past
                                                                                              Understand Washington Ads, You've
                                                                                              Got to Be a Code Breaker,” Wall
 participle. Passive has nothing to do with past. Passive voice can be past, pres-            Street Journal, March 7, 2011, A1.
 ent, or future:
     were received                (in the past)
     is recommended               (in the present)
     will be implemented          (in the future)
    To spot a passive voice, find the verb. If the verb describes something
                                                                            verb
 that the grammatical subject is doing, the verb is in active voice. If the
 describes somethin g that is being done to the grammati cal subject, the verb is
 in passive voice.
      Active Voice                                Passive Voice
      The customer received 500                   Five hundred widgets were
      widgets.                                    received by the customer.
      I recommend this method.                    This method is recommended by me.
      The state agencies will implement           The program will be implemented
      the program.                                by the state agencies.
142,   PROFESSIONAL WRITING




       130                                       Part 2    The Communication Process


       Figure 5.3              Getting Rid of Business Jargon
        Instead of                                                                                     Because

        At your earliest convenience                             The date you need a response          lf you need it by a deadline, say so. It
                                                                                                       may never be convenient to respond.
        As per your request; 65 miles per hour                   As you requested; 65 miles an hour    Per is a Latin word for by or for each.
                                                                                                       Use per only when the meaning is
                                                                                                       correct; avoid mixing English and Latin.
         Enclosed please find                                    Enclosed is; Here is                  An enclosure isn’t a treasure hunt. If
                                                                                                       you put something in the envelope, the
                                                                                                       reader will find it.

         Hereto, herewith                                        Omit                                  Omit legal jargon.
         Please be advised; Please be informed                   Omit—simply start your response       You don’t need a preface. Go ahead
                                                                                                       and start.

         Please do not hesitate                                  Omit                                  Omit negative words.
         Pursuant to                                             According to; or omit                 Pursuant does not mean after. Omit
                                                                                                       legal jargon in any case.
        This will acknowledge receipt of your                    _Omit—start your response             lf you answer a letter, the reader knows
        letter.                                                                                        you got it.
        Trusting this is satisfactory, we remain                 Omit                                  Eliminate-ing endings. When you are
                                                                                                       through, stop.
       cos ne



                     Menu Word Choice            To change from passive voice to active voice, you must make the agent the
                  \ Some restaurants use         new subject. If no agent is specified in the sentence, you must supply one to
                     humorous names for          make the sentence active.
                     their dishes so patrons
                     will talk about them to
                                                       Passive Voice                                  Active Voice
                     their friends.
        =    Sticky Fingers RibHouses, a               The request was approved by the                The plant manager approved
             South Carolina—based chain,               plant manager.                                 the request.
             calls its onion appetizer                 A decision will be made next month.            The committee will decide
             Git-R-D’onions.                                                                          next month..
                                                       No agent in sentence.
        =    David Burke at Blooming-
             dales, New York, offers Angry             A letter will be sent informing the            [You] Send the customer a letter
             Roasted Hen-in-Law: a                     customer of the change. No agent in            informing her about the change.
             roasted chicken which comes               sentence.
             with a knife in its back.
        =    Spy City Café, next to Wash-
                                                 Passive voice has at least three disadvantages:
             ington’s Spy Museum, serves
             Disguise Dogs, hotdogs
             which come with a selection           =      If all the information in the original sentence is retained, passive voice
             of 15 toppings (“disguises”).                makes the sentence longer. Passive voice takes more time to understand.”
        Adapted from Judy Mandell, “Name
                                                   =      If the agent is omitted, it’s not clear who is responsible for doing the
        That Dish: Menu Writing Gets Cre-                 action.

        ate, ie iad               nti        8     =      Using much passive voice, especially in material that has a lot of big
                                                          words, can make the writing boring and pompous.

                                                  Passive voice is desirable in these situations:
                                                  a. Use passive voice to emphasize the object receiving the action, not the
                                                        agent.
                                                            Your order was shipped November 15.

                                                        The customer’s order, not the shipping clerk, is important.
                                                                  Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                                          131



b. Use passive voice to provide coherence within a paragraph. A sentence is
                                                                                                                  What's in a Name
                                                                                                                  (3): Medicine Names
   easier to read if “old” information comes at the beginning of a sentence.
                                                                                                                   “Prozac. Viagra. Lipitor.
   When you have been discussing a topic, use the word again as your subject                                         “The names of these
   even if that requires passive voice.                                                                            incredibly popular med-
           The bank made several risky joans in the late 1990s. These loans were written off as      icines don’t have defined meanings.
           “uncollectible” in 2001.                                                                  But millions of dollars are spent
                                                                                                     creating just the right sound and
   Using loans as the subject of the second sentence provides a link between                         image.                                  ,
   the two sentences, making the paragraph as a whole easier to read.                                   “Research shows letters with a
c. Use passive voice to avoid assigning blame.                                                       hard edge like P, T or K convey
                                                                                                     effectiveness. X seems scientific.
           The order was damaged during shipment.                                                     L, R or S provides a calming or
   Active voice would require the writer to specify who damaged the order.                            relaxing feel. Z means speed. . . .
The passive voice is more tactful here.                                                                 “Most companies prefer a name

   According to PlainLanguage.gov, changing writing to active voice is the
                                                                                                     that says something about the
                                                                                                      drug, like Allegra, which alludes
most powerful change that can be made to government documents.” But even                              to the allergy relief it provides. . . .
the self-proclaimed prescriptivist style editor Bill Walsh, a copy chief at the                         “The name cannot make a
Washington Post, admits that sometimes passive voice is necessary—although                            claim about a drug. The hair-loss
not as often as many writers think.””                                                                 treatment Rogaine, for instance,
                                                                             Put                      was originally called Regain until
4. Use verbs—not nouns—to carry the weight of your sentence.                                          the FDA rejected it... .
the weight of your  sentence in the verb to make   your sentences more  forceful
                                                                                                        “The FDA rejects 35 percent
and up to 25% easier to read.2 When the verb is a form of the verb to be, revise                      to 40 percent of the brands it
the sentence to use a more forceful verb.                                                             reviews. In Europe, the rejection
                                                                                                      rate approaches 50 percent.”
   Weak:      The financial advantage of owning this equipment instead of leasing itis 10% after
              taxes.                                                                                  Quoted from Tom Murphy, “Starts

              Owning this equipment rather than leasing it will save us 10% after taxes.
                                                                                                      with P, T, K? Payoff Big for Right Drug
   Better:                                                                                            Name: Companies Spend Millions of
   Nouns ending in -ment, -ion, and -al often hide verbs.                                             Dollars on Processing a Winning Med-
                                                                                                      icine Brand,” Des Moines Register,
   Weak                                Better                                                         January 18, 2008, 6D.

   make an adjustment                  adjust
   make a payment                      pay
   make a decision                     decide
   reach a conclusion                  conclude
   take into consideration             consider
   make a referral                     refer
   provide assistance                  assist
 Use verbs to present the information more forcefully.
   Weak:       We will perform an investigation of the problem.
    Better:    We will investigate the problem.
   Weak:       Selection of a program should be based on the client's needs.
    Better:    Select the program that best fits the client's needs.

 5 Eliminate wordiness. Writing is wordy if the same idea can be expressed
                                                                     reader,
 in fewer words. Unnecessary words increase writing time, bore your
 and make your meaning more difficult to follow, since the reader must hold
 all the extra words in mind while trying to understand your meaning. Don
                                                                    s the most
 Bush, the “friendly editor” columnist for intercom, calls wordines
 obvious fault of technical writing.”
                                                                             may be
    Good writing is concise, but it may still be lengthy. Concise writing
                it is packed with ideas. In  Chapter   3, we saw   that revisions   to
 long because
                                                    to  develop  benefits  were   fre-
 create you-attitude and positive emphasis and
                                                                            ion not
 quently longer than the originals because the revision added informat
 given in the original.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




132                                         Part2    The Communication Process


               Meaningless                    Sometimes you may be able to look at a draft and see immediately how to
               Sentences                    condense it. When the solution isn’t obvious, try the following strategies to
           {Editor Bill Walsh of            condense your writing:
           the Washington Post
           gives these examples
                                            a. Eliminate words that add nothing.
of meaningless sentences]                   b. Combine sentences to eliminate unnecessary words.
=     A donation of your car, truck         c. Put the meaning of your sentence into the subject and verb to cut the num-
      or boat is tax-deductible to             ber of words.
      the maximum extent of the
      law.
                                                You eliminate unnecessary words to save the reader’s time, not simply to
  In other words, you're allowed            see how few words you can use. You aren’t writing a telegram, so keep the
to deduct it as much as you’re              little words that make sentences complete. (Incomplete sentences are fine in
 allowed to deduct it. Good                 lists where all the items are incomplete.)
 news: Your toenail clippings are               The following examples show how to use these methods.
 also deductible to the maximum
 extent of the law.                         a. Eliminate words that add nothing. Cut words if the idea is already clear
 =     You  can use this scholarship        from other words in the sentence. Substitute single words for wordy phrases.
       at any participating school in
                                               Wordy:       Keep this information on file for future reference.
       the world,
   | have no doubt that this is                Better:      Keep this information for reference.
 true. But it raises one major                 Or:          File this information.
 question. ...
                                               Wordy:       Ideally, it would be best to put the billing ticket just below the monitor and above
 = Area schools will be back in
                                                            the keyboard.
   session Monday, disappoint-
   ing thousands of children                    Better:    _ |f possible, put the billing ticket between the monitor and the keyboard.
   who would rather stay home
                                                Phrases beginning with of, which, and that can often be shortened.
   and watch John Wayne
   movies.                                     Wordy:       the question of most importance
      No, they wouldn’t. (How old are           Better:     the most important question
 you, anyway?)
                                                Wordy: _ the estimate which is enclosed
 Quoted from Bill Walsh, The Elephants
                                                Better:     the enclosed estimate
 of Style: A Trunkload of Tips on the Big
 Issues and Gray Areas of Contempo-             Wordy:      We need to act on the suggestions that our customers offer us.
 rary American English (New York:
 McGraw-Hill, 2004), 140, 149.                  Better:     We need to act on customer suggestions.

                                                Sentences beginning with There are or It is can often be tighter.
                                                Wordy:       There are three reasons for the success of the project.
                                                Tighter:     Three reasons explain the project’s success.
                                                Wordy:       It is the case that college graduates advance more quickly in the company.
                                                Tighter:     College graduates advance more quickly in the company.

                                              Check your draft. If you find these phrases, or any of the unnecessary words
                                            shown in Figure 5.4, eliminate them.

                                            b. Combine sentences to eliminate unnecessary words. In addition to sav-
                                            ing words, combining sentences focuses the reader’s attention on key points,
                                            makes your writing sound more sophisticated, and sharpens the relationship
                                            between ideas, thus making your writing more coherent.
                                                Wordy:       | conducted this survey by telephone on Sunday, April 21. | questioned two
                                                             groups of upperclass students—male and female—who, according to the Stu-
                                                             dent Directory, were still living in the dorms. The purpose of this survey was to
                                                             find out why some upperclassstudents continue to live in the dorms even though
                                                             they are no longer required by the University to do so. | also wanted to find out if
                                                             there were any differences between male and female upperclass students in their
                                                             reasons for choosing to remain in the dorms.
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                   Chapter5    Planning, Composing, and Revising                           133


Figure 5.4         Words to Cut
                                                                                  Substitute a single word for a wordy
 Cut the following words             Cut redundant words                          phrase




                                                                                             to
  Tighter:   On Sunday, April 21, | phoned upperclass men and women living in the dorms
             find out (1) why they continue to live in the dorms even though they are no longer
             required to do so, and (2) whether men and women gave the same reasons.


c. Put the meaning of your sentence into the subject and verb to cut the
number of words. Put the core of your meaning into the subject and verb of
your main clause.
   Wordy:     The reason we are recommending the computerization of this process is because
              it will reduce the time required to obtain data and will give us more accurate data.
   Better:   |Computerizing the process will give us more accurate data more quickly.
                                                                                             benefit
   Wordy:     The purpose of this letter is to indicate that if we are unable to mutually
                       seller/buyer relationship , with satisfactory material and satisfactory  pay-
              from our
                                                                                               other
              ment, then we have no alternative other than to sever the relationship. In
                                                                                                 our
              words, unless the account is handled in 45 days, we will have to change
              terms to a permanent COD basis.
                                                                                                pay-
   Better:    A good buyer/seller relationship depends upon satisfactory material and
                                                                                          clear your
              ment. You can continue to charge your purchases from us only if you
              present balance in 45 days.


 6. Vary sentence length and sentence structure.          Readable prose mixes
 sentence lengths and varies sentence structure. A really short sentence (under
                                                                              or
 10 words) can add punch to your prose. Really long sentences (over 30
 40 words) are  danger signs. The first-place Golden  Gobbledy  gook  Award,  in
                                                                      in an
 the Legalese Hall of Shame, goes to a four-page, 1,000-word sentence
 indictment filed in Oklahoma.”
    You can vary sentence patterns in several ways. First, you can mix simple,
 compound, and complex sentences. (See Appendix B for more information on
 sentence structure.) Simple sentences have one main clause:
   We will open a new store this month.
                                                                              or
    Compound        sentences have two main clauses joined with and, but, or,
 another conjunction. Compound sentences work best when the ideas in the
 two clauses are closely related.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




134                                     Part2      The Communication Process


             What's in a Name              We have hired staff, and they will complete their training next week.
             (4): Names Influence
                                              We wanted to have a local radio station broadcast from the store during its grand opening,
             Eating Behaviors
                                              but the Dus were already booked.
              Can renaming a food
 make it more appealing? Can the          Complex sentences have one main and one subordinate clause; they are
 name make you eat more? Well,          good for showing logical relationships.
 yes, especially if you're dieting.           When the stores open, we will have specials in every department.
   Researchers called Jelly Belly
 candies “fruit chews” or “candy              Because we already have a strong customer base in the northwest, we expect the new
 chews.” Dieters rated “candy                 store to be just as successful as the store in the City Center Mall.
 chews” as being less tasty than
                                           You can also vary sentences by changing the order of elements. Normally
 “fruit chews.” In addition, dieters
 consumed 70% more jelly beans
                                        the subject comes first.
 when the candies were called                 We will survey customers later in the year to see whether demand warrants a third store
 “fruit chews” than they did when             on campus.
 the candies were called “candy
 chews.”                                   To create variety, occasionally begin the sentence with some other part of
                                        the sentence.
 Adapted from Christopher Shea,
 “Salad Is a Magic Word,” Wall Street         Later in the year, we will survey customers to see whether demand warrants a third store
 Journal, April 28-24, 2011, C4.
                                              on campus.
                                              Use these guidelines for sentence length and structure:

                                          =      Always edit sentences for conciseness. Even a short sentence can be
                                                 wordy.
                                          =      When your subject matter is complicated or full of numbers, make a spe-
                                                 cial effort to keep sentences short.
                                          =      Use longer sentences to show how ideas are linked to each other, to
                                                 avoid a series of short, choppy sentences, and to reduce repetition.
                                          =      Group the words in long and medium-length sentences into chunks that
                                                 the reader can process quickly.
                                          =      When you use a long sentence, keep the subject and verb close together.

                                        Let’s see how to apply the last three principles.
                                              Use long sentences to show how ideas are linked to each other, to avoid
                                        a series of short, choppy sentences, and to reduce repetition. The following
                                        sentence is hard to read not simply because it is long but because it is shapeless.
                                        Just cutting it into a series of short, choppy sentences doesn’t help. The best
                                        revision uses medium-length sentences to show the relationship between ideas.
                                              Too long:    It should also be noted in the historical patterns presented in the summary,
                                                           that though there were delays in January and February which we realized were
                                                           occurring, we are now back where we were about a year ago, and that we are
                                                           not off line in our collect receivables as compared to last year at this time, but
                                                           we do show a considerable over-budget figure because of an ultraconservative
                                                           goal on the receivable investment.
                                               Choppy:     There were delays in January and February. We knew about them at the time.
                                                           We are now back where we were about a year ago. The summary shows this.
                                                           Our present collect receivables are in line with last year’s. However, they exceed
                                                           the budget. The reason they exceed the budget is that our goal for receivable
                                                           investment was very conservative.

                                                Better:    As the summary shows, although there were delays in January and February (of
                                                           which we were aware), we have now regained our position of a year ago. Our
                                                           present collect receivables are in line with last year’s, but they exceed the bud-
                                                           get because our goal for receivable investment was very conservative.
                                                                   Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter5       Planning, Composing, and Revising                          135


  Group the words in long and medium-length sentences into chunks. The
“better” revision above has seven chunks. At 27 and 24 words, respectively,
these sentences aren’t short, but they’re readable because no chunk is longer
than 10 words. Any sentence pattern will get boring if it is repeated sentence
after sentence. Use different sentence patterns—different kinds and lengths of
chunks—to keep your prose interesting.
   Keep the subject and verb close together. Often you can move the subject
and verb closer together if you put the modifying material in a list at the end
of the sentence. For maximum readability, present the list vertically.
  Hard to read:     Movements resulting from termination, layoffs and leaves, recalls and rein-
                    states, transfers in, transfers out, promotions in, promotions out, and pro-
                    motions within are presently documented through the Payroll Authorization
                    Form.
   Better:          The Payroll Authorization Form documents the following movements:
                    mg Termination
                    m Layoffs and leaves
                    m Recalls and reinstates
                    m Transfers in and out
                    mg Promotions in, out, and within



7. Use parallel structure.           Parallel structure puts words, phrases, or clauses
in the same grammatical and logical form. In the following faulty example,
by reviewing is a gerund, while note is an imperative verb. Make the sentence
parallel by using both gerunds or both imperatives.
   Faulty:          Errors can be checked by reviewing the daily exception report or note the
                    number of errors you uncover when you match the lading copy with the file
                    copy of the invoice.
  Parallel:         Errors can be checked by reviewing the daily exception report or by noting
                    the number of errors you uncover when you match the lading copy with the
                    file copy of the invoice.
   Also             To check errors, note
   parallel:         1. The number of items on the daily exception report.
                     2. The number of errors discovered when the lading copy and the file copy
                        are matched.

Note that a list in parallel structure must fit grammatically into the umbrella
sentence that introduces the list.
   Faulty:           The following suggestions can help employers avoid bias in job interviews:
                     1. Base questions on the job description.
                     2. Questioning techniques.
                     3. Selection and training of interviewers.
   Parallel:         The following suggestions can help employers avoid bias in job interviews:
                     1. Base questions on the job description.
                     2. Ask the same questions of all applicants.
                     3. Select and train interviewers carefully.
   Also parallel:   |Employers can avoid bias in job interviews by
                     1. Basing questions on the job description.
                     2. Asking the same questions of all applicants.
                     3. Selecting and training interviewers carefully.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




136                                                 Part 2   The Communication Process


              Limerick Law                             Words must also be logically parallel. In the following faulty example,
           Federal Judge Ronald                     juniors, seniors, and athletes are not three separate groups. The revision groups
           Leighton thought a                       words into nonoverlapping categories.
           465-page lawsuit (the
                                                       Faulty:             | interviewed juniors and seniors and athletes.
           title alone was eight
 pages) was too long. In a limer-                      Parallel:           | interviewed juniors and seniors. In each rank, | interviewed athletes and
ick, he demanded a “short and                                              nonathletes.
plain” statement of allegations:
                                                       Parallel structure is a powerful device for making your writing tighter,
      Plaintiff has agreat deal to say,
                                                    smoother, and more forceful. As Figure 5.5 shows, parallelism often enables
      But it seems he skipped                       you to tighten your writing. To make your writing as tight as possible, elimi-
            Rule 8(a).
                                                    nate repetition in parallel lists; see Figure 5.6.
      His Complaint istoo long, —
      Which renders
                itwrong,                            8. Put your readers in your sentences.         Use second-person pronouns (you)
      Please rewrite
                  andrefile today.                  rather than third-person (he, she, one) to give your writing more impact. You is
et:     ;                Me        Liat   ee        both singular and plural; it can refer to a single person or to every member of
‘Adapted from “Nobles& Knaves,”                     your organization.
B02.                          ee               Nr       Third-person:      Funds in a participating employee’s account at the end of each six
                                                                           months will automatically be used to buy more stock unless a “Notice
                                                                           of Election Not to Exercise Purchase Rights” form is received from the
                                                                           employee.
                                                        Second-person:     Once you begin to participate, funds in your account at the end of each
                                                                           six months will automatically be used to buy more stock unless you turn
                                                                           in a “Notice of Election Not to Exercise Purchase Rights” form.

                                                    Be careful to use you only when it refers to your reader.
                                                        Incorrect:         My visit with the outside sales rep showed me that your schedule can
                                                                           change quickly.
                                                        Correct:           My visit with the outside sales rep showed          me that schedules can
                                                                           change quickly.


                                                     Figure 5.5            Use Parallelism to Tighten Your Writing.




                                                                          Faulty                                             Parallel


                                                     Figure 5.6             Eliminate Repeated Words in Parallel Lists.




                                                                          Wordy                                              Concise
                                                               Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                  Chapter5    Planning, Composing, and Revising                           137


As You Write and Revise Paragraphs
Paragraphs are visual and logical units. Use them to chunk your sentences.

9. Begin most paragraphs with topic sentences. A good paragraph has
unity; that is, it discusses only one idea, or topic. The topic sentence states the
main idea and provides a scaffold to structure your document. Your writing
will be easier to read if you make the topic sentence explicit and put it at the
beginning of the paragraph.*!
   Hard to read             In fiscal 2012, the company filed claims for refund of federal income
   (no topic                taxes of $3,199,000 and interest of $969,000 paid as a result of
   sentence):               an examination of the company’s federal income tax returns by the
                            Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for the years 2008 through 2010. It
                            is uncertain what amount, if any, may ultimately be recovered.
   Better (paragraph        The company and the IRS disagree about whether the company is
   starts with topic        responsible for back taxes. In fiscal 2012, the company filed claims
   sentence):               for a refund of federal income taxes of $3,199,000 and interest of
                            $969,000 paid as a result of an examination of the company’s fed-
                            eral income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for the
                            years 2008 through 2010. It is uncertain what amount, if any, may
                            ultimately be recovered.

   A good topic sentence forecasts the structure and content of the paragraph.

Plan B also has economic advantages.

   (Prepares the reader for a discussion of B’s economic advantages.)

: We had several personnel changes in June.

   (Prepares the reader for a list of the month’s terminations and hires.)

 - Employees have complained about one part of our new policy on parental leaves.

   (Prepares the reader for a discussion of the problem.)
   When the first sentence of a paragraph is not the topic sentence, readers
who skim may miss the main point. If the paragraph does not have a topic
sentence, you will need to write one. If you can’t think of a single sentence that
serves as an “umbrella” to cover every sentence, the paragraph probably lacks
unity. To solve the problem, either split the paragraph into two or eliminate
the sentence that digresses from the main point.

10. Use transitions to link ideas. Transition words and sentences signal
the connections between ideas to the reader. Transitions tell whether the next
sentence continues the previous thought or starts a new idea; they can tell
whether the idea that comes next is more or less important than the previous
thought. Figure 5.7 lists some of the most common transition words and phrases.
   These sentences use transition words and phrases:
   Kelly wants us to switch the contract to Ames Cleaning, and | agree with her. (continuing
   the same idea)
   Kelly wants us to switch the contract to Ames Cleaning, but | prefer Ross Commercial.
   (contrasting opinions)
   As a result of our differing views, we will be visiting both firms. (showing cause and effect)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




138                                        Part2     The Communication Process



Figure 5.7              Transition Words and Phrases
a
      To show addition or                 To introduce an example            To show that the contrast         To show time
        continuation of the                 for example (e.g.)                 is more important than            after
        same idea                           for instance                       the previous idea                 as

        and                                 indeed                                 but                           before
                                            to illustrate                          however                       in the future
        also
        first, second, third                namely                                 nevertheless                  next
        in addition                         specifically                           on the contrary               then
        likewise                          To contrast                            To show cause and effect        until
        similarly                           in contrast                            as a result                   when
                                            on the other hand                      because                       while
      To introduce another
                                            or                                     consequently                To summarize or end
        important item
                                                                                   for this reason               finally
        furthermore                                                                                              in conclusion
                                                                                   therefore
        moreover
                                                                                                                                 ———
ee



                Writing for                      These are transitional sentences:
                International
                Audiences                        Now that we have examined the advantages of using Ames Cleaning, let’s look at potential
                                                 disadvantages. (shows movement between two sections of evaluation)
                When you're writing
                for readers in another           These pros and cons show us three reasons we should switch to Ross Commercial. (shows
 country, be careful to adjust                   movement away from evaluation sections; forecasts the three reasons)
 your writing style to the new cul-
 ture. Even the English language
 changes when you leave the                ORGANIZATIONAL PREFERENCES FOR STYLE
 United States. American spelling
 in documents for audiences who            Different organizations and bosses may legitimately have different ideas about
 have learned British English can          what constitutes good writing. If the style doesn’t seem reasonable, ask. Often
 be annoying to readers. Remem-            the documents that end up in files aren’t especially good; later, other workers
  ber that spelling is cultural, so        may find these and copy them, thinking they represent a corporate standard.
  adjust your writing to suit your         Bosses may in fact prefer better writing.
  readers, even if that means writ-           Recognize that a style may serve other purposes than communication. An
  ing grey, analyse, colour, centre,
                                           abstract, hard-to-read style may help a group forge its own identity. Research-
  and familiarise. Adjusting your
  style and your spelling for inter-
                                           ers James Suchan and Ronald Dulek have shown that Navy officers preferred
  national audiences demonstrates
                                           a passive, impersonal style because they saw themselves as followers. An air-
  respect for their cultures.              craft company’s engineers saw wordiness as the verbal equivalent of backup
    lf you’re adapting your text           systems. A backup is redundant but essential to safety, because parts and sys-
  for an international audience,           tems do fail.
  go beyond a dictionary. Local-              Building a good style takes energy and effort, but it’s well worth the work.
  ize your document by asking a            Good style can make every document more effective; good style can help
  native speaker from your target          make you the good writer so valuable to every organization.
  country (or countries) to read the
  document and note any prob-
  lematic words, phrases, images,           REVISING, EDITING, AND PROOFREADING
  or examples.
                                            Once you have your document written, you need to polish it.
  Adapted from James Calvert Scott,            A popular myth is that Abraham Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg address,
  “American     and   British Business-
  Related Spelling Differences,” Busi-
                                            perhaps the most famous American presidential speech, on the back of an
  ness Communication Quarterly 67,          envelope on the train as he traveled to the battlefield’s dedication. The reality
  no. 3 (2004): 153-67.                     is that Lincoln wrote at least a partial draft of the speech before leaving for the
                                            trip and continued to revise it up to the morning of its delivery. Furthermore,
                                            the speech was on a topic he passionately believed in, one he had been pon-
                                            dering for years.
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                               Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                                    139


     Like Lincoln, good writers work on their drafts; they make their documents                            When Words Hurt

better by judicious revising, editing, and proofreading.                                      Fa           In the    summer     of
                                                                                                 Sess      2006, a large, mid-
 =    Revising means making changes in content, organization, and tone that                                 western state univer-
                                                                                              sity was gearing up to host the
      will better satisfy your purposes and your audience.
                                                                                              first national Special Olympics,
 =    Editing means making surface-level changes that make the document                       a competition featuring people
      grammatically correct.                                                                  with intellectual disabilities. Visi-
 =    Proofreading means checking to be sure the document is free from typo-                  tors would be arriving from all
      graphical errors.                                                                       over the country, and the small
                                                                                              university town wanted to put on
                                                                                              its best face for the crowds. The
What to Look for When You Revise                                                              student newspaper created a
                                                                                               14-page, full-color visitors’ guide
When you're writing to a new audience or have to solve a particularly difficult               to the town and inserted it into
problem, plan to revise the draft at least three times. The first time, look for              the campus paper. Unfortunately,
content and clarity: Have I said enough and have I said it clearly? The second                they named it “[Name of Town]
time, check the organization and layout: Have I presented my content so it can                for Dummies” after the popular
be easily absorbed? Finally, check style and tone: Have I used you-attitude?                   book series.
The Thorough Revision Checklist summarizes the questions you should ask.                         The editor-in-chief quickly apol-
   Often you'll get the best revision by setting aside your draft, getting a blank             ogized for the insensitive word
page or screen, and redrafting. This strategy takes advantage of the thinking                  choice, while the newspaper

you did on your first draft without locking you into the sentences in it.                      removed the inserts and replaced

   As you revise, be sure to read the document through from start to finish.                   them with reprinted publications
                                                                                               featuring a new headline.
This is particularly important if you’ve composed in several sittings or if
you've used text from other documents. Such documents tend to be choppy,                      Adapted from Lisa Rossi, “Olympics
repetitious, or inconsistent. You may need to add transitions, cut repetitive                 Section Goof Sends Paper Running,”

parts, or change words to create a uniform level of formality throughout the
                                                                                              Des Moines Register, July 1, 2006,
                                                                                              1A, 4A.
document.
   If you're really in a time bind, do a light revision, as outlined in the Light
Revision Checklist. The quality of the final document may not be as high as
with a thorough revision, but even a light revision is better than skipping revi-
sion altogether.




 Nic                           BE:                   >        e            ae
 Sometimes revising and proofreading is more pleasant if done in an informal setting.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




140                                       Part2   The Communication Process


               Revisioning a
               Novel

      i        Michael       Chabon                TIAT, “SWING THE
                                                   GULL-PURN HORSE
              is a Pulitzer Prize                  THIEF FROM THE
                                                    NEAREST TREE ;
author. And his novel, The Yid-                    \NOUL? NEED
                                                    CLRRIFICATON,,
dish Policemen's Union, had a
blurb in his publisher's sales cata-
log plus an on-sale date when his
editor made him revise it.
   He spent eight months rework-
                                          NON SEQUITUR © 2010        Wiley Ink, Inc., Dist. By UNIVERSAL UCLICK. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.
ing the entire book, adding a
flashback structure and paring


                                          Achecksist GEMS NSS
down the language.
   Altogether, he spent five years
and four drafts working on the
novel. In the process, he moved           Content and clarity
to a different plot and changed            O Does your document meet the needs of the organization and of the reader —and make
from a first-person to a third-per-           you look good?
son narrator. His editor sent him          CO Have you given readers all the information they need to understand and act on your
detailed notes in the margins of              message?
the drafts. On the final draft, she         C1 Is all the information accurate and clear?
went over the manuscript page
                                            U1 Is the message easy to read?
by page with him.
   The novel won both Hugo and              C1 Is each sentence clear? Is the message free from apparently contradictory statements?
 Nebula awards, science fiction’s           C1 Is the logic clear and convincing? Are generalizations and benefits backed up with
 highest awards.                               adequate supporting detail?

 Adapted     from   Sam _ Schechner,      Organization and layout
 “Chabon’s Amazing Rewrite Adven-          C1 Is the pattern of organization clear? Is it appropriate for your purposes, audience, and
 tures,” Wall Street Journal, April 27,       context?
 2007, WS.
                                           C Are transitions between ideas smooth? Do ideas within paragraphs flow smoothly?
                                           C Does the design of the document make it easy for readers to find the information they
                                              need? Is the document visually inviting?
                                           C1 Are the points emphasized by layout ones that deserve emphasis?
                                            OO Are the first and last paragraphs effective?

                                          Style and tone
                                            1 Does the message use you-attitude and positive emphasis?
                                            CJ Is the message friendly and free from sexist language?
                                            1 Does the message build goodwill?



                                          checklist                     Light Revision Checklist
                                            1 Have you given readers all the information they need to understand and act on your
                                               message?
                                            C1 Is the pattern of organization clear and helpful?
                                            C1 Is the logic clear and convincing? Are generalizations and benefits backed up with
                                               adequate supporting detail?
                                            C1 Does the design of the document make it easy for readers to find the information they need?
                                            0 Are the first and last paragraphs effective?



                                           What to Look for When You Edit
                                           Even good writers need to edit, since no one can pay attention to surface
                                           correctness while thinking of ideas. Editing should always follow revision.
                                           There’s no point in taking time to fix a grammatical error in a sentence that
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                 Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                                          141


may be cut when you clarify your meaning or tighten your style. Some writ-                                     Résumé
                                                                                                               Proofreading Errors
ers edit more accurately when they print out a copy of a document and edit
the hard copy.                                                                                                 = “Position Desired:
                                                                                                               Profreader.” It doesn’t
   Check your material to make sure you have acknowledged all informa-
                                                                                                               look good. . .
tion and opinions you have borrowed from outside the organization (see                          s     “Skills: Familiar with all fau-
Chapter 18 for help on documentation). Using material from outside the                                cets of accounting.” Accoun-
organization without acknowledging the source is plagiarism. Even when                                tant by day, plumber by night.
you use company information, you may need to acknowledge the source                             =     “Resume Section Title: Edu-
if your audience is skeptical or generally not aware of the existence of the                          catio” You’re “n” trouble.
information.                                                                                    =     “Experience: Detailed-ori-
   Check your communication to make sure your sentences say what you                                  ented saleman.” We have our
intend.                                                                                               doubts.

  Not: Take a moment not to sign your policy.                                                   =      “Experience: Demonstrated
                                                                                                       ability in multi-tasting.” You'll
  But: Take a moment now to sign your policy.
                                                                                                       love our vending machine.
  Not: | wish to apply for the job as assistant manger.                                         =      “Carrier Objective: To become
  But: | wish to apply for the job as assistant manager.                                               a manager.” A man on the
                                                                                                       move.
   An extra “not” caused Arkansas to accidentally pass a law allowing its                       m      “Languages: Speak English
citizens of any age, even children, to marry if their parents agreed. The unin-                        and Spinach.” Must be what
tended law said this:                                                                                  they teach at the culinary
                                                                                                       academy.
  In order for a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age and who is not           a      “Awards/Accomplishments:
  pregnant to obtain a marriage license, the person must provide the county clerk with                 Dum major with my high
  evidence of parental consent to the marriage.*4                                                      school band.” Don’t be so
                                                                                                       hard on yourself.

   Walden O’Dell, former CEO of Diebold, an Ohio manufacturer of ATMs and                       =      “Experience: Child care
                                                                                                       provider: Organized activi-
other machines, wrote in a fund-raising letter for President Bush that he was
                                                                                                       ties; prepared lunches and
“committed to helping Ohio deliver its electoral votes to the president.” That                         snakes.” Probably best to
wording raised ethics questions because Diebold makes voting machines.”                                stick with graham crackers
  When you edit, you also need to check that the following are accurate:                               and milk.

                                                                                                    Quoted from “Cover Letter State-
     Sentence structure.                                                                            ments,” Robert Half International, ac-
     Subject-verb and noun-pronoun agreement.                                                       cessed March 20, 2011, http://www
                                                                                                    .resumania.com/ResumaniaArchive.
     Punctuation.
     Word usage.
     Spelling—including spelling of names.
     Numbers.

   You also need to know the rules of grammar and punctuation to edit. Errors
such as sentence fragments and run-on sentences disturb most educated read-
ers and make them wonder what other mistakes you might be making. Errors
in punctuation can change the meaning of a sentence. Lynne Truss, author of
the New York Times bestseller on punctuation Eats, Shoots & Leaves, offers “a
popular ‘Dear Jack’ letter” to show the need for care:
          ‘            ,       uM                              36




   Dear Jack,
   | want a man who knows what love is all about. You are generous, kind, thoughtful.
   People who are not like you admit to being useless and inferior. You have ruined me
   for other men. | yearn for you. | have no feelings whatsoever when we're apart. I can
   be forever happy—will you let me be yours?

   Jill
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




142                                       Part 2    The Communication Process


             The Cost of a Typo
                                             Dear Jack,
             Most small proofread-           | want a man who knows what love is. All about you are generous, kind, thoughtful
             ing errors are embar-           people, who are not like you. Admit to being useless and inferior. You have ruined
             rassing to a company.           me. For other men | yearn! For you | have no feelings whatsoever. When we're apart
Some errors, though still small,             | can be forever happy. Will you let me be? Yours,
can be very costly and even dan-
gerous. In February 2011, John-
                                             Jill
son & Johnson recalled more than
667,000 packages of Sudafed
because of an error on the direc-            Writers with a good command of grammar and mechanics can do a better
tions. Instead of the standard            job than the computer grammar checkers currently available. But even good
warning, each of the packages             writers sometimes use a good grammar handbook for reference. On the other
instructed users “do not not              hand, even good editors—such as Bill Walsh, Copy Desk Chief for the Busi-
divide, crush, chew, or dissolve the      ness Desk of the Washington Post—warn writers that handbooks should be
tablet.”                                  used with a clear goal of clarifying text, not blindly following rules.”
  Although no accidents or prob-
                                             Appendix B reviews grammar and punctuation, numbers, and words that
lems were reported from the
                                          are often confused.
incorrect instructions, the one
repeated word cost the company
                                             Most writers make a small number of errors over and over. If you know
time, money, and some of its rep-         that you have trouble with dangling modifiers or subject-verb agreement, for
utation for quality. Not every typo       example, specifically look for them in your draft. Also look for any errors that
requires a recall, but any one can        especially bother your boss and correct them.
be costly.

 Adapted from Melly Alazraki, “Johnson    How to Catch Typos
 & Johnson Recalls Sudafed Because
 of a Typo,” February 25, 2011, http://   To catch typos use a spell-checker. But you still need to proofread by eye. Spell
 www.dailyfinance.com/2011/02/25/         checkers work by matching words; they will signal any group of letters not
 johnson-and-johnson-recalls-
 sudafed-because-of-a-typo/.
                                          listed in their dictionaries. However, they cannot tell you when you've used
                                          the wrong word but spelled it correctly.
                                             Don’t underestimate the harm that spelling errors can create. A large, mid-
                                          western university lost its yearbook after an uncaught typo referred to the Greek
                                          community as the “geeks on campus.” Greeks boycotted the yearbook, which
                                          went deeply into debt and out of business. The impact of typos on job documents
                                          is well-known (see sidebar on this page for example). Proofread every document
                                          both with a spell checker and by eye, to catch the errors a spell checker can’t find.
                                              Proofreading is hard because writers tend to see what they know should be
                                          there rather than what really is there. Since it’s always easier to proof some-
                                          thing you haven’t written, you may want to swap papers with a proofing
                                          buddy. (Be sure the person looks for typos, not content.)
                                                 To proofread,


                                            =       Read once quickly for meaning, to see that nothing has been left out.
                                                    Read a second time, slowly. When you find an error, correct it and then
                                                    re-read that line. Readers tend to become less attentive after they find one
                                                    error and may miss other errors close to the one they’ve spotted.
                                             =      To proofread a document you know well, read the lines backward or the
                                                    pages out of order.

                                              Always triple-check numbers, headings, the first and last paragraphs, and
                                           the reader’s name.


                                           GETTING AND USING FEEDBACK
                                           Getting feedback almost always improves a document. In many organiza-
                                           tions, it’s required. All external documents must be read and approved before
                                           they go out. The process of drafting, getting feedback, revising, and getting
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                              Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                                       143

                                                                                                       Too Much Feeback?
                                                                                                    * When college admis-




                I
Even history-shaping documents, like the Declaration of Independence, become better
with editing.



more feedback is called cycling. One researcher reported that documents in
her clients’ firms cycled an average of 4.2 times before reaching the intended
audience.*® Another researcher studied a major 10-page document whose 20
drafts made a total of 31 stops on the desks of nine reviewers on four different
levels.*’ Being asked to revise a document is a fact of life in business.
   You can improve the quality of the feedback you get by telling people which
aspects you’d especially like comments about. For example, when you give a
reader the outline or planning draft, you probably want to know whether the "essay           prep    servicesethical? Nees
general approach and content are appropriate, and if you have included all ~                  eee
major points. After your second draft, you might want to know whether the Adapted             from June  Kronholz, “Perfect
reasoning is convincing. When     you reach the polishing    draft, you'll be ready — College Essay  Takes   Lots of Prac:
for feedback on style and grammar. The Checklist on the next page lists ques-         ROSA Bake aie
tions to ask.                                                                                 “The Admissions Police,” Wall Street
   It’s easy to feel defensive when someone criticizes your work. If the feed-                Journal, April 6, 2007, W1, W10.
back stings, put it aside until you can read it without feeling defensive.                    —
Even if you think that the reader hasn’t understood what you were trying to
say, the fact that the reader complained usually means the section could be
improved. If the reader says “This isn’t true” and you know the statement
is true, several kinds of revision might make the truth clear to the reader:
rephrasing the statement, giving more information or examples, or docu-
menting the source.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                        Part2   The Communication Process


               Your Edits May Be           Reading feedback carefully is a good way to understand the culture of your
               Showing                  organization. Are you told to give more details or to shorten messages? Does
             , “When SCO Group, a       your boss add headings and bullet points? Look for patterns in the comments,
             "litigious Lindon (Utah)   and apply what you learn in your next document.
               software    company,
filed a breach of contract suit in
Michigan against Daimler Chrys-         USING BOILERPLATE
ler[, . . . a] CNET News reporter,
poking through the Microsoft
                                        Boilerplate is language—sentences, paragraphs, even pages—from a previ-
Word filing, discovered that the        ous document that a writer legitimately includes in a new document. In aca-
case had originally been drawn up       demic papers, material written by others must be quoted and documented—to
as a suit against Bank of America       neglect to do so would be plagiarism. However, because businesses own
in a California court. . . .            the documents their employees write, old text may be included without
   “(Hlidden in a Word, Excel, —        attribution.
or PowerPoint file may [be] the            Many legal documents, including apartment leases and sales contracts,
 names of the author and any-           are almost completely boilerplated. Writers may also use boilerplate
one who edited the document,
                                        they wrote for earlier documents. For example, a section from a proposal
 reviewers’ comments, . . . and
                                        describing the background of the problem could also be used in the final
                                        report. A section from a progress report describing what the writer had
deleted text. ...
  “A Wired News analysis of a
Word document circulated by
                                        done could be used with only a few changes in the methods section of the
California Attorney General Bill        final report.
Lockyer urging other attorneys             Writers use boilerplate both to save time and energy and to use language
to crack down on file-sharing           that has already been approved by the organization’s legal staff. However,
showed that the text had been           research has shown that using boilerplate creates two problems.”’ First, using
edited or reviewed by an official       unrevised boilerplate can create a document with incompatible styles and
of the Motion Picture Association       tones. Second, boilerplate can allow writers to ignore subtle differences in sit-
of America... .                         uations and audiences.
   “Nearly every business ex-
changes electronic documents
with partners, competitors, and         READABILITY FORMULAS
customers. . . . [To remove sen-
sitive information,] select “Track      Readability formulas attempt to measure objectively how easy something is to
Changes” from the tools menu            read. However, since they don’t take many factors into account, the formulas
 and view the document as “Final        are at best a very limited guide to good style.
 Showing Markup.” Make sure                Computer packages that analyze style may give you a readability score.
 that all your changes have been        Some states’ “plain English” laws require consumer contracts to meet a cer-
 either accepted or rejected by the
                                        tain readability score. Some companies require that warranties and other con-
 program—a step that removes
                                         sumer documents meet certain scores.
 the tracking information. And
 make sure all versions but the last
                                            Readability formulas depend heavily on word length and sentence length.
 have been deleted.”
                                         See the BAC website to calculate readability using the two best-known
                                         readability formulas: the Gunning Fog Index and the Flesch Reading Ease
 Quoted from Stephen H. Wildstrom,       Scale. Research has shown,*’ however, that using shorter words and sen-
 “Don’t Let Word Give Away Your
 Secrets,” BusinessWeek, April 19,
                                         tences will not necessarily make a passage easy to read. Short words are
 2004, 26.                               not always easy to understand, especially if they have technical meanings
                                         (e.g., waive, bear market, liquid). Short, choppy sentences and sentence frag-
                                         ments are actually harder to understand than well-written medium-length
                                         sentences.
                                            No reading formula yet devised takes into account three factors that influ-
                                         ence how easy a text is to read: the complexity of the ideas, the organization of
                                         the ideas, and the layout and design of the document.
                                            Instead of using readability formulas, test your draft with the people for
                                         whom it is designed. How long does it take them to find the information they
                                         need? Do they make mistakes when they try to use the document? Do they
                                         think the writing is easy to understand? Answers to these questions can give
                                         much more accurate information than any readability score.
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                     Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                          145



(checklist               ellictiilelasmcon   el aet--lel-165
Outline or planning draft
    CI Does the plan seem on the right track?
    CJ What topics should be added? Should any be cut?
    1 Do you have any other general suggestions?

Revising draft
  C1 Does the message satisfy all its purposes?
    1 Is the message adapted to the audience(s)?
    CZ Is the organization effective?
    O What parts aren’t clear?
     [J What ideas need further development and support?
     — Do you have any other suggestions?

Polishing draft
     Cl Are there any problems with word choice or sentence structure?
     OC Did you find any inconsistencies?
     C1 Did you find any typos?
     0 Is the document's design effective?




=      Processes that help writers write well include not expecting the first draft
       to be perfect, writing regularly, modifying the initial task if it’s too hard or
       too easy, having clear goals, knowing many different strategies, using rules
       as guidelines rather than as absolutes, and waiting to edit until after the
       draft is complete.
=      Writing processes can include many activities: planning, gathering,
       brainstorming, organizing, writing, evaluating, getting feedback, revis-
       ing, editing, and proofreading. Revising means changing the document
       to make it better satisfy the writer’s purposes and the audience. Editing
       means making surface-level changes that make the document grammati-
       cally correct. Proofreading means checking to be sure the document is free
       from typographical errors. The activities do not have to come in any set
       order. It is not necessary to finish one activity to start another. Most writers
       use all activities only when they write a document whose genre, subject
       matter, or audience is new to them.
=      To think of ideas, try brainstorming, freewriting (writing without stop-
       ping for 10 minutes or so), and clustering (brainstorming with circled
       words on a page).
 =     Good style in business and administrative writing is less formal, more
       friendly, and more personal than the style usually used for term papers.
 =     Use the following techniques to make your writing easier to read.
       As you choose words,
        1. Use words that are accurate, appropriate, and familiar. Denotation is
           a word’s literal meaning; connotation is the emotional coloring that a
           word conveys.
        2. Use technical jargon sparingly; eliminate business jargon.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




146                              Part2    The Communication Process


                                     As you write and revise sentences,
                                         3. Use active voice most of the time. Active voice is better because it is
                                            shorter, clearer, and more interesting.
                                         4. Use verbs—not nouns—to carry the weight of your sentence.
                                         5. Eliminate wordiness. Writing is wordy if the same idea can be expressed
                                            in fewer words.
                                            a. Eliminate words that add nothing.
                                            b. Combine sentences to eliminate unnecessary words.
                                         c. Put the meaning of your sentence into the subject and verb to cut
                                            the number of words.
                                      6. Vary sentence length and sentence structure.
                                      7. Use parallel structure. Use the same grammatical form for ideas that
                                         have the same logical function.
                                      8. Put your readers in your sentences.
                                     As you write and revise paragraphs,
                                      9. Begin most paragraphs with topic sentences so that readers know what
                                         to expect in the paragraph.
                                     10. Use transitions to link ideas.
                                 =   Ifthe writing situation is new or difficult, plan to revise the draft at least three
                                     times. The first time, look for content and completeness. The second time,
                                     check the organization, layout, and reasoning. Finally, check style and tone.

                                                                                                      *Go to www.mhhe.com/locker10e for
       CHAPTER 5                  Exercises and Problems                                              ccna Docks ods ee

5.1        Reviewing the Chapter

1.    What are some techniques of good writers? Which             6. What are some ways you can make your paragraphs
      ones do you use regularly? (LO 5-1-3)                                more effective? (LO 5-2)
2.    What are ways to get ideas for a specific communi-              7.   How can you adapt good style to organization pref-
      cation? (LO 5-1)                                                     erences? (LO 5-2)
3. What activities are part of the composing process?                 8.   How do revising, editing, and proofreading differ?
   Which one should you be doing more often or more                        Which one do you personally need to do more
      carefully in your writing? (LO 5-1)                                  carefully? (LO 5-3)
4.    What are some half-truths about style? (LO 5-2)                 9.   How can you get better feedback on your writing?
5.    What are some ways you can make your sentences                       (LO 5-3)
      more effective? (LO 5-2)


 a A        Interviewing Writers about Their Composing Processes

 Interview someone about the composing process(es) he                 ™    Does your superior ever read your drafts and make
 or she uses for on-the-job writing. Questions you could,                  suggestions?
 ask include the following:                                           =    Do you ever work with other writers to produce a
 = What kind of planning do you do before you write?                       single document? Describe the process you use.
     Do you make lists? formal or informal outlines?                  =    Describe the process of creating a document where
 m= When you need more information, where do you get it?                   you felt the final document reflected your best work.
                                                                           Describe the process of creating a document you
 = How do you compose your drafts? Do you dictate?
                                                                           found difficult or frustrating. What sorts of things
     Draft with pen and paper? Compose on screen?
                                                                           make writing easier or harder for you?
     How do you find uninterrupted time to compose?
 = When you want advice about style, grammar, and
     spelling, what source(s) do you consult?
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition

                                                                                                                               |




                                                  Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                                 147


As your instructor directs,                                       ie        Present your results in a memo to your instructor.
a. Share your results orally with a small group of                d.        Share your results with a small group of students
       students.                                                            and write a joint memo reporting the similarities and
b.     Present your results in an oral presentation to the                  differences you found.
       class.



5.3.          Analyzing Your Own Writing Processes

Save your notes and drafts from several assignments so             =        What relation do you see between the process(es)
that you can answer the following questions:                                you use and the quality of the final document?
m Which practices of good writers do you follow?                   As your instructor directs,
® Which of the activities discussed in Chapter 5 do                a.  Discuss your process with a small group of other
      you use?                                                              students.
=     How much time do you spend on each of the                    b.       Write a memo to your instructor analyzing in detail
      activities?                                                           your process for composing one of the papers for this
=     What kinds of revisions do you make most often?                       class.
=     Do you use different processes for different docu-                    Write a memo to your instructor analyzing your
      ments, or do you have one process that you use most                   process during the term. What parts of your
      of the time?                                                          process(es) have stayed the same throughout the
      What parts of your process seem most successful?                      term? What parts have changed?
      Are there any places in the process that could be
      improved? How?




5.4            Identifying Words with Multiple Denotations

 a.       Each of the following words has several denotations.              browser       log       see
          How many can you list without going to a diction-                  court        table     check
          ary? How many additional meanings does a good            b.        List five other words that have multiple denotations.
          dictionary list?




 5.5           Evaluating the Ethical Implication of Connotations

 In each of the following pairs, identify the more favor-           4        terminate /fire
 able term. When is its use justifiable?                            5.       inaccuracy /lying
 1.       wasted/sacrificed                                         6.       budget/spending plan
 2.       illegal alien/immigrant                                   7        feedback/criticism
 3. friendly fire/enemy attack



    5.6        Correcting Errors in Denotation and Connotation

    Identify and correct the errors in denotation or connota-          4. While he researched companies, he was literally
    tion in the following sentences:                                      glued to the web.
    1. In our group, we weeded out the best idea each                  Sb Our backpacks are hand sewn by one of roughly 16
        person had thought of.                                            individuals.
    2. She is a prudent speculator.                                       Raj flaunted the law against insider trading.
    3. The three proposals are diametrically opposed to
         each other.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




148                              Part 2   The Communication Process


5.7        Using Connotations to Shape Response

Write two sentences to describe each of the following             2. _Chris often starts work on a new project without
situations. In one sentence, use words with positive con-             being told to do so.
notations; in the other, use negative words.                      3. Asa supervisor, Chris gives very specific
1. Chris doesn’t spend time on small talk.                            instructions to subordinates.


5.8        Choosing Levels of Formality

Identify the more formal word in each pair. Which term         _ 3. assistant      helper
is better for most business documents? Why?                      4. pilot project _testing the waters
l.adaptedto          geared to                                    5. cogitate       think
2. befuddled    — confused


5.9        Eliminating Jargon and Simplifying Language

Revise these sentences to eliminate jargon and to use             4. Please be advised that this writer is in considerable
short, familiar words.                                               need of a new computer.
1. When the automobile company announced its stra-                Be Enclosed please find the proposed draft for the
   tegic downsizing initiative, it offered employees a               employee negative retention plan. In the event
   career alternative enhancement program.                           that you have alterations which you would like to
2. Any alterations must be approved during the                       suggest, forward same to my office at your earliest
   30-day period commencing 60 days prior to the                     convenience.
   expiration date of the agreement.
3. As per your request, the undersigned has obtained
   estimates of upgrading our computer system. A
   copy of the estimated cost is attached hereto.


5.10       Changing Verbs from Passive to Active Voice

Identify passive voice in the following sentences and             Sk When the vacation schedule is finalized it is recom-
convert it to active voice. In some cases, you may need to           mended that it be routed to all supervisors for final
add information to do so. You may use different words                approval.
as long as you retain the basic meaning of the sentence.             As stated in my résumé, I have designed web pages
Remember that imperative verbs are active voice, too.                for three student organizations.
1. Fora customer to apply for benefits, an application               Material must not be left on trucks outside the ware-
    must be completed.                                               house. Either the trucks must be parked inside the
2. The cost of delivering financial services is being                warehouse or the material must be unloaded at the
      slashed by computers, the Internet, and toll-free              time of receiving the truck.
      phone lines.


 5.11       -Using Strong Verbs

Revise each of the following sentences to replace hidden               If you wish to be eligible for the Miller scholarship,
verbs with action verbs.                                               you must complete an application by January 31.
1. An understanding of stocks and bonds is important                   When you make an evaluation of media buys, take
    if one wants to invest wisely.                                     into consideration the demographics of the group
2. We must undertake a calculation of expected                         seeing the ad.
    revenues and expenses for the next two years.                      We provide assistance to clients in the process of
3. The production of clear and concise documents is                    reaching a decision about the purchase of hardware
    the mark of a successful communicator.                             and software.
4. We hope to make use of the company’s website to
    promote the new product line.
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                  Chapter5     Planning, Composing, and Revising


5.12        Reducing Wordiness
1.    Eliminate words that say nothing. You may use dif-             DD, Combine sentences to show how ideas are related
      ferent words.                                                      and to eliminate unnecessary words.
      a. There are many businesses that are active in                    a. Some customers are profitable for companies.
          community and service work.                                        Other customers actually cost the company
      b. The purchase of a new computer will allow us                        money.
           to produce form letters quickly. In addition,                 b.     If you are unable to come to the session on HMOs,
           return on investment could be calculated for                      please call the human resources office. You will
           proposed repairs. Another use is that the com-                    be able to schedule another time to ask questions
           puter could check databases to make sure that                     you may have about the various options.
           claims are paid only once.                                     c. Major Japanese firms often have employees who
       c. Our decision to enter the South American mar-                      know English well. U.S. companies negotiating
           ket has precedence in the past activities of the                  with Japanese companies should bring their
          company.                                                              own interpreters.



5.13.       Improving Parallel Structure
Revise each of the following sentences to create                         provide attention to details such as revision date
parallelism.                                                             and the webmaster’s address.
1. The orientation session will cover the following                      When you leave a voicemail message,
    information:                                                         = Summarize your main point in a sentence or
    = Company culture will be discussed.                                        two.
    = How to use the equipment.                                           =     The name and phone number should be given
    = You will get an overview of key customers’                                slowly and distinctly.
        needs.                                                            m     The speaker should give enough information so
2. Five criteria for a good web page are content that                           that the recipient can act on the message.
       serves the various audiences, attention to details,                ®     Tell when you'll be available to receive the
       and originality. It is also important to have effec-                     recipient's return call.
       tive organization and navigation devices. Finally,


5.14         Putting Readers in Your Sentences

Revise each of the following sentences to put readers in                  your family. We invite you to review the rate plans
them. As you revise, use active voice and simple words.                   on the attached page and choose the one that best fits
1. Mutual funds can be purchased from banks, bro-                         your needs. All our customers are important to us.
       kers, financial planners, or from the fund itself.                 Another aspect of the university is campus life,
 2.    Iwould like to take this opportunity to invite you                 with an assortment of activities and student groups
                                                                          to participate in and lectures and sports events to
       back to Global Wireless. As a previous customer we
       have outstanding new rate plans to offer you and                   attend.



 5.15        Editing Sentences to Improve Style

 Revise    these sentences    to make    them   smoother,     less        New procedure for customer service employees:
 wordy, and easier to read. Eliminate jargon and repeti-                  Please be aware effective immediately, if a customer
 tion. Keep the information; you may reword or reorga-                    is requesting a refund of funds applied to their
 nize it. If the original is not clear, you may need to add               account a front and back copy of the check must
 information to write a clear revision.                                   be submitted if the transaction is over $500.00. For
                                                                              example, if the customer is requesting $250.00 back,
 1. There are many different topics that you will read
                                                                              and the total amount of the transaction is $750.00, a
      about on a monthly basis once you subscribe to Inc.
                                                                              front and back copy of the check will be needed to
 2. With the new organic fertilizer, you'll see an                            obtain the refund.
      increase in the quality of your tomatoes and the
      number grown.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




150                               Part 2   The Communication Process


4.    The county will benefit from implementing flextime.          by, There is a seasonality factor in the workload, with
      = Offices will stay open longer for more business.               the heaviest being immediately prior to quarterly
                                                                       due dates for estimated tax payments.
      = Staff turnover will be lower.
      = Easier business communication with states in
         other time zones.
      = Increased employee productivity.




5.16       Practicing Plain Language

Working with a partner, create three sentences that fea-           ™   Sentence 3: words with multiple denotations or
ture problematic elements that mask meaning.                           connotations
= Sentence 1: wordiness and/or euphemisms                          Then exchange your sentences with another team and
                                                                   rewrite their sentences into plain language.
= Sentence 2: jargon from your field of study




5.17       Using Topic Sentences

Make each of the following paragraphs more readable                    cover this early in the meeting since it may affect
by opening each paragraph with a topic sentence. You                   our hiring preferences. Finally, we need to announce
may be able to find a topic sentence in the paragraph and              the deadlines for grant proposals, decide which
move it to the beginning. In other cases, you'll need to               grants to apply for, and set up a committee to draft
write a new sentence.                                                  each proposal.
1. At Disney World, a lunch put on an expense account                  Separate materials that can be recycled from your
    is “on the mouse.” McDonald’s employees “have                      regular trash. Pass along old clothing, toys, or
    ketchup in their veins.” Business slang flourishes                 appliances to someone else who can use them.
    at companies with rich corporate cultures. Memos                   When you purchase products, choose those with
      at Procter & Gamble are called “reco’s”    because the           minimal packaging. If you have a yard, put your
      model P&G memo begins with a recommendation.                     yard waste and kitchen scraps (excluding meat and
2.    The first item on the agenda is the hiring for the               fat) in a compost pile. You can reduce the amount
      coming year. George has also asked that we review                of solid waste your household produces in four
      the agency goals for the next fiscal year. We should             ways.




5.18        Revising Paragraphs

Revise each paragraph to make it easier to read. Change,               One service is investments. General financial news
rearrange, or delete words and sentences; add any mate-                and alerts about companies in the customer’s portfo-
rial necessary.                                                        lio are available. Quicken also provides assistance in
a. Once a new employee is hired, each one has to be                    finding the best mortgage rate and in providing assis-
     trained for a week by one of our supervisors at a cost            tance in making the decision whether to refinance a
     of $1,000 each which includes the supervisor’s time.              mortgage. Another service from Quicken is advice
     This amount also includes half of the new employee’s              for the start and management of a small business.
     salary, since new hires produce only half the normal              Banking services, such as paying bills and applying
     production per worker for the week. This summer                    for loans, have long been available to Quicken sub-
     $24,000 was spent in training 24 new employees.                    scribers. The taxpayer can be walked through the tax
     Absenteeism increased in the department on the                     preparation process by Quicken. Someone consider-
     hottest summer days. For every day each worker                     ing retirement can use Quicken to ascertain whether
      is absent we lose $200 in lost production. This past              the amount being set aside for this purpose is suf-
      summer there was a total of 56 absentee days taken                ficient. Quicken’s website provides seven services.
      for a total loss of $11,200 in lost production. Turnover
      and absenteeism were the causes of an unnecessary
      expenditure of over $35,000 this summer.
                                                                 Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter5    Planning, Composing, and Revising                                            151


5.19       Revising, Editing, and Proofreading a Letter

Dana Shomacher, an enthusiastic new hire of six months                a food drive for Coastal Food Pantry. Revise, edit, and
at Bear Foods, wants Stan Smith, regional head of HR at               proof her memo.
the grocery chain, to allow her to organize and publicize

                       Hey Stan,

                       | have this great idea for great publicity for Bear Foods that won’t cost anything and
                       will get us some really great publicity. Its something great we can do for our commu-
                       nity. |wont Bear to conduct a food drive for Coastal Food Pantry. Their was an article
                       in the Tribune about how they were having trouble keeping up with food requests
                       and | thought what a great fit it would be for Bear.

                       All our employees should donate food and we should also get our customer to
                       donate also. We could set out some shopping carts for the donations. | could write an
                       announcement for the Tribune and get some postures made for our front windows.

                       | am willing to take care of all details so you won't have to do anything except say
                       yes to this memo.

                       Dana

After you have fixed Dana’s memo, answer these ques-                      contributes to Coastal, how should that fact change
tions in a memo to your instructor.                                       the content of Dana’s memo?
= What revisions did you make? Why?                                   = What edits did you make? Why?
™ Many grocery stores already contribute to local food                = What impression do you think this letter made on
    pantries. In addition to some staples, they provide                   the head of human resources? Explain. Do you think
    items such as bakery goods that are past their sale                   he granted Dana’s request? Why or why not?
    date but still quite tasty, sacks for bagging groceries           Submit both your version of Dana’s memo and your
    at the pantry, and even shopping carts to transport               analysis memo.
    groceries to the cars of pantry clients. If Bear already


5.20        Writing Paragraphs

As your instructor directs, write a paragraph on one or             — e._-—«*Write a profile of someone who is successful in the
more of the following topics.                                              field you hope to enter.
a. Discuss your ideal job.
             :              ‘             :          :                 As your instructor directs,               c        t           d        ilel
b.     Summarize a recent article from a business magazine                           1      ‘
                                                                       a.     Labe       topic   sentences,   active   voice,   and       paralle
       or newspaper.
                                                                              structure.
 c.    Explain how technology is affecting the field you               b.     Edit a classmate’s paragraphs to make the writing
       plan to enter.                                                         even tighter and smoother.
d.     Explain why you have or have not decided to work
       while you attend college.


 5.21.      Identifying Buzzwords and Jargon
 This is an actual press release published in the Des Moines Register with an article on buzzwords.

                   Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., the largest private employer with more than 1.8 million employ-
                   ees and the largest corporate mover of people, selected Capital Relocation Services
                   as the sole source provider for the implementation of its Tier Ill and Tier IV reloca-
                   tion programs. These two programs account for the vast majority of the company’s
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




152                               Part2   The Communication Process



                     relocations. Capital was awarded the business following an intensive RFP and due
                     diligence process.
                          “We're very excited about the synergy that Wal-Mart’s selection of Capital
                     brings to both companies,” commented Mickey Williams, Capital’s CEO. “We are
                     also pleased to welcome to Capital the existing Wal-Mart PMP Relocation team that
                     has been on-site at Wal-Mart’s Bentonville headquarters for 14 years. They will con-
                     tinue to serve Wal-Mart and Sam’s Club’s Associates and will have an active role in
                     the implementation of the new policy.”
                          “What really enabled us to stand out was our focus on the strategic results
                     Wal-Mart was looking for, and connecting that to their relocation program,” added
                     Williams. “Additionally, we demonstrated what would need to be done to achieve
                     those results.”
                          Mr. Williams continued, “Several years ago, we realized that traditional reloca-
                     tion solutions weren’t enough. The challenge was that relocation management had
                     become a logistics focused straightjacket. The emphasis was on efficiency and not
                     on effectiveness. In a time of unprecedented change, relocation management pro-
                     grams were becoming increasingly inflexible.”
                          “We realized that our continued success required us to stop thinking of our-
                     selves solely as a relocation management company—we had to start thinking and
                     acting as a talent management support company; after all that is the underlying pur-
                     pose of relocation management in the first place. Wal-Mart’s selection of Capital is a
                     big confirmation that our approach is the right one.”

      Now answer these questions:                                      4. What is the purpose of this press release? Does
       1. What is this press release about? What is it                     it meet its purpose? Why or why not?
          saying?                                                 Write a memo to your instructor evaluating the press
       2. Why did Capital Relocation Services get the             release as an effective document.
          new contract?                                           Source: Larry Ballard, “Decipher a Honcho’s Buzzwords, Such
       3. Underline the buzzwords and jargon in the press         as ‘Unsiloing,’” Des Moines Register, January 21, 2008, 1D
          release. What do these words do in the press
          release?




5.22        Checking Spelling and Grammar Checkers

Each of the following paragraphs contains errors in                     clients feel that she could be more tactful in suggest-
grammar, spelling, and punctuation. Which errors does                   ing ways that the clients accounting practices courld
your spelling or grammar checker catch? Which errors                    be improved.
does it miss? Does it flag as errors any words that are            c.   Brochure
correct?                                                                Are you finding that being your own boss crates it’s
a.     Answer to an Inquiry                                             own problems? Take the hassle out of working at
       Enclosed are the tow copies you requested of our                 home with a VoiceMail Answering System. Its almost
       pamphlet, “Using the Internet to market Your prod-               as good as having your own secratery.
       ucts. The pamphelt walks you through the steps of          d.        Presentation Slide
       planning the Home Page (The first page of the web
       cite, shows examples of other web pages we have            How to Create         a Web Résumé
       designed, and provide a questionaire that you can
       use to analyze audience the audience and purposes.”              Omit home adress and phone number
       Performance Appraisal                                            Use other links only if they help an employer evalu-
                                                                        ate you.
       Most staff accountants complete three audits a
       month. Ellen has completed 21 audits in this past six            =      Be Professional.
       months she is our most productive staff accountant.              =      Carefully craft and proof read the phrase on the
       Her technical skills our very good however some                         index apage.
                                                               Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition

                                                                                                                                !




                                                 Chapter5   Planning, Composing, and Revising                                   153


25           Revising Documents using “Track Changes”

“Track Changes” is a feature in some word processors               =        Look for accurate, appropriate, and ethical wording
that records alterations made to a document. It is particu-                 as well as instances of unnecessary jargon.
larly useful when you are collaborating with a colleague           =        Look for active voice and concise prose.
to create,    edit, or revise   documents.   Track   Changes        =       Look for structural issues like topic sentences,
will highlight any text that has been added or deleted                      tightly written paragraphs, varied sentence structure
to your document but it also allows you to decide, for                      and length, and focus upon the thesis statement.
each change, whether to accept the suggestion or reject                     Suggest where sentences can be combined or where
it and return to your original text. In addition to Track                   sentences need parallel structure.
Changes, many word processors include a comment fea-                =       Look for you-attitude.
ture that allows you to ask questions or make sugges-               =       Ask questions (using comments) when the text isn’t
tions without altering the text itself.                                 clear or make suggestions to tighten the writing or
    For this exercise, you will electronically exchange a               improve word choices.
document with one of your classmates. With the Track                Return the document to its author and open yours to
Changes feature turned on, you will review each other’s
                                                                    review the changes and comments your partner added
documents, make comments or ask questions, insert addi-
                                                                    to your document. For each change, decide whether to
tions, and make deletions to improve the writing, and then
                                                                    Accept or Reject the suggestion.
revise your work based upon the changes and comments.                  Continue to revise the document. Then submit a copy
    As your instructor directs, select the electronic file of
                                                                    of your original version and the revised version to your
the document you created for exercise 5.20 “Writing Para-
graphs” or another document that you have created for               instructor.
this class. Exchange this file with your peer review part-
ner. Open your partner’s file and select Track Changes.
Review the document and make suggestions that will
help your peer improve the writing. For instance, you can

5.24         Using the SEC's A Plain English Handbook
Go the Securities and Exchange Commission’s A                       changes have been made? What are examples of each
Plain English Handbook, at http://www.sec.gov/pdf/                  kind? Can you understand the revised version? Did you
handbook.pdf. Scroll down to Appendix B and look                    understand the original version?
at the four before and after examples. What kinds of

5.25         Investigating the Plain Language Act in Federal Agencies

Look at some of the plain language guidelines for some of                   the class, explaining the changes in the improved
the agencies listed on the PlainLanguage.gov site, at http://               message.
www plainlanguage.gov/plLaw /fedGovt/index.cfm.                         =   You might want to look at the humorous but true
= Work in small groups, with each group checking                             nine easy steps to making a sentence unreadable,
    the adaptations of a different agency. Report back to                    found at http://www.plainlanguage.gov /test
    the class. As a class, discuss how different agencies                    Examples /indexExample.cfm?record=6&search=
    adapt the act to their focus.                                            humor.
=    Inyour groups, also look at some of the before and
     after examples. Share a particularly good one with

 5.26        Valuing drafts

 Suppose your state has an open records law, a law that                 Hints:
 gives citizens broad access to records of communications               1. Why do you think the new legislation is being
 made by public officials, including records reflecting the                proposed?
 development of various decisions and laws. Now sup-                    2. What isa draft? Do you want to see brainstorming
 pose your state legislature is considering legislation that               notes of Senator Doe? Suppose in your state a law
 would enable government officials to keep drafts secret.                  is a draft until it has been signed by the governor.
 Are you for or against the new legislation?                               Would that fact modify your opinion?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




154                              Part2   The Communication Process

3. Can you think of criteria that would exclude some                  public impact. Now are you for or against the new
   but not all drafts?                                                legislation?
4. Where in the process do you think most of the sig-
      nificant changes are made in policy? Early? Late?          As your instructor directs,
   Somewhere in-between?                                         a.   Discuss your opinions in small groups.
5. When does it become hard to change a policy?                  b.   Asa group present your opinions to the class.
6. Suppose the policy could also be applied to drafts            c.   Post your opinions online for your classmates to
   of corporate officials who set company policies with               read.
                                                2
Business and Administrative Co iS iS SaCc a oO‘= f= = o ~ < w me}— xO i=
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




CHAPTER

                                    12
Building Résumés

Chapter Outline
A Time Line for Job Hunting                        Education      -
                                                   Honors and Awards
Evaluating Your Strengths and Interests
                                                   Experience
Using the Internet in Your Job Search              Other Skills
sevoleelmiclarel lars]                             Activities
                                              B®   Portfolio
Networking
                                            References
A Caution about Blogs, Social Networking
Sites, and Internet Tracking                What Not to Include in a Résumé

Using an Internship as a Job Hunting Tool   Dealing with Difficulties
How Employers Use Résumés                     @    “| Don’t Have Any Experience.”
                                              @    "All My Experience Is in My Family's
Guidelines for Résumés
                                                   Business.”
   ® Length                                   @  “| Want to Change Fields.”
     Emphasis                                 @  “I’ve Been Out of the Job Market for a
     Details                                     While.”
     Writing Style                             @ “| Was Laid Off.”
     Key Words                                 @ “| Was Fired.”
   ® Layout and Design
                                            Electronic Résumés
Kinds of Résumés
                                               B® Sending Your Résumé Electronically
What to Include in a Résumé                    ®   Posting Your Résumé on the Web
   ® Name and Contact Information           Honesty
   ® Career Objective
                                            Summary of Key Points
   ® Summary of Qualifications
                                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




NEWSWORTHY                        COMMUNICATION

Changing Channels




          hannels for job documents are changing _affinities—you can join to help you make connections.
          so rapidly that newspapers and business You can attach your résumé, pack your profile with
          magazines are running articles on the sub- _key words that make you easy to find, connect to your
ject. In 2010, Fortune ran an                                                   blog and Twitter account, and

eight-page story on LinkedIn,                                                   US Se              ee ae eae
                                      “Fortune says that LinkedIn is the
“How LinkedIn Will Fire Up                     es                               on your work (and approve all
                                      only social site that matters for            x           scelegs
                                                                                comments before they appear
Your Career.” Calling it Face-
book for grownups, Fortune SAMA ek                                              on your profile).
pavtoatlinkedinisdheonly.. 9                | 0                 pe ig              Your profile will be in good
social site that matters for careers.                       company. The average member is college-educated
    The numbers for LinkedIn are impressive. The and makes $107,000. Every Fortune 500 company is
site has over 60 million profiles and more than a half                          represented.
million groups—based on companies, schools, and                                    You do have your profile there, right?

Source: Jessi Hempel, “How LinkedIn Will Fire Up Your Career,” Fortune, April 2010, 74-82.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




368                    Part4   The Job Hunt


                       Learning Objectives
                       After studying this chapter, you will know how to

                                     Prepare a detailed time line for your job search.

                                     Prepare a résumé that makes you look attractive to employers.
                                     Deal with common difficulties that arise during job searches.
                                     Handle the online portion ofjob searches.
                                     Keep your résumé honest.



                       You will probably change jobs many times during your career. Although no
                       longitudinal study has ever been completed, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statis-
                       tics has started one, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. It shows that
                       the average person born in the latter years of the baby boom held an aver-
                       age of 11 jobs from age 18 to age 44. In fact, 25% of them have held 15 jobs or
                       more. Even in middle age, when job changing slows down, 68% of jobs ended
                       in fewer than five years. This means that you should keep your résumé up
                       to date.
                           A résumé is a persuasive summary of your qualifications for a job with a
                       specific employer. If you’re on the job market, having a résumé is a basic step
                       in the job hunt. When you’re employed, having an up-to-date résumé makes
                       it easier to take advantage of opportunities that may come up for even better
                       jobs. If you’re several years away from job hunting, preparing a résumé now
                       will help you become more conscious of what to do in the next two or three
                       years to make yourself an attractive candidate.
                           This chapter covers paper and electronic résumés. Job application letters
                       (sometimes called cover letters) are discussed in Chapter 13. Chapter 14 dis-
                       cusses interviews and communications after the interview. All three chapters
                       focus on job hunting in the United States. Conventions, expectations, and cri-
                       teria differ from culture to culture: different norms apply in different countries.
                           All job communications should be tailored to your unique qualifications and
                       the specifications of the job you want. Adopt the wording or layout of an example
                       if it’s relevant to your own situation, but don’t be locked into the forms in this
                       book. You've got different strengths; your résumé will be different, too.


                       A TIME LINE FOR JOB HUNTING [kre]
                       Many employers consider the way you do your job hunt to be evidence of the
                       way you will work for them. Therefore, you should start preparing yourself
                       several years ahead of your formal applications.
                          Informal preparation for job hunting should start soon after you arrive
                       on campus. Check out the services of your college placement and advising
                       offices. Join extracurricular organizations on campus and in the community to
                       increase your knowledge and provide a network for learning about jobs. Find
                       a job that gives you experience. Note which courses you like—and why you
                       like them. If you like thinking and learning about a subject, you're more likely
                       to enjoy a job in that field. Select course projects and paper topics that will
                       help you prepare for a job—and look good on your résumé.
                          Once you have selected a major, start reading job ads, particularly those
                       posted on your professional organization’s website. What kinds of jobs are
                                                      Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                         Chapter12   Building Résumés                                      369


available? Do you need to change your course selections to better fit them?                          What Employers
                                                                                                     Want, |
What kinds of extras are employers seeking? Do they want communication
skills? Extra statistics courses? International experience? Learn this informa-                     You can increase your
tion early while you still have time to add to the knowledge and skill sets you                     odds of getting an
are acquiring. Attend job seminars and job fairs. Join your professional asso-           interview by understanding what
                                                                                         hiring managers are thinking
ciation and its listserv.
   Formal preparation for job hunting should begin a full year before you begin
                                                                                         while they evaluate your résumé.
                                                                                         The following are questions man-
interviewing. Enroll for the services of your campus placement office. Ask friends       agers ask themselves:
who are on the job market about their experiences in interviews; find out what
kinds of job offers they get. Check into the possibility of getting an internship or     Can this applicant fill the needs

a co-op job that will give you relevant experience before you interview.                 of the company? Your résumé
                                                                                         should stress all of your most rel-
   The year you interview, register with your Placement Office early. An active
                                                                                         evant skills and experience which
job search takes significant chunks of time, so plan accordingly. If you plan to         match the position opening. Rather
graduate in the spring, prepare your résumé and plan your interview strategy             than submitting a generic résumé
early in the fall. Initial campus interviews occur from October to February for          for every position you apply for, cre-
May or June graduation. In January or February, write to any organization                ate a customized résumé based on
you'd like to work for that hasn’t interviewed on campus. From February to               your review of the job opening.
April, you're likely to visit one or more offices for a second interview.                Will this applicant stay with the
   Try to have a job offer lined up before you get the degree. People who don’t          company long term? Managers
need jobs immediately are more confident in interviews and usually get better            seek employees who are most
job offers. If you have to job-hunt after graduation, plan to spend at least 30          likely to stay with a company long
hours a week on your job search. The time will pay off in a better job that you           term because the hiring process is
find more quickly.                                                                        long, difficult, and costly. The cost
                                                                                          of replacing an employee averages
                                                                                          $13,355    according    to a study
EVALUATING YOUR STRENGTHS AND INTERESTS                                                   conducted by the Employment
                                                                                          Policy Foundation. To avoid costly
A self-assessment is the first step in producing a good résumé. Each person               turnover, managers look at your
could do several jobs happily. Richard Bolles, a nationally recognized expert             résumé to see if you have a stable
in career advising for over a third of a century and author of the What Color             work history.
Is Your Parachute books, says most people who don’t find a job they like fail             Will this applicant be profes-
because they lack information about themselves.” Personality and aptitude                 sional? Your résumé represents
tests can tell you some of your strengths, but you should still answer for your-          your ability to communicate. Unfor-
self questions like these:                                                                tunately, managers will eliminate
                                                                                          résumés for the slightest problems
  =   Whatskills and strengths do you have?                                               since they may receive hundreds
                                                                                          of résumés for one position. Make
  =   What achievements have given you the most satisfaction? Why did you                 sure your résumé is easy to fol-
      enjoy them? What jobs would offer these kinds of satisfactions?                     low and does not contain typos or
  =   What work conditions do you like? Would you rather have firm dead-                  grammatical mistakes.
      lines or a flexible schedule? Do you prefer working independently or
      with other people? Do you prefer specific instructions and standards for
                                                                                          Adapted from Robert Half Interna-
                                                                                          tional, “What Employers Think When
      evaluation or freedom and uncertainty? How comfortable are you with                 They Read Your Résumé,” Career-
      pressure? How much challenge do you want?                                           Builder, September, 23, 2008, http://
                                                                                          www.careerbuilder.com/Article/
  =   What kind of work/life balance do you want? Are you willing to take                 CB-427-Resumes-Cover-Letters-
      work home? To work weekends? To travel? How important is money to                   What-Employers-Think-When-They-

      you? Prestige? Time to spend with family and friends?
                                                                                          Read-Your-R%C3%A9sUM%C3%AI/.


  =   How fast do you want to move up? Are you willing to pay your dues for
      several years before you are promoted?
  =   Where do you want to live? What features in terms of weather, geogra-
      phy, cultural and social life do you see as ideal?
  =    Isit important to you that your work achieve certain purposes or values,
       or do you see work as just a way to make a living? Are an organization’s
       culture and ethical standards important to you? If so, what values will
       you look for?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




370                                           Part4   The Job Hunt


                 What Employers                  Once you know what is most important to you, check to see what businesses
                 Want, Il                     are looking for (see Figure 12.4). Then analyze the job market to see where you
                 Careerbuilder.com            could find what you want. Each possibility will require somewhat different
            asked hiring manag-               training and course selection, underscoring the need for you to begin consider-
ers what the top five attributes are          ing your job search process early in your college career.
when they hire new graduates.
 HE Relevant experience: Man-
    agers look for a candidate's
                                              USING THE INTERNET IN YOUR JOB SEARCH
      ability to make his/her job             The Internet is a crucial tool for job seekers as well as employers.
      experience relevant to the                 Probably the most common use of the Internet for job candidates is to search
      company— and find this abil-
                                              for openings (see Figure 12.1). In addition to popular job boards like Monster
      ity lacking. Most managers
                                              and CareerBuilder job candidates typically search for jobs posted on organiza-
      say they view volunteer activi-
                                              tions’ Facebook pages, LinkedIn sites, and Twitter (TwitJobSearch.com). They
      ties as relevant experience.
                                              also check electronic listings in local newspapers and professional societies.
  . Professionalism during the
                                              However, you do need to be careful when responding to online ads. Some
    interview: Managers want
                                              of them turn out to be pitches from career or financial services firms, or even
    to see candidates who dress
    professionally, who have
                                              phishing ads—ploys from identity thieves seeking your personal information.
    researched the company, and                  Phishing ads often look like real postings; many have company names and
      who are prepared to answer              logos nearly identical to those of real employers. People behind phishing ads
      standard interview questions.           may even e-mail job candidates to build up trust. Privacy experts caution job
  . Fit within the company
                                              candidates to be particularly careful with job postings that lack details about
      culture: Managers want can-             the hiring company or job description, and ads that list a large salary range.°
      didates whose personalities                In addition to searching for ads, every job candidate should check the Inter-
      and work styles fit well.               net for information about writing résumés and application letters, researching
  . Education: Managers con-
                                              specific companies and jobs, and preparing for interviews. Many comprehen-
    sider the school, degree,                 sive sites give detailed information that will help you produce more effective
      major, GPA, and relevant                documents and be a better-prepared job candidate.
      courses.                                   As you search the Web, remember that not all sites are current and accurate.
  . Enthusiasm: Managers want
                                              In particular, be careful of .com sites: some are good, others are not. Check your
    candidates who are clearly                school’s career site for help. Check the sites of other schools: Stanford, Berkeley,
    interested in the job and                 and Columbia have particularly excellent career sites. And even good sources
    show the energy they would                can have advice that is bad for you. Figure 12.2 lists some of the best sites.
    bring to their work.                         A relatively new use of the Internet for job searchers is online job fairs. At
                                              online fairs, you can browse through virtual booths, leave your résumé at
Adapted from Laura Morsch, “Five
                                              promising ones, and sometimes even apply on the spot, all without leaving
Must-Haves    for New Grads,” Experience,
Inc. , accessed April 3, 2011, http:/Aribe.   your home. Other advantages of online job fairs are their wide geographic and
experience.convValumnus/article?channel_      24-hour access.
id=career_management&source_
 page=additional_articles&article_id=
 article_1 156346148348.                      Figure 12.1            Job Listings on the Web


                                               America’s Job Bank                              Monster.com
                                               www.jobbankinfo.org                             www.monster.com
                                               CareerBuilder.com                               MonsterTrak
                                               www.careerbuilder.com                           http://college.monster.com
                                               Careers.org
                                               Wwww.careers.org                                Job listings from the Chicago
                                                EmploymentGuide.com                            Tribune, Detroit News, Los Angeles
                                                                                               Times, Miami Herald, Philadelphia
                                               www.employmentguide.com
                                                                                               Inquirer, San Jose Mercury News,
                                                Federal Jobs Career Central                    and other city newspaper's websites.
                                                www.fedjobs.com
                                                Indeed.com
                                                www.indeed.com
                                                   Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                       Chapter 12   Building Résumés                                     371


                                                                                                   Rebranding Yourself
Figure 12.2         Comprehensive Web Job Sites Covering the Entire
                    Job Search Process                                                             Whether you are look-
                                                                                                    ing to advance in your
  About.com (Part of New York Times      Monster.com                                                career or to change
  Company)                                                                             careers entirely, you may need to
                                           www.monster.com
                                                                                       do some personal rebranding.
     http://jobsearch.about.com          MonsterCollege
                                                                                       Rebranding is the effort you make
  Campus Career Center                     http://college.monster.com/?wtime_          to change other people’s percep-
     www.campuscareercenter.com          n=monstertrak                                 tions about who you are and what
                                         OWL (Purdue Online Writing Lab)               you do well. But it is not always an
  CareerBuilder
                                           http://owl.english.purdue.edu               easy process. Here are five tips to
     www.careerbuilder.com
                                         Quintessential Careers                        help you with your rebranding:
  Career Rookie
                                           www.quintcareers.com                        1. Set your goals. Who do you
     www.careerrookie.com                                                                 want to be? What skills will
                                         The Riley Guide
  College Central                                                                         you need to get there?
                                            www.rileyguide.com
     www.collegecentral.com                                                            2. Define your points of dif-
                                         Spherion Career Center
  College Grad Job Hunter                   www.spherion.com/corporate/ret-     -         ference. What makes you
     www.collegegrad.com                                                                  special? How can your dif-
                                            registered .jsp
                                                                                          ferences help you be noticed
  The Five O’Clock Club                  wetfeet
                                                                                          and connected with your new
     www. fiveoclockclub.com               www.wetfeet.com/undergrad                      brand?
  JobHuntersBible.com (Dick Bolles)      Vault                                         3. Develop a narrative. How
     www.jobhuntersbible.com                www.vault.com                                 do your past experiences and
ne EEEEEE EERIE EIEEENENSSESS REE!                                                        skills strengthen your new
                                                                                          career?
                                                                                       4. Reintroduce yourself. How
                                                                                          will you tell your friends and
   As you do all this research for your job hunt, you will probably begin to              co-workers about your new
find conflicting advice. When evaluating suggestions, consider the age of the             brand?
advice; what was true five years ago may not be true today, because the job             5. Prove your worth. How can

search process is changing so. Also consider your industry; general advice                 you show that you will be a

that works for most may not work for your industry. Above all, consider what               contributing member of your

advice helps you present yourself as favorably as possible.
                                                                                           new field?
                                                                                          These five steps will help you
                                                                                        on your path to a new personal
                                                                                        brand.
PERSONAL BRANDING
                                                                                        Adapted from Dorie Clark, “Reinventing
A specialized use of the Internet is for personal branding, a popular term              Your Personal Brand,” Harvard Busi-
for marketing yourself, including job searching. It covers an expectation that          ness Review, 89, no. 3 (2011): 78-81.

you will use various options, from the traditional résumé and cover letter to
social media, to market your expertise. According to one recent survey, 83%
of employers use social media to find new employees. Of those, 89% use
LinkedIn, 28% use Facebook, and 14% use Twitter.* As has always been true
of job searches, you will use these tools to show your value (what do you offer
employers?) and quality (why should they hire you instead of other candi-
dates?). These are some of the most popular tools:

 = LinkedIn: This site allows you to include useful information beyond
   your résumé, and, unlike your web page, it has a powerful search engine
   behind it.
 = Personal web page: Your web page allows you to connect to examples
   of your professional work.
 = Blogs: A blog in particular can contribute to your professional image if
   it focuses on your professional specialty and current issues in your field.
   However, keeping a blog up to date is time-consuming work during an
   already stressful period.
  PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                                   Part4    The Job Hunt


                        Digital Dirt
                                                    m      Facebook: Keep content professional. Avoid inappropriate language
                        Do you wonder if your
                                                           and all content involving alcohol, other drugs, and incomplete attire.
            -%          employer can find out
                        if you committed a
                                                           Remember that Facebook has a history of making personal information
                        crime,   experienced               public.
  financial difficulties, really attended           =      Twitter: Share useful information such as thoughtful comments about
  college, or received a driving ticket?                   news in your field as you work to build up your Twitter network. Aim
  According to a survey of executive                       for quality, not numbers. Also, follow companies you would like to work
  recruiters by ExecuNet, an execu-                        for.
  tive job-search and networking
                                                    =      Professional forums: Participate thoughtfully: doing so enables peo-
  organization, 75% of recruiters use
  search engines to uncover informa-
                                                           ple to recognize your name favorably when your application arrives.
  tion about job candidates.                        =      Cover letter: Still an excellent tool for personal branding. It gives you
    Prospective employers can use                          more room to provide supporting details about your value and quality.
  employment screening services to
  obtain records from private, state
  and federal agencies. Employers
  also check social networking sites                            WARNING:          Select your tools carefully; you probably do not have time to
  such as Facebook, and Google                                  use successfully all the tools on this list. Stay professional in all venues; avoid
  names to find blogs and personal                      negative comments about people, your school, and your employers. In addition to
  websites.                                             content, writing (grammar, coherence, style, logic, spelling) will be judged by potential
    Remember that nothing on the                        employers. The list of candidates rejected after a basic web search grows daily.
  Web is private. Do not post or
  write anything on the Internet that
  you do not want a prospective
  employer to see—starting today.
    How can you clean up your
                                                   NETWORKING
  reputation online?                               Many experts now consider networking to be THE most important factor in
  =   Google yourself. If you find                 finding a job. It is important for entry-level work, and becomes even more cru-
      something you would rather                   cial as you advance in your career.
      your prospective employer                        Networking starts with people you know—friends, family, friends of your
      did not see, contact the                     parents, classmates, teammates, gym mates, colleagues—and quickly expands
      website and ask for it to be
                                                   to electronic contacts in the social media noted above. Let people know you
      removed.
                                                   are looking for a job, and what your job assets are. Use social media to empha-
  =   Clean up your Facebook or
                                                   size your field knowledge and accomplishments. Join your school’s alumni
      personal website. Remove
                                                   association to find alumni in businesses that interest you.
      any pictures that may not
      present a professional image
                                                       The secret to successful networking is reciprocity. Too many people network
      or may be misunderstood by                   just for themselves, and they quickly gain a “one-way” reputation that hurts
      an outsider, especially pic-                 further networking. Good networkers work for a “two-way” reputation; to
      tures showing you drinking or                earn it, they look for ways to reciprocate. They help their contacts make fruit-
      dressed inappropriately.                     ful connections. They share useful information and tips. Successful networks
_ &   Cover negative information                   are not just for finding jobs: they are vital for career success.
      by increasing your positive
      online presence, including
      creating a professional web                  A CAUTION ABOUT BLOGS, SOCIAL
      page with many links to your
      accomplishments.
                                                   NETWORKING SITES, AND INTERNET TRACKING
                                                   Most employers routinely Google job candidates, and many report they are
  Adapted        from    Jared   Flesher,   “How
  to Clean up Your Digital Dirt before It
                                                   totally turned off by what they find—especially on personal blogs and web
  Trashes Your Job Search,” Wall Street            pages and social networking sites such as Facebook. If you have a personal
  Journal, January 12, 2006, http://online.        blog, web page, or other electronic presence, check sites carefully before you
  wsj.com/article/C601 12FLESHER. html.
                                                   go on the job market.

                                                    =      Remove any unprofessional material such as pictures of you at your
                                                           computer with a beer in your hand or descriptions of your last party.
                                                    =      Remove negative comments about current or past employers and teach-
                                                           ers. People who spread dirt in one context will probably do so in others,
                                                           and no one wants to hire such people.
                                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                                 Chapter12       Building Résumés                       373



=     Remove political and social rants. While thoughtful, supported opinions
      can show both education and logic, emotional or extreme statements
   will turn off most employers.
 = Remove any personal information that will embarrass you on the job. If
   you blog about romance novels, but don’t want to be teased about your
   choice in literature on your new job, make ruthless cuts on your blog.
 m Remove inappropriate material posted by friends, relatives, and
   colleagues.
 = Check your blog for writing aptitude. Many employers will consider
   your blog an extended writing sample. If yours is full of grammatical
   and spelling errors, obviously you are not a good writer.

Even if you take your blog off-line while you are job searching, employers
may still find it in cached data on search engines. The best advice is to plan
ahead and post nothing unprofessional on the web.


             WARNING:            According to a 2010 report on research commissioned by Micro-
            soft, a quarter or more of recruiters also check photo- and video-sharing sites,
     gaming sites, virtual world sites, and classifieds and auction sites such as Craigslist,
     Amazon, and eBay.°



USING AN INTERNSHIP AS A JOB HUNTING TOOL
Internships are becoming increasingly important as ways to find out about
professions, employers, and jobs. Many companies use their internships to find
full-time employees. GE, for example, makes about 80% of its new-graduate
hires from students who held summer internships with the company; in 2010
PricewaterhouseCoopers offered a full-time job to 90% of its eligible summer
interns. A Wall Street Journal survey of college recuriters found 25% reporting
that more than 50% of their new-graduate hires came from their intern pools.
The National Association of Colleges and Employers found in its 2010 survey
of internships that 57% of interns became full-time hires (see Figure 12.3)5In
fact, some industry experts are predicting that within the next few years intern
recruiting will largely replace entry-level recruiting.°


Figure 12.3                 Percentage of Interns Offered Full-Time Jobs


    Entertainment/media                                                                                 85
    Oil and gas extraction                                                                              81

    Construction                                                                                        80

    Accounting                                                                                          19

    Food and beverage                                                                                   71

    Retail                                                                                              70
    Finance/insurance/real estate                                                                       67

    Engineering                                                                                         67

    Computer and electronics              .                                                             64

    Chemical/pharmaceutical                                                                         ,   61
 EL
                                                                                    June 8, 2010, D7.
 Source: Joe Walker, “Getting Creative to Land an Internship,” Wall Street Journal,
 PROFESSIONAL WRITING




374                     Part4    The Job Hunt


                           Even if your internship does not lead to a full-time job, it can still give you
                        valuable insight into the profession, as well as contacts you can use in your job
                        search. An increasingly important side benefit is the work you do in your intern-
                        ship, which can become some of the best items in your professional portfolio.


                        HOW EMPLOYERS USE RESUMES
                        Understanding how employers use résumés will help you create a résumé
                        that works for you.
                        1. Employers use résumés to decide whom to interview. See Figure 12.4.
                           (The major exceptions are on-campus interviews, where the campus place-
                           ment office has policies that determine who meets with the interviewer.)
                           Since résumés are used to screen out applicants, omit anything that may
                           create a negative impression.
                        2. Résumés are scanned or skimmed. At many companies, résumés are
                             scanned electronically. Only résumés that match key words are skimmed
                             by a human being. A human may give a résumé 10 to 30 seconds before
                             deciding to keep or toss it. You must design your résumé to pass both the
                             “scan test” and the “skim test” by emphasizing crucial qualifications.
                        3. Employers assume that your letter and résumé represent your best work.
                           Neatness, accuracy, and freedom from typographical errors are essential.
                           Spelling errors will probably cost you your chance at a job, so proofread
                           carefully.
                        4. After an employer has chosen an applicant, he or she submits the applicant's
                           résumé to people in the organization who must approve the appointment.
                           These people may have different backgrounds and areas of expertise. Spell out
                           acronyms. Explain awards, Greek-letter honor societies, unusual job titles, or
                             organizations that may be unfamiliar to the reader.



                        Figure 12.4                Employers Want Colleges to Place More Emphasis
                                                   on These Skills


                          Effective communication, both oral and written                                                          89
                          Critical thinking and analytical reasoning                                                              81
                          Application of knowledge to the work world, through internships                                         79
                             and other hands-on experiences
                          Ability to analyze and solve complex problems                                                           UD)
                          Teamwork                                                                                                fas
                          Innovation and creativity                                                                               70
                          Understanding of basic concepts and new developments in science                                         70
                            and technology
                          Ability to locate, organize, and evaluate information from multiple                                     68
                             sources
                          Understanding of global contexts and developments                                                       67
                          Ability to work with numbers and understand statistics                                                  63

                        Source: Hart Research Associates, Raising the Bar: Employers’ Views on College Learning in the Wake of the Economic
                        Downturn: A Survey among Employers Conducted on Behalf of the Association of American Colleges and Universities,
                        January 20, 2010, http://www.aacu.org/leap/documents/2009_EmployerSurvey.pdf.
                                                     Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                        Chapter12   Building Résumés                                         375



GUIDELINES FOR RESUMES                                                                 cee
                                                                                            \        Increasing
                                                                                                     §=6©6-EXpectations
Writing a résumé is not an exact science. What makes your friend look good             ill WES       for Employees
does not necessarily help you. If your skills are in great demand, you can vio-                      A survey conducted for
late every guideline here and still get a good job. But when you must compete           the Association of American Col-
against many applicants, these guidelines will help you look as good on paper           leges and Universities found that
as you are in person.                                                                   employers really are expecting more
                                                                                        of their employees. You are not just
                                                                                        imagining the change. Compared
Length                                                                                  to past expectations, 88% to 91%
                                                                                        expected employees to
A one-page résumé is sufficient, but do fill the page. Less than a full page sug-
                                                                                        =   Take on more responsibilities.
gests that you do not have very much to say for yourself.
   If you have more good material than will fit on one page, use a second page.         =   Use a broader skills set.

A common myth is that all résumés must fit on one page. According to surveys            ®   Coordinate more with other
conducted by international staffing firm Accountemps of executives at the 1,000             departments.
largest companies in this country, approval of the two-page résumé is increas-          =   Acquire more learning and
ing ifcandidates have sufficient good material that relates to the posted job.” An          skills.
experiment that mailed one- or two-page résumés to recruiters at major account-         =   Deal with more complex
ing firms showed that even readers who said they preferred short résumés were               challenges.
more likely to want to interview the candidate with the longer résumé.® The             How does your résumé              reflect
longer résumé gives managers a better picture of how you will fit in.                   these new realities?
   If you do use more than one page, the second page should have at least 10            Adapted from Hart Research Associ-
to 12 lines. Use a second sheet of paper; do not print on the back of the first         ates, Raising the Bar: Employers’ Views
page. Leave less important information for the second page. Put your name               on College Leaming in the Wake of the
                                                                                        Economic Downtum: A Survey among
and “Page 2” on the page. If the pages are separated, you want the reader to            Employers Conducted on Behaif of the
know whom the qualifications belong to and that the second page is not your             Association of American Colleges and
whole résumé.                                                                           Universities, January 20, 2010, http://
                                                                                        www.aacu.org/leap/documents/2009_
                                                                                        EmployerSurvey.pdf.

Emphasis
Emphasize the things you've done that (a) are most relevant to the position for
which you’re applying, (b) show your superiority to other applicants, and (c)
are recent (in the last three to five years). Whatever your age at the time you
write a résumé, you want to suggest that you are now the best you've ever been.
   Show that you’re qualified by giving relevant details on course projects,
activities, and jobs where you've done similar work. Be brief about low-level
jobs that simply show dependability. To prove that you're the best candidate
for the job, emphasize items that set you apart from other applicants: pro-
motions, honors, achievements, experience with computers or other relevant
equipment, foreign languages, and so on.
   You can emphasize material by putting it at the top or the bottom of a page,
by giving it more space, and by setting it off with white space. The begin-
ning and end—of a document, a page, a list—are positions of emphasis. When
you have a choice (e.g., in a list of job duties), put less important material in
the middle, not at the end, to avoid the impression of “fading out.” You can
also emphasize material by presenting it in a vertical list, by using informative
headings, and by providing details. Headings that name skills listed in the job
ad, or skills important for the job (e.g., Managerial Experience) also provide
emphasis and help set you apart from the crowd.

Details
Details provide evidence to support your claims, convince the reader, and
separate you from other applicants. Numbers make good details. Tell how
many people you trained or supervised, how much money you budgeted or
saved. Describe the interesting aspects of the job you did.
 PROFESSIONAL WRITING




376                     Part4   The Job Hunt


                           Too vague:        Sales Manager, The Daily Collegian,      University Park, PA, 2010-2012.
                                             Supervised staff; promoted ad sales.
                           Good details:     Sales Manager, The Daily Collegian, University Park, PA, 2010-2012.
                                             Supervised 22-member sales staff; helped recruit, interview, and select
                                             staff; assigned duties and scheduled work; recommended best performers
                                             for promotion. Motivated staff to increase paid ad inches 10% over previ-
                                             ous year’s sales.
                           Omit details that add nothing to a title, that are less impressive than the title
                        alone, or that suggest a faulty sense of priorities (e.g., listing hours per week
                        spent filing). Either use strong details or just give the office or job title without
                        any details.

                        Writing Style
                        Without sacrificing content, be as concise as possible.
                           Wordy:    Member, Meat Judging Team, 2008-09
                                     Member, Meat Judging Team, 2009-10
                                     Member, Meat Judging Team, 2010-11
                                     Captain, Meat Judging Team, 2011-12
                           Tight:    |Meat Judging Team, 2008-12; Captain 2011-12
                           Wordy:    Performed foundation load calculations
                           Tight:   |Calculated foundation loads

                           Résumés normally use phrases and sentence fragments. Complete sentences
                        are acceptable if they are the briefest way to present information. To save space
                        and to avoid sounding arrogant, never use I in a résumé. Me and my are accept-
                        able if they are unavoidable or if using them reduces wordiness.
                           Verbs or gerunds (the ing form of verbs) create a more dynamic image of
                        you than do nouns, so use them on résumés that will be read by people instead
                        of scanning programs. In the following revisions of job responsibilities, nouns,
                        verbs, and gerunds are in bold type:
                           Nouns:     Chair, Income Tax Assistance Committee, Winnipeg, MB, 2011-2012. Respon-
                                      sibilities: recruitment of volunteers; flyer design, writing, and distribution for
                                      promotion of program; speeches to various community groups and nursing
                                      homes to advertise the service.
                          Verbs:    — Chair, Income Tax Assistance Committee, Winnipeg, MB, 2011-2012. Recruited
                                      volunteers for the program. Designed, wrote, and distributed a flyer to pro-
                                      mote the program; spoke to various community groups and nursing homes to
                                      advertise the service.
                          Gerunds:      Chair, Income Tax Assistance Committee, Winnipeg, MB, 2011-2012. Respon-
                                        sibilities included recruiting volunteers for the program; designing, writing,
                                        and distributing a flyer to promote the program; and speaking to various com-
                                        munity groups and nursing homes to advertise the service.

                        Note that the items in the list must be in parallel structure (p. 135).


                                    WARNING:         All spelling and grammar should be perfect. If they are not your
                                      strong suits, pay an editor. In these days of massive responses to job postings,
                                      don't give recruiters an easy elimination of your résumé through careless errors.
                           Remember that spell checks will not catch all errors, as all those store “mangers”
                           will tell you.
                                                      Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                         Chapter12   Building Résumés                            377



Key Words
Now that electronic résumé scans are common, all résumés, but particularly
electronic résumés, need to use key words—words and phrases the employer
will have the computer seek. Key words are frequently nouns or noun phrases:
database management, product upgrades, cost compilation/analysis. How-
ever, they can also be adjectives such as responsible. Key words are frequently
the objects of all those action verbs you are using in your résumé; conducted
publicity campaigns, wrote weekly division newsletter.
   Key words may include

     Software program names such as Excel.
     Job titles.
     Types of degrees.
     College or company names.
     Job-specific skills, buzzwords, and jargon.
     Professional organizations (spell out the name and then follow it with its
     abbreviation in parentheses to increase the number of matches).
     Honor societies (spell out Greek letters).
     Personality traits, such as creativity, dependability, team player.
 =   Area codes (for geographic narrowing of searches).

   To find the key words you need in your job search, look through job ads and
employer job sites for common terminology. If many ads mention “communi-
cation skills,” your résumé should too.
   Some key words are widely popular. A survey of over 3,000 hirers con-
ducted for CareerBuilder reported these key words as ones searched for most
often:

     Problem-solving and decision-making skills (50%)
     Oral and written communications (44%)
     Customer service or retention (34%)
     Performance and productivity improvement (32%)
     Leadership (30%)
     Technology (27%)
     Team-building (26%)
     Project management (20%)
     Bilingual (14%)

   In addition to using popular key words, you should double-check to make
certain your résumé uses the language of the particular job ad to which you
are responding. If the ad uses “software engineers” instead of “computer pro-
grammers,” then your résumé should also use “software engineers.” If the ad
talks about “collaboration,” you will use that word instead of “teamwork”
when you discuss your group work experience.
   Use key words liberally in your Summary of Qualifications section. How-
ever, to get an interview, your résumé will usually need to put key words
into a context proving you have the skills or knowledge. This means that key
words will also have to appear in the rest of your résumé, too. Since you will
not know exactly what key words are desired, it makes sense to use some
synonyms and similar terms: manager and management, Excel and spreadsheets,
creative and creativity.
ae   PROFESSIONAL WRITING




     378                    Part4    The Job Hunt


                            Layout and Design
                            The layout and design of your résumé will be vital to catch the eye of the
                            employer who is spending only 10 seconds on each document.

                                        WARNING:        Do not use résumé templates that come with word-processing
                                        software. Many employers see so many résumés from these templates that
                                        they learn to recognize—and discount—them.


                            Almost certainly, you can create a better résumé by adapting a basic style you
                            like to your own        unique qualifications. Experiment with layout, fonts, and
                            spacing to get an attractive résumé. Consider creating a letterhead that you
                            use for both your résumé and your application letter.
                               Decide what are your best selling points and promote them early. Since
                            most résumés will be put into electronic formats (discussed later in chapter),
                            make sure the first screen of information about you is strong, tempting readers
                            to look further.
                               One of the major decisions you will make is how to treat your headings.
                            Do you want them on the left margin, with text immediately below them, as
                            in Figure 12.5? Do you want them alone in the left column, with text in a col-
                            umn to the right, as in Figure 12.7? Generally, people with more text on their
                            résumés use the first option. Putting headings in their own column on the left
                            takes space and thus helps spread a thinner list of accomplishments over the
                            page. But be careful not to make the heading column too wide, or it will make
                            your résumé look unbalanced and empty.
                               Work with fonts, bullets, and spacing to highlight your information. Do be
                            careful, however, not to make your résumé look “busy” by using too many
                            fonts. Generally three fonts should be the top limit, and you should avoid
                            unusual fonts. Keep fonts readable by using at least 10-point type for large
                            fonts such as Arial and 11-point for smaller fonts such as Times New Roman.
                            Use enough white space to group items and make your résumé easy to read,
                            but not so much that you look as if you’re padding.
                               Use color sparingly, if at all. Colored text and shaded boxes can prevent
                            accurate scanning. Similarly, white 8%- by 11-inch paper is standard, but do
                            use a good-quality paper.
                               All of these guidelines are much more flexible for people in creative fields
                            such as advertising and design.


                            KINDS OF RESUMES
                            Two basic categories of résumés are chronological and skills. A chronological
                            résumé summarizes what you did in a time line (starting with the most recent
                            events, and going backward in reverse chronology). It emphasizes degrees,
                            job titles, and dates. It is the traditional résumé format. Figures 12.5 and 12.8
                            show chronological résumés.
                              Use a chronological résumé when

                             =      Your education and experience are a logical preparation for the position
                                    for which you're applying.
                             =      You have impressive job titles, offices, or honors.

                               A skills résumé, also called a functional résumé, emphasizes the skills
                            you've used, rather than the job in which you used them or the date of the
                            experience. Figure 12.7 shows a skills résumés. Use a skills résumé when
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition    las




                                                               Chapter12   Building Résumés                             379


Figure 12.5     A Community College Chronological Résumé to Use for Career Fairs and Internships


                                                                                                          nt

                                                                                                   ee
                                                                                                   al       gizeinf0!
                                                      Lee Cheng                                Use ano
                                                          chengl@eccc.edu                       reading

               Campus Address                        using 98508                              Permanent Address
               1524 Main Street                  both adr ntinuoue                            2526 Prairie Lane
               New Brunswick, NJ 08901            ensures “formato”                           Middlesex, NJ 00846
               732-403-5718                        contact                                     732-404-7793

               Education
               East Coast Community College
               AA in Financial Management, June 2012
               GPA: 3.0/4.0 Give your grade average if
                                    it’s 3.0 or higher.
               Summary of Qualifications                                                                Sus
                                                                                          List 3-7 qualifications.
                    9    Self-motivated, detail-minded, results-oriented
    Use key words
     employers might a Consistently successful track record in sales
     seek.
                     a Effectively developed and operated entrepreneurial business

               Sales Experience
               Financial Sales Representative, ABC Inc., New Brunswick, NJ, February 2011—present
                     o Establish client base
                     a Develop investment strategy plans for clients
                     a Research and recommend specific investments

               Other Experience
                   Entrepreneur, A-Plus T-Shirt Company, Middlesex, NJ, September 2008—January 2011
     One way '0          | Created a saleable product (graphic T-shirts)
     handle              Oo Secured financial support
                   ment.
      self-employ’          Located a manufacturer
                            Supervised production
                            Sold T-shirts to high school students
                         Bo Realized a substantial profit to pay for college expenses
                         eo




               Cook, Hamburger Shack, Seaside Heights, NJ, Summers 2007-2008
                     a Learned sales strategies
                     a   Ensured customer satisfaction
                     a   Collaborated with a team of 25

                Collector and Repair Worker, ACN, Inc., Middlesex, NJ, Summer 2005-2006
                     a Collected and counted approximately $10,000 a day Specify large sums of money.
                     a Assisted technicians with troubleshooting and repairing coin mechanisms

                Other Skills
                Computer:       Word, Excel, InDesign, WordPress, Outlook
                Language:       Fluent in Spanish Many employers
                                                          appreciate a
                                                          second language.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




380                                       Part4     The Job Hunt


              What Happens to
              Your Résumé?                 =      Your education and experience are not the usual route to the position for
                                                  which you're applying.
       oi     Each year, technology
            giant Siemens Global           m      You're changing fields.
hires more than 10,000 employees           =      You want to combine experience from paid jobs, activities, volunteer
out of over 780,000 applicants.                   work, and courses to show the extent of your experience in administra-
One civil engineering position had                tion, finance, public speaking, and so on.
187 applications,     but only three
made it through to the face-to-
face interview. How does Siemens
                                             The two kinds differ in what information is included and how that informa-
find the right people? CNNMoney           tion is organized. You may assume that the advice in this chapter applies to
found four key steps:                     both kinds of résumés unless there is an explicit statement that the two kinds
1. Hire internally. Like many             of résumés would handle a category differently.
   corporations, Siemens adver-
   tises positions both internally
   and externally, but hires 40%          WHAT TO INCLUDE IN A RESUME
   of open positions from inside
   the company.
                                          Although the résumé is a factual document, its purpose is to persuade. In a
                                          job application form or an application for graduate or professional school, you
2. Use the web. Siemens posts
   jobs on Monster and Career-
                                          answer every question even if the answer is not to your credit. In a résumé, you
      Builder. Recruiters also use        cannot lie, but you can omit some information that does not work in your favor.
      LinkedIn both to eliminate             Résumés commonly contain the following information. The categories
      candidates and to recruit           marked with an asterisk are essential.
      people who may not be look-
      ing for a job.                              Name and Contact Information*
3. Use computers to scan appli-
                                                  Career Objective
      cations and find applicants
      who match job requirements.                 Summary of Qualifications
4. Conduct initial interviews by                  Education*
   phone. Only after applicants                   Honors and Awards
   pass this step can they be                     Experience*
   sent on to the hiring manager.
                                                  Other skills
  For large corporations, using
technology and recruiters to                      Activities
screen applicants is vital to find-               Portfolio
ing the right people for jobs.

Adapted     from   Tami   Luhby,   “The       You may choose other titles for these categories and add categories that are
Secret Life of a Resumé,” CNNMoney,       relevant for your qualifications, such as computer skills or foreign languages.
May 18, 2011, http://money.cnn.com/
fdcp?unique= 1305728467379.
                                              Education and Experience always stand as separate categories, even if you
                                          have only one item under each head. Combine other headings so that you
                                          have at least two long or three short items under each heading. For example,
                                          if you’re in one honor society and two social clubs, and on one athletic team,
                                          combine them all under Activities and Honors.
                                              If you have more than seven items under a heading, consider using sub-
                                          headings. For example, a student who had a great many activities might
                                          divide them into Campus Activities and Community Service.
                                              Put your strongest categories near the top and at the bottom of the first
                                          page. If you have impressive work experience, you might want to put that
                                          category first and Education second.


                                          Name and Contact Information
                                          Use your full name, even if everyone calls you by a nickname. You may use an ini-
                                          tial rather than spelling out your first or middle name. Put your name in big type.
                                              If you use only one address, consider centering it under your name. If you
                                          use two addresses (office and home, campus and permanent, until                   ye
                                          after        ) set them up side by side to balance the page visually. Use either
                                                              Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                  Chapter12   Building Résumés                                          381


                                                                                                                Résumé Blunders

                                                                                                                CareerBuilder.com’s
                                                                                                                survey of hiring manag-
                                                                                                                ers found these resumé
                                                                                                                howlers:
                                                                                                    =   Candidate listed God as a
                                                                                                        reference. (Alas, the candi-
                                                                                                        date didn’t include a phone
                                                                                                        number.)
                                                                                                    =   Candidate's e-mail address
                                                                                                        had “lovesbeer” in it.
                                                                                                    =   Candidate listed “Master of
                                                                                                        Time and Universe” under his
                                                                                                        experience.
                                                                                                    =   Candidate's condition for
                                                                                                        accepting the position was
                                                                                                        being allowed to bring his pet
                                                                                                        monkey to the workplace.
                                                                                                    =   Candidate sent a 24-page
                                                                                                        résumé for a five-year career.
                                                                                                    =   Candidate put a picture of her
           ae                      eal                                                                  cat on top of her résumé.

A résumé is your most important document at career fairs.                                           Bullets quoted from Mary Lorenz, “The
                                                                                                    Candidate Tried to Hypnotize Me!’ and
                                                                                                    More: Hiring Managers Share Their
                                                                                                    Strangest Resume Stories,” Career-
post office (two-letter, full caps, no period) abbreviations for the state or spell                 Builder: The Hiring Site, September 15,
out the state name, but do be consistent throughout your résumé.                                    2010, http://thehiringsite.careerbuilder
                                                                                                    .com/2010/09/1 5/hiring-managers-
  Urbana, IL 61801                                                                                  share-strangest-resumes/.

  Wheaton, Illinois 60187

   Give a complete phone number, including the area code. Some job candidates
give both home and cellphone numbers. Do provide a phone number where
you can be reached during the day. Employers usually call during business
hours to schedule interviews and make job offers. Do not give lab or dorm
phone numbers unless you are sure someone there will take an accurate
message for you at all times. Also, be sure that all answering machines have
a professional-sounding message.
   If you have a web page, and you are sure it looks professional (both content
and writing), you may wish to include its URL. Be sure your web page does
not reveal personal information—such as marital status, ethnicity, religious
beliefs, or political stance—that could work against you. Be particularly care-
ful of photographs.
   Provide an e-mail address. Some job candidates set up a new e-mail address
just for job hunting. Your e-mail address should look professional; avoid sexy,
childish, or illicit addresses. List your LinkedIn site, if you have one.


Career Objective
Career objective statements should sound like the job descriptions an employer
might use in a job listing. Keep your statement brief—two lines at most. Tell
what you want to do, what level of responsibility you want to hold. The best
career objectives are targeted to a specific job at a specific company.
   Ineffective career objective:   To offer a company my excellent academic foundation in hos-
                                   pital technology and my outstanding skills in oral and written
                                   communication
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




382                                       Part4   The Job Hunt


              Objectionable                  Better career objective:           Hospital and medical sales for Rand Medical requiring experi-
              Objectives                                                        ence with state-of-the-art equipment
              {These job objectives
              did not help their
                                             Good career objectives are hard to write. If you talk about entry-level work, you
              writers:]                   won't sound ambitious; if you talk about where you hope to be in 5 or 10 years,
a     "Ajob.” Any one will do.
                                          you won’t sound as though you’re willing to do entry-level work. When you're
=     "To obtain a position that
                                          applying for a job that is a natural outgrowth of your education and experience,
      will allow me to utilize my
                                          you may omit this category and specify the job you want in your cover letter.
      strengths and reinforce my              Often you can avoid writing a career objective statement by putting the job
      weaknesses.” Are you sure           title or field under your name:
      that’s a good idea?
                                             Joan Larson Ooyen                  Terence Edward Garvey            David R. Lunde
=     "To become a billionier.” A
      candidate who's not on the                       Marketing                   Technical Writer        Corporate Fitness Director
      money.
                                          Note that you can use the field you’re in even if you're a new college graduate.
=     "| am seeking a permanent
      position to get out of debt.”
                                          To use a job title, you should have some relevant work experience.
      Will we get anything out of
                                             If you use a separate heading for a career objective, put it immediately after
      the deal?                           your contact information, before the first major heading (see Figure 12.7). The
=     "To obtain a position that will
                                          résumé in Figure 12.5 does not use a Career Objective because it is being used
      enable me to utilize my pro-        for various jobs offered at a career fair. If you were particularly interested in
      fessional skills and knowledge      several jobs there, you would make targeted résumés for those companies.
      in a capacity that demon-           More and more experts are advising that objectives be clarified in the cover
      strates me intelligence.” My,       letter rather than wasting valuable space at the top of the résumé.
      oh, my.
=     "To work for XYZ Company.”
      We'll forward your résumé to        Summary of Qualifications
      them.
                                          A section summarizing the candidate’s qualifications seems to have first
=     ”My dream job would be as a
                                          appeared with scannable résumés, where its key words helped increase the
      professional baseball player,
      but since | can’t do that, |’ll
                                          number of matches a résumé produced. But the section proved useful for
      settle on being an accoun-          human readers as well and now is a standard part of many résumés. The best
      tant.” Your enthusiasm is           summaries show your knowledge of the specialized terminology of your field
      overwhelming.                       and offer specific, quantifiable achievements.
=     "To learn new skills and gain          Weak:        Staff accountant
      training which will help me
      develop my new business.”              Better:      Experience with accounts payable, accounts receivable, audits, and month end
      Your dedication is touching.                        closings. Prepared monthly financial reports.
                                             Weak:        Presentation skills
From     Robert     Half International,
“Resumania Archive,” http://www              Better:      Gave 20 individual and 7 team presentations to groups ranging from 5 to 100
.resumania.com/arcindex.html.
                                                          people.
Reprinted with permission of Robert
Half International.
                                            Some career advisers believe a summary is too repetitious of other sections
                                          on a one-page résumé. They believe the space is better used by listing your
                                          achievements that set you apart from other candidates.


                                          Education
                                          Education can be your first major category if you’ve just earned (or are about
                                          to earn) a degree, if you have a degree that is essential or desirable for the
                                          position you're seeking, or if you can present the information briefly. Put your
                                          Education section later if you need all of page 1 for another category or if you
                                          lack a degree that other applicants may have (see Figure 12.7).
                                             Under Education, provide information about your undergraduate and
                                          graduate degrees, including the location of institutions and the year you
                                          received or expect your degree, if these dates are within the last 10 years.
                                             Use the same format for all schools. List your degrees in reverse chronological
                                          order (most recent first).
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                              Chapter12   Building Résumés                            383



    Master of Accounting Science, May 2012, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
    Bachelor of Arts in Finance, May 2010, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM


    BS in Industrial Engineering, May 2012, lowa State University, Ames, IA
    AS in Business Administration, May 2010, Des Moines Area Community College,
    Ankeny, IA

     When you're getting a four-year degree, include community college only
 if it will interest employers, such as by showing an area of expertise different
 from that of your major. You may want to include your minor, emphasis, or
 concentration and any graduate courses you have taken. Include study abroad,
 even if you didn’t earn college credits. If you got a certificate for international
 study, give the name and explain the significance of the certificate. Highlight
 proficiency in foreign or computer languages by using a separate category.
     To punctuate your degrees, do not space between letters and periods:
    AS. in Office Administration
    B.S. in Accounting
    Ed.D. in Business Education
’ Current usage also permits you to omit the periods (BS, MBA), but be consis-
  tent with the usage you choose.
     Professional certifications can be listed under Education or in a separate
 category.
    If your GPA is good and you graduated recently, include it. If your GPA is
 under 3.0 ona    4.0 scale, use words rather than numbers: “B- average.” If your
 GPA isn’t impressive, calculate your average in your major and your average
 for your last 60 hours. If these are higher than your overall GPA, consider
 using them. The National Association of Colleges and Employers, in its Job
 Outlook 2010 survey, found that 75% of employers do screen job applicants by
 GPA." If you leave your GPA off your résumé, most employers will automati-
 cally assume that it is below a 3.0. If yours is, you will need to rely on intern-
 ships, work experience, and skills acquired in activities to make yourself an
 attractive job candidate.
    After giving the basic information (degree, field of study, date, school, city,
  state) about your degree, you may wish to list courses, using short descrip-
  tive titles rather than course numbers. Use a subhead like “Courses Related to
  Major” or “Courses Related to Financial Management” that will allow you to
  list all the courses (including psychology, speech, and business communica-
  tion) that will help you in the job for which you're applying. Don’t say ekel-
  evant Courses,” as that implies your other courses were irrelevant.

     Bachelor of Science in Management, May 2012, Illinois State University, Normal, IL
     GPA: 3.8/4.0 ©
     Courses Related to Management:
           Personnel Administration           Business Decision Making
           Finance                            International Business
           Management | and II                Marketing
           Accounting | and II                Legal Environment of Business
           Business Report Writing            Business Speaking

     Listing courses is an unobtrusive way to fill a page. You may also want
  to list courses or the number of hours in various subjects if you’ve taken an
  unusual combination of courses that uniquely qualify you for the position for
  which you're applying.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




384                                       Part4    The Job Hunt


             The Value of “Soft
             Skills”                           BS in Marketing, May 2012, California State University at Northridge
                                                     30 hours in marketing
             What     are   MBA    pro-
                                                     15 hours in Spanish
            grams teaching? Soft
                                                     9 hours in Chicano studies
skills—lessons in teamwork, lead-
ership, and communication. Spe-
cifically, students are working on             If your course list is similar to that of others in your major, you should use
listening, teamwork, interpersonal        the space for material that better shows your uniqueness. In that case, another
communication,        presentations,      way to fill the page is to include a Projects section, in which you highlight
and sensitivity to others. Why?           some course projects relevant to the jobs you are seeking.
Businesses are requesting MBA               As you advance in your career, your education section will shrink until
graduates with strong soft skills         finally it probably will include only your degrees and educational institutions.
because they believe these stu-
dents will be employees who can
lead, communicate, and negotiate.         Honors and Awards
  In response,      schools such as
the Stanford Graduate School of           It’s nice to have an Honors and Awards section, but not everyone can do so.
Business are requiring all first-year     If you have fewer than three and therefore cannot justify a separate heading,
students to take personality tests,       consider a heading Honors and Activities to get that important word in a posi-
participate in teamwork exercises,        tion of emphasis.
and examine their people skills.             Include the following kinds of entries in this category:
At Tuck, professors designed a
program which places students
in teams of five to work together          =      Academic honor societies. Specify the nature of Greek-letter honor soci-
throughout their program.                         eties (i.e., journalism honorary) so the reader doesn’t think they’re just
   Recruiters note that job candi-                social clubs.
dates need to present their soft
                                           =      Fellowships and scholarships, including honorary scholarships for
skills in language appropriate for
the particular job they are seeking.
                                                  which you received no money and fellowships you could not hold
                                                  because you received another fellowship at the same time.
Adapted from Phred Dvorak, “M.B.A.         =      Awards given by professional societies.
Programs Hone ‘Soft Skills," Wall
Street Journal, February 12, 2007, B3;     =      Major awards given by civic groups.
and Dana Mattioli, “Hard Sell on ‘Soft’
Skills Can Primp a Résumé: Experience
                                           =      Varsity letters; selection to all-state or all-America teams; finishes in
with Facebook, Class Project, Juggling            state, national, or Olympic meets. (These could also go under Activities
Activities Can Impress Employers,” Wail           but may look more impressive under Honors. Put them under one cat-
Street Journal, May 15, 2007, B6.
                                                  egory or the other—not both.)


                                              Identify honor societies (“national journalism honorary,” WM “campus honor-
                                          ary for top 2% of business majors”) for readers who are not in your discipline.
                                          If your fellowships or scholarships are particularly selective or remunerative,
                                          give supporting details:
                                               Clyde Jones Scholarship: four-year award covering tuition, fees, room,
                                               and board.
                                               Marilyn Terpstra Scholarship: $25,000 annually for four years.
                                               Heemsly Fellowship: 50 awarded nationally each year to top Information
                                               Science juniors.
                                          Be careful of listing Dean’s List for only one or two semesters. Such a list-
                                          ing reminds readers that in these days of grade inflation you were off the list
                                          many more times than you were on it. Omit honors like “Miss Congeniality”
                                          or “Muscle Man Star” that work against the professional image you want your
                                          résumé to create.
                                              As a new college graduate, try to put Honors on page 1. In a skills résumé,
                                          put Honors on page 1 if they’re major (e.g., Phi Beta Kappa, Phi Kappa Phi).
                                          Otherwise, save them until page 2—Experience will probably take the whole
                                          first page.
                                                              Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                 Chapter12   Building Résumés                                   385


Experience                                                                                                 Altruism and Jobs

You may use other headings   if they P work better: Work Experience, Summer Faz Mere                   pels
                                                                                              reat to inves-
                                                                                       more graduates
                      ens                           5        2            z
          .
and Part-Time Jobs, Military Experience, Marketing Experience. In a skills             ieee ond eo
résumé, headings such as “Marketing Experience” allow you to include         causes. And many ofthese grads
accomplishments from activities and course projects. Headings that reflect                       find they ike makingadifference.
skills mentioned in the job ad are particularly effective.                                         Teach for America, the nonprofit
                             .     ;         :                   A      nA    ag                 that trains top college grads for
          .                                                                                      teaching in poverty school dis-
What to include Under this section in a chronological résumé, include the
following information for each job you list: position or job title, organization,                _tricts, saw applications jump 42%
city and state (no zip code), dates of employment for jobs held during the last 10               in 2009. The Peace Corps had
to 15 years, and other details, such as full- or part-time status, job duties, special           16% more applications.
responsibilities, or the fact that you started at an entry-level position and were     —Allof these opportunities provide
promoted. Use strong verbs      such as the ones in Figure 12.6 to brainstorm what — experience    and leadership skills
you've done. Try to give supporting details for highly valued attributes such                    valuable on the job market. They
as communication skills and leadership experience. Include any internships                       28° pee              eno
and co-ops0 you have had. : Also, include unpaid jobs and self-employment  if                    ee
                                                                                                 Increased competition for these
                                           aes                 .         :
they provided relevant skills (e.g., supervising people, budgeting, planning,            eine ears thet aopioants
persuading). Experience information  for skills résumés   is  discussed  on  page   387. should   highlight business experi-
   Normally, go back as far as the summer after high school. Include earlier             ence, language skills (especially
jobs if you started working someplace before graduating from high school but __gpanish and French), and volun-
continued working there after graduation, or if the job is pertinent to the one _ teer experience.
you are applying for. If you worked full-time after high school, make that clear.          Will you make a difference?
   The details you give about your experience are    some     of the most  vital  infor- ss         som Kyle Stock, “Jobl
mation   on your  résumé.  As you provide  these  details,   use  bulleted  lists  (easy ae             ee soe eretaes
to read) rather than paragraphs which are harder to read and may be skipped _ profits See a Flood of Applications
over. Remember that items in lists need to have parallel      structure; see page _ with Business and Legal Know Pow’
                                                      :                             Wall Street Journal, June 9, 2009, D6.
135 for a refresher. Focus on results rather than duties; employers are far more
interested in what you accomplished than in what you had to do. Use num-
bers to support your results wherever possible:
   Supervised crew of 15
   Managed $120,000 budget; decreased expenses by 19%.
   Wrote monthly electronic newsletter; increased hits by 12%.
Emphasize accomplishments that involve money, customers, teamwork, lead-
ership, computer skills, and communication.

 Figure 12.6         Action Verbs for Résumés
nnnEEE EEEyEEEEEESESS                                                        ESSE

  analyzed                directed               led                         reviewed

  budgeted                earned                 managed                     revised

  built                   edited                 motivated                   saved

 chaired                  established             negotiated                 scheduled

  coached                 evaluated               observed                   simplified

  collected               examined                organized                  sold

  conducted               helped                  persuaded                  solved

  coordinated             hired                   planned                    spoke

  counseled               improved                presented                  started

  created                 increased               produced                   supervised

  demonstrated            interviewed             recruited                  trained

  designed                introduced              reported                   translated

  developed               investigated            researched                 wrote
 Se SDSS
    n    OIEEIOE n
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




386                                      Part4   The Job Hunt


               | Do Good Work               Use past tense verbs for jobs you held in the past, and present tense verbs for
               [Create an “| Do Good     jobs you still have. Do not list minor duties such as distributing mail or filing
           Work” folder to] back         documents. If your duties were completely routine, say, at your summer job at
           up your claims of top         McDonald’s, do not list them. If the jobs you held in the past were low-level
performance with solid evidence.         ones, present them briefly or combine them:
  Before you leave the office this
Friday,     write   down   five things      2008-2012 Part-time and full-time jobs to finance education
you—not necessarily others—
believe you did well this week,
even if they represent common
                                            If as an undergraduate you've earned a substantial portion of your college
tasks. Perhaps you returned all          expenses with jobs and scholarship, say so in a separate statement under either
phone calls, leaving no loose            Experience or Education. (Graduate students are expected to support themselves.)
ends to tie at the end of the week.
Or maybe the details you provide            These jobs paid 40% of my college expenses.
in your sales reports enabled you
to find additional product fits for
the client. Any letters from happy
customers or e-mails thanking
                                            Paid for 65% of expenses with jobs, scholarships, and loans.
you for solving a problem should
go right in your folder. . . .           Paying for school expenses just with loans is generally not considered noteworthy.
  Tuck that list away and con-
tinue this weekly exercise for the
                                         Formats for setting up Experience           There are two basic ways to set up the
entire month. At the end of the
month, narrow the four or five
                                         Experience section of your résumé. In indented format, items that are logically
lists to 10 accomplishments that         equivalent begin at the same space, with carryover lines indented. Indented
stand out to you. At the end of          format emphasizes job titles. It provides work information in this order:
the year, review the 120 items              Job title, name of organization, city, state, dates. Other information.
and cull them to 25. Formal-
ize the language that describes             Experience
those 25 achievements and print               Engineering Assistant, Sohio Chemical Company, Lima, Ohio, Summers 2011
them out in an organized manner               and 2012.
. . along with your references.
                                              e Tested wastewater effluents for compliance with Federal EPA standards
   “When someone asks, ‘What
                                              e Helped chemists design a test to analyze groundwater quality and seepage
do you bring to this organiza-
tion?’ you won't merely reply, ‘I’m
                                                around landfills
good with people,’ you'll hand                e Presented weekly oral and written progress reports to Director of Research and
that sales manager or HR person                 Development
proof,” says professional trainer             Animal Caretaker, Animalcare, Worthington, Ohio, Summers 2008-2010.
Carol Price.

Quoted from Julie Sturgeon, “All
                                             Two-margin or block format frequently can be used to emphasize when
About You,” Selling Power, September     you worked, if you’ve held only low-level jobs. Don’t use two-margin format
2000, 57.                                if your work history has gaps.

                                            EXPERIENCE
                                            Summers, 2010-12       Repair worker, Bryant Heating and Cooling, Providence, RI
                                            2010-11                Library Clerk, Boston University Library, Boston, MA. Part-
                                                                   time during school year                                     ,
                                            2008-10                Food Service Worker, Boston University, Boston, MA. Part-
                                                                   time during school year
                                            Summer, 2009           Delivery person, Domino’s Pizza, Providence, RI

                                            The left column can also emphasize steadily increasing job titles.

                                            Experience at Gene Elton, Miami, Florida
                                            Intern
                                            Computer Programmer
                                            Systems Analyst
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition            ae




                                                              Chapter12   Building Résumés                                      387


The right column would list duties and dates.                                                            Job Skills Checklist
   Use a hyphen to join inclusive dates:                                                      <          Gaaagumunenden:

  March-August, 2012 (or write out March to August, 2012)                                                oe       your      skills?
                                                                                                             ib          Purdue's
  2009-2012 or 2009-12                                                                        Online Writing Lab, has an excel-
If you use numbers for dates, do not space before or after the slash:                         lent list to help get you going.
                                                                                              Connect   the skills you     identify
   10/10-5/11
                                                                                              to experiences in your life that
                                                                                              demonstrate  the skills; then
Skills résumés Skills résumés stress the skills you have acquired rather                                          Le
                                                                                              put the best material into your
than specific jobs you have held. They show employers that you do have the                     Bes
desired skill set even if you lack the traditional einen background.                          ho eae eh               eee
They allow you to include skills acquired from activities and course projects in              _purdue.edu/ow/resource/626/1/.
addition to jobs. On the other hand, they are also a clue to employers that you
do lack that traditional background, or that you have gaps in your job history,
so you will need to make your skill set convincing.
    Inaskills résumé, the heading of your main section usually changes from “Expe-
rience” to “Skills.” Within the section, the subheadings will be replaced with the
skills used in the job you are applying for, rather than the title or the dates of the jobs
you've held (as in a chronological résumé). For entries under each skill, combine
experience from paid jobs, unpaid work, classes, activities, and community service.
   Use headings that reflect the jargon of the job for which you’re applying:
logistics rather than planning for a technical job; procurement rather than pur-
chasing for a job with the military. Figure 12.7 shows a skills résumé for some-
one who is changing fields.
   A job description can give you ideas for headings. Possible headings and
subheadings for skills résumés include
                 Administration           Communication
                 Budgeting                Editing
                 Coordinating             Fund-Raising
                 Evaluating               Interviewing
                 Implementing             Negotiating
                 Negotiating              Persuading
                 Planning                 Presenting
                 Supervising              Writing
   Many jobs require a mix of skills. Try to include the skills that you know
will be needed in the job you want. You need at least three subheadings in
a skills résumé; six or seven is not uncommon. Give enough detail under each
subheading so the reader will know what you did. Put the most important
category from the reader’s point of view first.
   In a skills résumé, list your paid jobs under Work History or Employment
Record near the end of the résumé (see Figure 12.7). List only job title, employer,
city, state, and dates. Omit details that you have already used under Skills.

 Other Skills
 You may want a brief section in a chronological résumé where you highlight
 skills not apparent in your work history. These skills may include items such as
 foreign languages or programming languages. You might want to list software
 you have used or training on expensive equipment (electron microscopes,
 NMR machines). As always on your résumé, be completely honest: “two years
 of high school German,” or “elementary speaking knowledge of Spanish.”
 Any knowledge of a foreign language is a plus. It means that a company desir-
 ing a second language in its employees would not have to start from scratch in
 training you. Figure 12.8 lists skills in its Qualifications section.
eek   PROFESSIONAL WRITING




      388                                     Part4   The Job Hunt


      Figure 12.7                    A Skills Résumé for Someone Changing Fields


                                                                               my     have 4             266 Van Buren Drive
                                                                               avy Nes
                                                                                   cA  gional W    \D
                    Molly Schooner                                             profession     6          Lawrence, KS 66044
                                                                                nad                      schoonerm@ukansas.edu
                www.ukansas.edu/~Schooner88/home.htm                            ne URI                   785-897-1534 (home)

                                                                                                         785-842-4242 (cell)

                    Objective             To contribute my enthusiasm for writing as a Technical Writer at PDF
                                          Productions

                    Skills                Computer
                              Care        ¢ Designed a web page using Dreamweaver
              7        C. allows YOU           www.lawrenceanimalshelter.com                                company
            okllS     " jerienc°"e           Used a variety of Macintosh and PC platform programs and languages:
            to mor and class                   Aspects(online discussion forum)                    Adobe Professional
             from WO"                          Dreamweaver CS5                                     HTML                      Specily
                                               PageMaker                                           Java Script               computer
                                               XML                                                 Photoshop CS5             programs
                                                                                                                              vou know
                                          Design and Writing                                                                  ‘ vel
                                                                                                                                vell
                                          e Designed a quarterly newsletter for local animal shelter
                                          e Developed professional brochures
                                          e Wrote a variety of professional documents: letters, memos, and reports
                                          e Edited internal documents and promotional materials
                                          e Proofread seven student research papers as a tutor

                                          Organization and Administration
                                          ¢ Coordinated program schedules
                                          e Developed work schedules for five employees
                                          e Led a 10-member team in planning and implementing sorority
                                            philanthropy program
                                          ¢ Created cataloging system for specimens
                                          ¢ Ordered and handled supplies, including live specimens

                Employment              — Technical Writer, Lawrence Animal Shelter, Lawrence, KS, 2010—present
                History                   Undergraduate Lab Assistant, Department of Biology,
                     sed to                     University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 2010-present                       Uses reverse
                                          Tutor, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 2009-2010                         chronology


                Education                 Bachelor of Arts, May 2012
                                          University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS
                                          Major: Animal Ecology
                                          Minor: Chemistry               Give minor        when
                                                                                         helpful
                                          GPA: 3.4/4.0                    it can be


                Honors                    Phi Kappa Phi Honor Society
                                          Alpha Lambda Delta Honor Society, Ecology Honorary
                                          Dean’s List, 2007 — present                                            explail
                                          Raymond Hamilton Scholarship, 2010-2011                                 reader ™
                                                    ($5,000 to a top ecology student in Kansas)
                                                       Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




Figure 12.8       A One-Page Chronological Resume



                                                                                                       831.503.4692
                                                                                                     51 Willow Street
     Jeff      Moeller                                                                           San José, CA 95112
                                                              Use job title
                                                              ae company name in                  jmoeller@csmb.edu

   Career Objective                                            Career Objective
   To bring my attention to detail and love for computer/video games to Telltale Games as a Game Designer


   Qualifications
     e Experienced in JavaScript, Lua, and Python
     : Intermediate proficiency with Visual Studio; high proficiency with Source
     e                                                                           Safe Highlights
                                                                                      qualifications
     e Excellent communication, interpersonal, and collaboration skills               specific to the job.
       Advanced knowledge of computers
     e Love of video games


   Education
   California State University Monterey Bay                                   Keeps Education
   August 2008-May 2012 (expected)                                            section simple to
   Bachelor of Science in Computer Science and Information Technology         @/)phasize
                                                                              experience.

   Experience
   Online Marketing     Consultant —Self-Employed          Lists job titles
   October 2009-present                                    on separate lines.
     e Manage multiple-client Google Adwords accounts
     e Install web software and implement designs for fast turnarounds
     e Interface with clients using Basecamp


   Editor-in-Chief —Point Network LLC                ee             ae
   June 2007- present                                    you are doing the job now.
     e Write and edit for several LucasArts-related gaming news websites
     e Design and code websites using Wordpress
     e Manage and administrate the LucasForums.com community

                                                                     Use past tense fo
    Online Marketing Assistant—Hayfield Group                       jobs that are Nar
    May 2010-August 2010; May 2010-August 2011
      e Managed all client Google Adwords accounts
      e Assisted in or managed planning and executing PPC and SEO campaigns
      e Coded the company website and integrated the Drupal CMS
      e Prepared website analytics reports using Google Analytics and other analytics suites


    Community Manager —Praise Entertainment, Inc.
    April 2009-September 2011
                                                                          online forum owners
      e Managed the community at AdminFusion.com, a website geared toward
       e Organized and ran a monthly contest for community members

                                 Close with strong
    Honors and Activities seciion.
      e Member of the gaming press for E3 2010 and 2011
      * Member of second place team in 2011 National STEM Video Game challenge
         (see demo, “Parrot Villa” at www.STEMChallenge.gov/201 1_winners)
                                                                                   Include activities that employer
                                                                                   might value
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




390                                   Part4    The Job Hunt


            What to Know
            about Job
                                      Activities
            References                Employers may be interested in your activities if you’re a new college graduate
    Zz        Many job reference      because they can demonstrate leadership roles, management abilities, and social
myths exist that may undermine        skills as well as the ability to juggle a schedule. If you’ve worked for several
your job search:                      years after college or have an advanced degree (MBA, JD), you can omit Activi-
Myth: | don’t have to mention         ties and include Professional Activities and Affiliations or Community and
a job that didn’t work out,           Public Service. If you went straight from college to graduate school but have
especially if |worked there only a    an unusually strong record demonstrating relevant skills, include this category
short while.                          even if all the entries are from your undergraduate days.
Fact: Employers check jobs                Include the following kinds of items under Activities:
through Social Security, and
they will believe the worst of
                                       =      Volunteer work. Include important committees, leadership roles, com-
omissions.
                                              munication activities, and financial and personnel responsibilities.
Myth: Companies are not
legally allowed to give damaging
                                       =      Membership in organized student activities. Include important subcom-
information about applicants.                 mittees, leadership roles. Include minor offices only if they’re directly
Fact: Although many companies
                                              related to the job for which you’re applying or if they show growing
have formal policies of providing             responsibility (you held a minor office one year, a bigger office the fol-
only bare-bones data, many                    lowing year). Include so-called major offices (e.g., vice president) even if
employees within those                        you did very little. Provide descriptive details if (but only if) they help
organizations still engage in                 the reader realize how much you did and the importance of your work,
providing additional, negative                or if they demonstrate usable job skills.
information about applicants.          =      Membership in professional associations. Many of them have special
Voice tone, or mentioning that
                                              low membership fees for students, so you should join one or more.
you may not be eligible for rehire,
may speak volumes.                     =      Participation in varsity, intramural, or independent athletics. However,
Myth: References do not matter
                                              don’t list so many sports that you appear not to have had adequate time
once you are hired.                           to study.
Fact: References may still be          =      Social clubs, if you held a major leadership role or if social skills are
checked after you are hired and               important for the job for which you’re applying.
can be used for grounds for
termination.                          As you list activities, add details that will be relevant for your job. Did you
Myth: References are not              handle a six-figure budget for your Greek organization? Plan all the road trips
needed after you have ajob.           for your soccer club? Coordinate all the publicity for the campus blood drive?
Fact: Stay in contact with your       Design the posters for homecoming? Major leadership, financial, and creative
references. You never know when       roles and accomplishments may look more impressive if they’re listed under
you may want to change jobs.          Experience instead of under Activities.

                                      Portfolio
                                      If you have samples of your work available, you may want to end your résumé
                                      by stating “Portfolio (or writing samples) available on request.” or by giving
                                      the URL for your work.

                                      REFERENCES
                                      References are generally no longer included on résumés. Nor do you say “Ref-
                                      erences Available on Request,” since no job applicant is going to refuse to sup-
                                      ply references. However, you will probably be asked for references at some
                                      point in your application process, so it is wise to be prepared.
                                          You will need at least three, usually no more than five, never more than
                                      six. As a college student or a new graduate, include at least one professor and
                                      at least one employer or adviser—someone who can comment on your work
                                      habits and leadership skills. If you’re changing jobs, include your current
                                      superior. For a skills résumé, choose references who can testify to your abili-
                                      ties in the most important skills areas. Omit personal or character references,
                                                       Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                          Chapter12   Building Résumés                            391



who cannot talk about your work. Don’t use relatives, friends, or roommates,
even if you’ve worked for them, because everyone will believe they are biased
in your favor.
   Always ask permission to use the person as a reference. Doing so is not only
polite, but ensures the person will remember you when contacted. Instead of
the vague “May I list you as a reference?” use, “Can you speak specifically
about my work?” Jog the person’s memory by taking along copies of work
you did for him or her and a copy of your current résumé. Tell the person
what qualifications a specific employer is seeking. Keep your list of references
up-to-date. If it’s been a year or more since you asked someone, ask again—
and tell the person about your recent achievements.
   On your list of references, provide name, title or position, organization, city,
state, phone number, and e-mail for each of your references. If their connection
to you is not clear, add an identifying line (former academic adviser; former
supervisor at Careltons) so they do not look like personal references. You could
also give the full mailing address if you think people are more likely to write
than to call. Use courtesy titles (Dr., Mr., Ms.) for all or for none. By convention,
all faculty with the rank of assistant professor or above may be called Professor.
    References that the reader knows are by far the most impressive. In fact,
employers may ask about you among people they already know: a former class-
mate may now work for them, a professor in your major department may consult
for them. Through these routes, employers can get references about you even in
companies whose formal human resources policy provides only dates of employ-
ment. Therefore, you should be well thought of by as many people as possible.
    Some employers are also checking contacts on social networking sites such
as LinkedIn and Facebook to find people who may know you. When you are
on the job market, you may want to consider adjusting your privacy settings
so that your contacts are visible to only a select few. On sites without such
adjustments, you need to be careful with your contact list. Remember that
 Facebook has a history of making personal information public.
    Include the name and address of your placement office if you have written
 recommendations on file there; that contact information will be all you need.

WHAT NOT TO INCLUDE IN A RESUME
Certain items do not belong on résumés used in the United States (standards
 differ in other countries). These include age, ethnicity, marital status, number
 of children, and health. Photographs also do not belong on résumés unless
 you are applying for jobs such as entertainment positions. Although interested
 parties can frequently find your picture on Facebook, for instance, pictures
 have long been excluded because of their ability to enable discrimination. For
 safety reasons, résumés should never include your Social Security number.
    Including these kinds of information shows you have not researched the
 job-hunting process. Since many employers take your performance on the job
 hunt as an indication of the quality of work you will do for them, résumé
 lapses indicate that you may not be the best employee.
    Since résumés are used to eliminate a large pool of job candidates down to
 the handful that will be interviewed, do not include controversial activities
 or associations. This category generally includes work for specific religious
 or political groups. (If the work is significant, you can include it generically:
 Wrote campaign publicity for state senator candidate.)
    High school facts are generally omitted once you are a junior in college
 unless you have good reasons for keeping them. These reasons might include
 showing you have local connections or showing skill ina needed area not cov-
 ered by college activities (perhaps you are applying for coaching jobs where a
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




392                                        Part4    The Job Hunt


              Résumé Checklist             variety of team sports will help you, and you played basketball in high school
              Does      the      résumé
                                           and volleyball in college). The fact that you have good high school activities
      7a      have a good, easy-to-        but few if any college activities is not a good reason. In this case, listing high
              read layout?                 school activities will show you are on a downward trend at a very early age!
 Does it include your name,                   Do not pad your résumé with trivial items; they are easily recognized as
 address, city, state, zip code,           padding and they devalue the worth of your other items. For instance, except
 phone number, and e-mail                  under the most unusual circumstances, graduate students should not list
 address at the top of the page?           grants for travel to conferences as honors, since such travel grants are ubiq-
 Does it use bullets or bold to            uitous. Some community groups, especially religious organizations, list all
 highlight key elements?                   college graduates in their group-specific “honorary.” Since everyone who
 Does it list information in order of      graduates will belong, these are not considered honors.
 relevance to the position?                   As you advance in your career, you will continually cut information from
 Does it give specifics, not               earlier stages of your life, as well as from outside activities, to focus on your
 generalities, about your                  recent career achievements.
 experience?
 Did you double check the
 spelling, grammar and
                                           DEALING WITH DIFFICULTIES
 punctuation?                              Some job hunters face special problems. This section gives advice for six com-
 Does it use action verbs to               mon problems.
 describe your job duties?
 ls your résumé truthful?
 ls it tailored for a specific
                                           “| Don’t Have Any Experience.”
 employer?                                 If you have a year or more before you job hunt, you can get experience in sev-
 Does a 10-second reading reveal           eral ways:
 the basics about you?
 Does the résumé warrant                    =      Take a fast-food job—and keep it. If you do well, you'll be promoted to a
 an interview, if you were an                      supervisor within a year. Use every opportunity to learn about the man-
 employer?
                                                   agement and financial aspects of the business.
 How does your résumé rate?
                                            =      Sign on with agencies that handle temporary workers. As an added
 Adapted from UC Berkeley Career Cen-              bonus, some of these jobs become permanent.
 ter, “Résumé and Letter Writing: Resumé
 Checklist,” in Job and Internship Guide
                                             = Joina volunteer organization that interests you. If you work hard, you'll
 2010-2011, accessed April 3, 2011,            quickly get an opportunity to do more: manage a budget, write fund-
 http://career.berkeley.edu/Guide/             raising materials, and supervise other volunteers.
 ResumeLetterWriting.pdf.
                                             = Freelance. Design brochures, create web pages, do tax returns for small
                                               businesses. Use your skills—for free, if you have to at first.
                                             =     Write. Create a portfolio of ads, instructions, or whatever documents are
                                                   relevant for the field you want to enter. Ask a professional—an instruc-
                                                   tor, a local business person, someone from a professional organization—
                                                   to critique them.

                                              If you’re on the job market now, think carefully about what you've really
                                           done. Complete sentences using the action verbs in Figure 12.6. Think about
                                           what you’ve done in courses, in volunteer work, in unpaid activities. Espe-
                                           cially focus on skills in problem solving, critical thinking, teamwork, and com-
                                           munication. Solving a problem for a hypothetical firm in an accounting class,
                                           thinking critically about a report problem in business communication, work-
                                           ing with a group ina marketing class, and communicating with people at the
                                           senior center where you volunteer are experience, even if no one paid you.

                                           “All My Experience Is in My Family’s Business.”
                                           In your résumé, simply list the company you worked for. For a reference, instead of
                                           a family member, list a supervisor, client, or vendor who can talk about your work.
                                           Since the reader may wonder whether “Jim Clarke” is any relation to the owner of
                                                       Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                          Chapter12   Building Résumés                                     393



“Clarke Construction Company,” be ready to answer interview questions about
                                                                                                       Should | Create a
                                                                                                       Video Résumé?
why you're looking at other companies. Prepare an answer that stresses the broader
opportunities you seek but doesn’t criticize your family or the family business.                  ~.   What    is   a   video
                                                                                                    ” résumé?
                                                                                                       Job    hunters     post
“| Want to Change Fields.”                                                                short videos as part of their job
                                                                                          applications through services such
Have a good reason for choosing the field in which you’re looking for work. “I            as YouTube, Google video, and
want a change” or “I need to get out of a bad situation” does not convince an             video résumé sites.
employer that you know what you're doing.                                                 Who uses video résumés?
   Think about how your experience relates to the job you want. Sam wants                 Anyone can. Currently, most video
a new career as a pharmaceutical sales representative. He has sold wood-                  résumés are produced by appli-
stoves, served subpoenas, and worked on an oil rig. A chronological résumé                cants interested in entertainment

makes his work history look directionless. But a skills résumé could focus on             and media, but job seekers in
                                                                                          other industries are starting to use
persuasive ability (selling stoves), initiative and persistence (serving subpoe-
                                                                                          video postings.
nas), and technical knowledge (courses in biology and chemistry).                         What are the benefits to
   Learn about the skills needed in the job you want: learn the buzzwords of               employers?
the industry. Figure 12.7 shows a skills résumé of someone changing fields                 Employers get an opportunity to
from animal ecology to technical writing. Her reason for changing could                    screen applicants before asking
be that she found she enjoyed the writing duties of her jobs more than she                 for an interview. This may save
enjoyed the ecology field work.                                                            an employer from conducting an
                                                                                           interview.
                                                                                           Are there risks?
“I’ve Been Out of the Job Market for a While.”                                             Yes, discrimination on the basis

You need to prove toa potential employer that you're up-to-date and motivated:             of sex, age, and ethnicity.

                                                                                             lf you decide to create a video
 = Create a portfolio of your work to show what you can do for the                         posting, you may want to con-
                                                                                           sider these tips for your video
   employer.
                                                                                           resumé:
 = Do freelance work.
                                                                                           1. Be brief and concise.
   Be active in professional organizations. Attend meetings.                                  Remember that employers
   Look for volunteer work where you can use and expand relevant work                         generally spend less than 30
   skills.                                                                                    seconds per résumé. Don’t
                                                                                              expect them to spend longer
   Attend local networking events.
                                                                                              on your video.
   Read the journals and trade publications of your field.                                 2. Be prepared. Avoid reading
   Learn the software that professionals use in your field.                .
                                                                                              a script. You should be con-
   Be up-to-date with electronic skills such as IMing, text messaging, and                    versational and natural in your
   computer searching.                                                                        presentation.

 = Take professional training to expand your skill set.                                    3. Tailor the video to the specific
                                                                                              employer and position.

    Employment counselors advise that you not leave a gap on your résumé;
                                                                                           4. Be professional. Post a video
                                                                                              that is clear, audible, and free
 such a gap makes employers speculate about disasters such as nervous break-                  from background noise.
 downs or jail time. They suggest you matter-of-factly list an honorable title such
 as Parent or Caregiver; do not apologize. Better yet is to fill in the gap with sub-
 stantial volunteer experience. Heading a $75,000 fund-raising drive for a new
 playground looks good for almost any employer. A side benefit of volunteer
 work, in addition to new career skills, is networking. Boards of directors and
 agency executives are frequently well-connected members of the community.

 “| Was Laid Off.”
 In times of large layoffs, this is not an overwhelming obstacle. You do not
 need to point out the layoff in your application materials, the end date of your
 last employment will make the point for you. Instead, use your documents to
 highlight your strengths.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                        Part4   The Job Hunt


              Résumé Blasting               Do be prepared to be asked about the layoff in an interview. Why were you
              Résumé blasting is        laid off when other employees were retained? It helps if you can truthfully
           )) the process of dis-       give a neutral explanation: the accounting work was outsourced, our entire
              tributing your resumé     lab was closed; the company laid off everyone who had worked fewer than
              to dozens, hundreds,      five years. Be sure you do not express bitterness or self-pity; neither emotion
or thousands of résumé sites and        will help you get your new job. On the other hand, do not be overly grateful
databases. Résumé blasting ser-         for an interview; such excess shows a lack of self-confidence. Be sure to show
vices will do the work for you,         you are keeping yourself current by doing some of the items in the bulleted
for a price. But don’t yield to the     list in the previous section.
temptation.
  ResumeDoctor.com  surveyed over
5,000 recruiters and hiring man-        “| Was Fired.”
agers about online job postings.
Top complaints were       —             First, deal with the emotional baggage. You need to reduce negative feelings
1. Large numbers of irrelevant          to a manageable level before you're ready to job-hunt.
   responses (92%). Most                   Second, take responsibility for your role in the termination.
   participants indicated that             Third, try to learn from the experience. You'll be a much more attractive job
   they receive hundreds of             candidate if you can show that you've learned from the experience—whether
   responses per online job             your lesson is improved work habits or that you need to choose a job where
   posting.                             you can do work you can point to with pride.
2. Résumés not matching the                 Fourth, collect evidence showing that earlier in your career you were a good
   job description (71%).               worker. This evidence could include references from earlier employers, good
3. Job candidates “blasting out”        performance evaluations, and a portfolio of good work.
   résumés (63%).                           Some common strategies may also give you some help for references. You
Adapted from Universum WetFeet,         should check with the Human Resources Department to understand the com-
“Looking Good on Paper,” accessed       pany’s reference policy. Some companies now give no references other than
April 2, 2011, htto/Avww.wetfeet.con/   verification of job title and work dates. Others do not give references for
Experienced-Hire/Resume—Cover-letter/
Articles/_ooking-Good-on-Paper.aspx.    employees who worked only a short time.'' Another option is to ask someone
                                        other than your former boss for a reference. Could you ask a supplier or ven-
                                        dor? A different department head?
                                           A different tactic is suggested by Phil Elder, an interviewer for an insur-
                                        ance company. He suggests calling the person who fired you and saying
                                        something like this: “Look, I know you weren't pleased with the job I did at
                                               . I’m applying for a job at        now and the personnel director may
                                        call you to ask about me. Would you be willing to give me the chance to get
                                        this job so that I can try to do things right this time?” All but the hardest of
                                        heart, says Elder, will give you one more chance. You won't get a glowing
                                        reference, but neither will the statement be so damning that no one is willing
                                        to hire you.”
                                           Above all, be honest. Do not lie about your termination at an interview or
                                        on a job application. The application usually requires you to sign a statement
                                        that the information you are providing is true and that false statements can be
                                        grounds for dismissal.


                                         ELECTRONIC RESUMES
                                         In addition to a paper résumé for job fairs, interviews, and potential contacts,
                                         you will need electronic versions of your résumé. With a few exceptions noted
                                         below, these résumés will have the same content but will be formatted differ-
                                         ently so they can be “read” by both software and humans.


                                         Sending Your Résumé Electronically
                                         Many employers are asking to have résumés posted on their organizations’
                                         websites. When doing so, be sure you follow their directions exactly. You may
                                         also be asked by some employers to send your résumé by e-mail.
                                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                            Chapter12   Building Résumés                                       395


                                                                                                                              Beware of Spam
                                    WELL, AS       YOUR   RESUME   AND
                                    WORK SAMPLES SHOW, YouURE                                                                 Filters
                                    CLEARCY    A   VERY   GOOD   WRITER.                                                    . Employers are using
                                                                                                                            ~ filters to keep out

                                          AND AS YOUR PROFANITY-                                                             er     Bue eanegng
                                          (MB        iracenceeience                                         computer viruses. Unfortunately,
                                                                  y                                         legitimate e-mails, including résu-
                                                                                                            més, are also getting blocked.
                                                                                                            Applicants who send résumés
                                                                                                            with an e-mail may be rejected by
                                                                                                            spam filters for various reasons
                                                                                                            such as “foul” language (B.S.) or
                                                                                                            overused phrases (responsible
                                                                                                            for or duties included).
                                                                                                              What can you do to avoid spam
REAL LIFE ADVENTURES ©2010 GarLanco. Reprinted with permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.    filters?
                                                                                                            =     Avoid acronyms or titles that
                                                                                                                  may be considered “foul”
      Here are some basic guidelines of e-mail job-hunting etiquette:                                             language.
                                                                                                            =     Watch overusing words or
 =        Don’t use your current employer’s e-mail system for your job search.                                    phrases.
          You'll leave potential employers with the impression that you spend                                —g_ayoid words lke free, extend,
          company time on writing résumés and other nonwork-related activities.                                   unbelievable, opportunity,
 =        Set up a free, Internet-based e-mail account using services such as Hot-                                trial, mortgage.
          mail, Gmail, or Yahoo! to manage correspondence related to your job — = Avoid using unusual colors.
          hunt.                                                                                              = Be careful of using all capi-
  =       Avoid using silly or cryptic e-mail addresses. Instead of bubbles@aol.com,                              tals, exclamation points, or
                                                                                                                   dollar amounts in subject
          opt for something business-like: yourname@yahoo.com.                                                     lines.
  =       Write a simple subject line that makes a good first impression: Résumée—                             What preventative steps can
          Kate Sanchez. A good subject line will improve the chances that your                               you take to avoid being caught
          résumé is actually read, since e-mail from unknown senders is often                                by spam filters?
          deleted without being opened. If you are responding to an ad, use the                              =     Set your personal spam
          job title or job code listed.                                                                            filter to high; then send your
  =       Before sending your résumé into cyberspace, test to see how it will look                                 résumé to your own e-mail
          when it comes out on the other end. E-mail it to yourself and a friend,                                  account
          then critique and fix it.                                                                          .     Send your résumé to a spam

          Send only one résumé, even if the firm has more than one position for
                                                                                                                   checker.
  =
          which you qualify. Most recruiters have negative reactions to multiple                                Adapted from Michael Trust, “How to
          résumés.                                                                                              Stop Your Résumé from Becoming

          Experts differ on whether candidates should phone to follow up. Phon-
                                                                                                                Spam,” Careerealism, October 11,
  =                                                                                                             2010, http://www.careerealism.com/
          ing once to be sure your résumé arrived is probably fine.                                             stop-resume-spam.


    It’s important to heed the specific directions of employers that you are
 e-mailing. Many do not want attachments because of viruses. While a few may
 want a Microsoft Word or PDF attachment of your résumé, others may specify
 that you paste your résumé directly into the body of your e-mail message.
    If you are sending your résumé in the text of an e-mail,

     =    Start all lines at the left margin.
     =    Donotuse bold, underlining, bullets, tabs, or unusual fonts. Instead use
          keys such as asterisks.
     =    You can also put some headings in all capital letters, but use this device
          sparingly.
      =   To avoid awkward line breaks for your readers, shorten line lengths to
          65 characters and spaces.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                           Part4   The Job Hunt


               Play Safe                      Your résumé will look plain to you, but the employers receiving it are used
      /       Before posting your
                                           to the look of in-text résumés.
          S®) job application online,         If you are sending your résumé as an attachment, name the document
              you should verify the        appropriately: Smith Robyn Résumé.docx. Never name it Résumé.docx; you
              site is safe. Here are       do not want it to get lost in a long directory of documents.
some criteria:                                With your résumé include a brief cover letter that will make the receiver
                                           want to look at your résumé. In it, mention the types of files you've included.
1. Have you heard of the
   site? If not, be careful. Look
                                           (See Figure 13.8.) Remember, it takes only an instant for readers to delete your
   for online reviews of the site.         e-mail. Do not give them reasons to trash your résumé.
2. Does it ask you to register
                                              Some people confuse electronic and scannable résumés. The former are
   before you can search for               résumés you send in or attached to an e-mail. The latter are paper résumés spe-
   jobs? This is a big red flag.           cially formatted for older software. Software programs have greatly improved
   Try a different site.                   recently and most can now scan regular résumés posted on websites. How-
3. Does it have a comprehen-               ever, if you are asked to send a scannable résumé, guidelines for creating one
   sive privacy policy? Read               are in Appendix D.
   the policy to see if they sell
   or rent your information. Put-          Posting Your Résumé on the Web
   ting up your job packet on a
   nonprivate forum could affect           You will probably want to post your résumé online. Be selective when you
   your identity in the future. Do         do: stick with well-known sites for safety reasons. Choose one or two of the
   not assume the site is pro-             large popular sites such as Monster or CareerBuilder. Also choose one or two
   tected if it has a privacy seal.        smaller sites, preferably ones specific to your desired occupation or location.
4. Can you limit access to                 A well-chosen niche site can show employers that you know your field. Stud-
   your personal contact                   ies are still showing that about 25% of external hires are made through job
   information? Identity theft             boards.'?
   is a growing problem. Good
                                              Many responsible career sites recommend that you should not succumb to
                                           résumé blasting—posting your résumé widely on the web. Many employers
   sites allow you to protect per-
   sonal contact information.
                                           consider such blasting to be akin to spam and they respond negatively to job
5. Does it let you delete your
                                           candidates who do it.
   résumé after you get a
   job? Safe websites should
                                              If the websites you choose have you place your information into their
   allow you to delete your                résumé form, cut and paste from your résumé to avoid typos. Do not use
   documents or make them                  résumé templates unless you are asked to do so; they will rarely present you
   inactive while you are not              as well as the layout you have designed for yourself.
   conducting a job search. You               For safety reasons, use your e-mail address as contact information instead
   don’t want your new boss                of your address and phone number. Make sure your e-mail address looks
   to think you are still on the           professional; you should not be HotLips@Yahoo.com. To foil identity
   job market for an even better            thieves, some web consultants also recommend that you remove all dates
   position.
                                            from your résumé, and that you replace employer names with generic
 Adapted     from   Susan   Joyce,   “15    descriptions (statewide information technology company). Identity thieves
 Critical Criteria for Choosing the Best    can take information directly from online résumés, or they can call employ-
 Job Site for You,” NETability, Inc.,
 accessed April 3, 2011. http://www.
                                            ers and, claiming to be conducting background checks, get additional
 job-hunt.org/choosing.shtml.               information.
                                               Since many databases sort résumés by submission date, renew your résumé
                                            by making small changes to it at least every two weeks. If you don’t get any
                                            response to your résumé after a month or two, post it on a different site.
                                               If you post your résumé on your personal website, be sure that all the links
                                            go to professional-looking pages, such as documents you have created. Now
                                            is not the time to link to pictures of you partying. Also, make sure the first
                                            screen includes a current job objective and Summary of Qualifications. One
                                            study found that résumés on personal websites were particularly useful for
                                            self-employed workers, for whom they attracted clients.'*
                                               When you have your new job, remove your résumé from all sites. Your new
                                            employer will probably take a dim view of finding your résumé on job sites
                                            and it is virtually impossible to block your online résumé from people at your
                                            current place of employment.
                                                      Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                         Chapter12   Building Résumés                                         397



HONESTY                                                                                 Fa
                                                                                                       Résumé Lies Lead to
                                                                                                       Termination
Be absolutely honest on your résumé—and in the rest of your job search. Just                  =
                                                                                                    Listed below are high-
                                                                                                                             :
ask Marilee Jones, former Dean of Admissions at Massachusetts Institute of                          level professionals who

Technology (MIT). In 1979, when she applied for an admissions job at MIT, her            learned the hard way that eventu-

résumé listed bachelor’s and master’s degrees from Rensselaer Polytechnic
                                                                                         ally employers will discover dis-
                                                                                         crepancies on résumés.
Institute. In reality, she attended there only one year as a part-time student. By
1997, when she was promoted to the deanship, she did not have the courage
                                                                                         =     Dave Edmondson, for-
                                                                                               mer chief executive of
to correct her résumé. In April 2007, she was forced to resign, even though she                RadioShack, resigned after
was a nationally recognized leader in admissions, after an anonymous tip.                      lying about having a college
   Most businesses now conduct some kind of background check on job                            degree.
applicants. Even graduate schools, particularly business schools, are check-             =     George O'Leary, former
ing applicants.'° A survey of over 3,000 hirers conducted for CareerBuilder                    Notre Dame football coach,
reported that 49% had caught lies on résumés.                                                  resigned over inaccuracies in
   Background checks on job candidates can include a credit check, legal and                   both his academic and ath-
criminal records, complete employment history, and academic credentials. Such                  letic backgrounds.
checks turn up some incredible whoppers. Résumés have been found using                    s     Jeffrey Papows, former CEO
someone else’s photo, listing degrees from nonexistent schools, listing fake                    of Lotus Corporation, quit
Mensa memberships, and even claiming a false connection to the Kennedy clan.”                   over discrepancies in his mili-
      You can omit some material on your résumé, because obviously you cannot                   tary and educational record.

include everything about your life to date. For instance, it’s still ethical to omit      ws    Kenneth Lonchar, CFO of
a low GPA, although most employers will assume it is very low indeed to be                      Veritas software, resigned
omitted. But what you do include must be absolutely honest.                                     over inaccuracies in his aca-

   Some of the most frequent inaccuracies on résumés are inflated job titles                    demic background.

and incorrect dates of employment. While these data are easy to fudge, they                 Have you checked your resumé

are also easy to catch in background checks. It is also possible that some of
                                                                                          to make sure you have not

these particular inaccuracies come from careless records kept by job candi-
                                                                                          inflated your credentials?

dates. Do you remember the exact job title of that first job you held as a sopho-            Adapted     from     Rachel    Zupek,
more in high school? Keep careful records of your employment history!                        “Infamous Résumé Lies,” Career-

   If employers do an employment history check, and many do, they will have
                                                                                             Builder, July 7, 2010, http://msn.
                                                                                             careerbuilder.com/Arnticle/MSN-1 154-
a complete work history for you. They will be able to spot inaccurate company                Cover-Letters-Resumes-Infamous-
names and work dates. If you left a company off your résumé, they may wonder                 R%C3%AISUM%C3%AY-Lies.

why; some may assume your performance at that company was not satisfactory.
   Other areas where résumés are commonly inaccurate are

  =     Degrees: many people conveniently forget they were a few hours short
        of a degree.
  =     GPAs: inflating one’s grade point seems to be a big temptation.
        Honors: people list memberships in fake honoraries, or fake member-
        ships in real honoraries.
        Fake employers.
        Job duties: many people inflate them.
        Salary increases.
        Fake addresses: people create these to have the “local” advantage.
        Fake contact information for references: this information frequently
        leads to family members or friends who will give fake referrals.
        Technical abilities.
        Language proficiency.

      All dishonesty on a résumé is dangerous, keeping you from being hired if
 discovered early, and causing you to be fired if discovered later. However, the
 last two bullets listed above are particular dangerous because your chances are
 good of being asked at an interview to demonstrate your listed proficiencies.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




398                                        Part4       The Job Hunt




                                               Informal preparation for job hunting should start soon after you arrive on cam-
              The Cost of a Typo               pus. Formal preparation for job hunting should begin a full year before you begin
                                               interviewing. The year you interview, register with your placement office early.
             Typos can cost you
                                               Personal branding and networking, particularly through social media such
             a job. Many employ-
             ers say they will not
                                               as LinkedIn, are now an important part of job searching.
 consider résumés with spelling                Employers skim résumés to decide whom to interview. Employers assume
 mistakes or typographical errors.             that the letter and résumé represent your best work.
   Why? Employers consider your                Emphasize information that is relevant to the job you want, is recent (last
 job documents to be examples of               three years), and shows your superiority to other applicants.
                                               To emphasize key points, put them in headings, list them vertically, and
 your finest work. If you are care-
 less on them, they assume you will
 be even more careless in the work
                                               provide details.
 you do for them.                              Résumés use sentence fragments punctuated like complete sentences.
      Spell check is not enough. Too           Items in the résumé must be concise and parallel. Verbs and gerunds create
 many “mangers” (managers) with                a dynamic image of you.
 great ability “to to” attend to detail
                                               A chronological résumé summarizes what you did in a time line (starting
                                               with the most recent events, and going backward in reverse chronology). It
 are seeking work in the “pubic
 area” (public arena). You get the
 point. Proofread your documents
                                                emphasizes degrees, job titles, and dates. Use a chronological résumé when
 carefully. Get your friends and fam-           = Your education and experience are a logical preparation for the position
 ily to proof them also, but remem-                for which you're applying.
 ber, no one cares as much about                = You have impressive job titles, offices, or honors.
 your     documents   as you    do.   If
                                                A skills résumé emphasizes the skills you’ve used, rather than the job in
 English is not your first language,
 or your strong suit, consider pay-
                                                which or the date when you used them. Use a skills résumé when
 ing for a professional editor. The             = Your education and experience are not the usual route to the position
 success of your career starts with                 for which you’re applying.
 these documents.                               = You’re changing fields.
                                                = You want to combine experience from paid jobs, activities, volunteer
                                                    work, and courses to show the extent of your experience in administra-
                                                        tion, finance, speaking, etc.
                                                   =    Your recent work history may create the wrong impression (e.g., it has
                                                        gaps, shows a demotion, shows job-hopping, etc.).
                                                   Résumés contain the applicant's contact information, education, and expe-
                                                   rience. Career objectives, summary of qualifications, honors and awards,
                                                   other skills, activities, and a portfolio reference may also be included.
                                                   Many résumés are now sent electronically and are posted on the Internet or
                                                   the organization’s website.
                                                   Remove any unprofessional material from your personal web page, blog,
                                                   and social networking sites.
                                                   Always be completely honest in your résumé and job search.



                                            Exercises and Problems
                                                                                                           *Go to www.mhhe.com/locker10e for
          CHAPTER            12                                                                            additional Exercises and Problems.




  12.1          Reviewing the Chapter

  1.     What should you do soon after starting college to                    3.   How can you use writing components such as
         prepare for your job search? (LO 12-1)                                    emphasis and details to help set yourself apart from
  2.     What should you do a full year before your job                            other candidates? (LO 12-2)
         search? (LO 12-1)
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                              Chapter 12       Building Résumés


4. What are factors you should consider when prepar-           10. Pick one of the common problems job hunters
   ing your contact information? (LO 12-2)                         may face and explain how you would deal with it
5. Why are career objectives hard to write? (LO 12-2)              if it happened to you during your career.
                                                                   (LO 12-3)
6. What are key words? How do you use them in your
   summary of qualifications? In electronic résumés?           11. What are some basic guidelines of e-mail job-hunt-
                                                                       ing etiquette? (LO 12-4)
   (LO 12-2)
                                                                12. What safety precautions do you need to take when
7. What kinds of details make your experience look
   most attractive to potential employers? (LO 12-2)                you post your résumé online? (LO 12-4)
8. How can activities help make you look attractive to          13. What roles are blogs and Facebook pages playing in
   potential employers? (LO 12-2)                                      the job search? (LO 12-4)
                                                                14. Why is it more important now than ever before to
9. What can you do to help get the best references pos-
                                                                    be completely honest on your résumé? (LO 12-5)
   sible? (LO 12-2)




12.2.    Reviewing Grammar
                                                                structure by revising the sentences             in Exercise    B.7,
Most résumés use lists, and items in lists need to have
                                                                Appendix B.
parallel structure. Polish your knowledge of parallel




12.3.    Analyzing Your Accomplishments

List the 10 achievements that give you the most personal        As your instructor directs,
satisfaction. These could be things that other people           a. Share your answers with a small group of other stu-
wouldn’t notice. They can be accomplishments you’ve                 dents.
achieved recently or things you did years ago.                  b. Summarize your answers in a memo to your instruc-
    Answer the following questions for each accomplishment:             tor.
1. What skills or knowledge did you use?                         c.     Present your answers orally to the class.
2. What personal traits did you exhibit?
3. What about this accomplishment makes it person-
     ally satisfying to you?




12.4.     Remembering What You've Done

Use the following list to jog your memory about what              6. Helped a group deal constructively with conflict.
you've done. For each item, give three or four details as         7. Demonstrated creativity.
well as a gerieral statement.                                     8. Took a project from start to finish.
   Describe a time when you                                       9. Created an opportunity for yourself in a job or vol-
1. Used facts and figures to gain agreement on an                       unteer position.
    important point.                                             10. Used good judgment and logic in solving a
2. Identified a problem that a group or organiza-                    problem.
    tion faced and developed a plan for solving the
    problem.                                                     As your instructor directs,
3. Madea presentation or a speech to a group.                    a. Identify which job(s) each detail is relevant for.
4. Won the goodwill of people whose continued sup-               b. Identify which details would work well ona résumé.
    port was necessary for the success of some long-              c.     Identify which      details, further   developed,    would
     term project or activity.                                           work well in a job letter.
 5. Interested other people in something that was
     important to you and persuaded them to take the
     actions you wanted.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




400                              Part4   The Job Hunt


12.5     Developing Action Statements

Use 10 of the verbs from Figure 12.6 to write action state-   work,   in classes,   in extracurricular   activities,   or   in
ments describing what you've done in paid or volunteer        community service.



12.6      Evaluating Career Objective Statements

The following career objective statements are not effec-      3. To work with people responsibly and creatively, help-
tive. What is wrong with each statement as it stands?            ing them develop personal and professional skills.
Which statements could be revised to be satisfactory?         4. A position in international marketing which makes
Which should be dropped?                                         use of my specialization in marketing and my
1. To use my acquired knowledge of accounting to                 knowledge of foreign markets.
     eventually own my own business.                          5. To bring Faith, Hope, and Charity to the American
2. Aprogressively responsible position as a                      workplace.
     MARKETING MANAGER where education and                    6. To succeed in sales.
     ability would have valuable application and lead to      7. To design and maintain web pages.
     advancement.



12.7.     Deciding How Much Detail to Use

In each of the following situations, how detailed should      3. Lois Heilman has been a clerk-typist in the Alumni
the applicant be? Why?                                           Office. As part of her job, she developed a schedule
1. Ron Oliver has been steadily employed for the last            for mailings to alumni, set up a merge system, and
    six years while getting his college degree, but the          wrote two of the letters that go out to alumni. The
    jobs have been low-level ones, whose prime benefit           merge system she set up has cut in half the time
    was that they paid well and fit around his class             needed to produce letters.
    schedule.                                                 4. Asaco-op student, Stanley Greene spends every
2. Adrienne Barcus was an assistant department                   other term in a paid job. He now has six semesters
    manager at a clothing boutique. As assistant man-            of job experience in television broadcasting. During
    ager, she was authorized to approve checks in the            his last co-op he was the assistant producer for a
    absence of the manager. Her other duties were ring-          daily “morning magazine” show.
    ing up sales, cleaning the area, and helping mark
     items for sales.



 12.8     Evaluating Web Résumés

 Evaluate five résumés you find on the web. Many schools       c. Write a memo analyzing what works and what
 of business have places where students can post résumés          doesn’t. Attach printouts of each page you discuss.
 online. You may find other résumés on job boards (see         d. Join with a small group of students to analyze the
 the list in Figure 12.2).                                        pages.
 As your instructor directs,                                   e. Make a short oral presentation to the class discussing
                                                                  the best (or worst) page you found.
 a. Share your results with a small group of students.
 b. Write an e-mail message analyzing what works and
     what doesn’t. Provide URLs or links to the pages you
     discuss.



 12.9     Writing Job Search Goals

 Write a list of goals and tasks you need to accomplish for    steps do you need to start taking now to accomplish these
 a successful job search. Which ones are crucial? What         goals and tasks? Make a tentative time line for the steps.
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                              Chapter12    Building Résumés                              401


12.10    Writing a Job Description
Write a job description for your “dream position.”             mw    Pay
Include the following:                                               Experience and education requirements
= Position title                                                     Personal competencies (for example, ability to com-
= Position description including tasks, special                      municate, work in teams, problem solve, etc.).
    requirements                                                =    Amount of travel
=   Location                                                    =    Social, political, and ethical issues that may be
    Work hours                                                       involved
=   Working conditions (for example, office space,                 In small groups, share your descriptions. Did you get
    scheduling, amount of supervision)                          some ideas from the dream jobs of other students?
=   Company culture



12.11     Performing a Needs Analysis
Identify a specific job posting you are interested in and       b.   Compose bullet entries for each qualification using
list its requirements. Analyze the needs of the job and              action verbs.
identify your personal strengths and qualifications to          c.   Identify areas in which you still need to improve.
obtain it.                                                           Brainstorm a list of ways in which you can achieve
                                                                     what you need.
As your instructor directs,
a. Work on incorporating your list into a résumé.




12.12     Researching a Job Ad

For a specific job ad online, list job requirements and key     As your instructor directs,
words. Search online for the corporation that has posted        a. Share your findings with a group and discuss how
the job. Look up the corporation’s mission and objectives           the given job posting correlates to the company’s
pages and look for repeating keywords and hot buttons.              overall mission and needs.
Find correlations between the job posting and the com-          b. Identify one such case from your group and present
pany’s objectives.                                                  it to the class.



12.13     Editing a Résumé

Below are a job ad and a résumé applying for that               look at it, too. Redo her résumé to improve it. Then write
job. Using the information you have about Jennifer’s            a memo to your instructor discussing the strengths and
two jobs (given below the résumé), critique Jennifer’s          weaknesses of the résumé and explaining why you made
résumé. Her job letter is Exercise 13.18, if you wish to        the changes you did.


                     Account Manager
                      Location: Aurora, IL
                      Job Category: Business/Strategic Management
                      Career Level: Entry-Level Manager (Manager/Supervisor of Staff)

                      Quantum National is the market leader in providing research, sales and market-
                      ing, health care policy consulting, and health information management services to
                      the health care industry. Quantum has more than 20,000 employees worldwide and
                      offices in 15 countries in Central and South America. Medical Innovation Communi-
                      cations, a division of Quantum National, currently has an opportunity for an Account
                      Manager in our Aurora, IL, office. Medical Innovation Communications provides
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




402                             Part4   The Job Hunt



                 comprehensive product commercialization at all stages of product development: from
                 phase 2, through national and international product launches to ongoing support.

                 The Account Manager has global responsibility for managing the client's marketing
                 communications programs, assuring that the client’s objectives are met in terms of
                 program quality and on-time delivery.



                 Responsibilities include:
                   m     Day-to-day client contact to identify and translate marketing objectives into
                         strategic medical communications/education programs.
                   =     Develop proposals, budgets, estimates of job cost, and profitability.
                   =     Lead ateam of Project Managers and Marketing Associates through guidance,
                         delegation, and follow-up; and significant interaction with the client.
                   =     Work with New Business Development Teams to develop proposals, budgets,
                         and presenting company capabilities/business pitches to clients.
                   =     Schedule the workflow of a 30-person demonstration and marketing team.


                 Requirements:
                   m     Bachelors degree.
                   =     Ability to define and respond to client needs, working effectively under tight
                         deadlines.
                   =     Proven client management experience.
                   =     Proven team management experience.
                   =     Superior written and spoken communication skills.

                 E-mail applications and résumés to pattersj|@micquant.com, and direct inquiries to
                 J. Pattersen.



                 Jennifer Stanton                      8523 8th Street               125 AS. 27th Ave
                 wildechilde@gmail.com                 Ames, IA 50011               Omaha, NE 68101
                 cell: 515-668-9011                    515-311-8243                      402-772-5106


                 Objective
                 To get a job as an account manager.

                  Education
                 lowa State University, Ames, |A— Business
                 May 2012, maybe December 2012
                 Minor: Botany
                  Cumulative GPA: 2.63 / 4.0
                  Mid-Plains Community College, North Platte, NE—Associate of Arts
                  May 2008
                  Bryan High School, Omaha, NE
                  May 2005

                  Work Experience
                  May 2011-August 2011—Summer Internship at FirstWest Insurance, Des Moines, IA
                    m=   Worked with a senior account manager to oversee some medical and EAP accounts.
                    m    Made her phone calls to customers.
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                             Chapter12    Building Résumés                           403



                    m   Organized meetings with customers.
                    =   had to write some training “how-to’s” for the new billing database.

                  1998-2010—Worked in family business
                  Worked weekends and summers in my parents’ used-book store.

                  Skills
                  Microsoft Office
                  Fluent in Spanish




When you ask, Jennifer tells you about her two jobs:


                  At her internship this summer, the person she worked with was pretty much an
                  absentee supervisor: Jennifer had to do all the work alone (and she’s still a little
                  bitter about that). Her department managed five Employee Assistance Provider
                  accounts with a total of about 36,000 individual policy holders in five midwestern
                  states. She had to set up and maintain work schedules for 12 employees, and man-
                  age the expense reports for the entire group. Four of those employees traveled a lot,
                  so there were lots of expense reports to manage; there were so many that Jennifer
                  had to revise the department’s budget twice. She spent about four hours of every
                  day returning customer phone calls and linking customers up on conference calls
                  with her department’s employees. And those training how-to’s? That turned into a
                  20-page how-to manual, which she wrote up and then had FirstWest’s IT depart-
                  ment turn into a website for the department to use.

                  Her parents’ family bookstore in Omaha is actually a franchise of a national chain
                  of aftermarket bookstores: Booktopia. The store generates about $450,000 in
                  gross sales per year, and stocks about 100,000 titles (not counting Internet sales
                  and special orders); it employs 5 full-time and 17 part-time employees. In addition
                  to filling in as a floor clerk, stocker, and cashier—all jobs that put her customer-
                  service, cash-handling, and “people skills” to the test—Jennifer has been handling
                  all of the paperwork between the store and the Booktopia corporate office. (Her
                  parents are great salespeople but they’re not good at paying attention to details.
                  That’s created friction between them and the corporate office.) That paperwork
                  includes all of the store’s quarterly and yearly budget, staffing, and marketing
                   reports since 1999.


                Note: This exercise was written by Matthew Search.




12.14     Analyzing Job Applicants Based on Their Résumés

Based on your reading of Chapter 12, the following job           weaknesses as highlighted by their résumés? Which of
description and the two résumés below, analyze the two           the two candidates would you select? Why?
applicants for the position. What are their strengths and


                   Job description for Cost Accountant

                   The position of Cost Accountant is responsible for budgeting, reviewing, analyz-
                   ing, controlling, and forecasting costs involving different cost centers throughout the
                   production process, including raw material procurement, inventory management,
                   manufacturing, warehousing, and shipping. Other responsibilities include analyzing
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




404                           Part4    The Job Hunt



                 G/L reports; ensuring compliance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
                 (GAAP) and Cost Accounting Standards (CAS); conducting breakeven (BE), contri-
                 bution margin, and variance analyses; and preparing periodic reports for upper man-
                 agement. The position requires a bachelor’s degree in accounting. A certification in
                 management accounting from the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA) will
                 be a plus. The position also requires a minimum of two years of work experience in
                 cost accounting at a manufacturing company.



                                           STAN GOLDBERG
                                                1010, Buck St., Fairfax, VA
                                               Stanberg@bestwebsite.com

                 OBJECTIVE
                                      Cost Accountant position in which | can effectively utilize my
                                      skills in budgeting, accounting, costing, forecasting, reporting,
                                      and teamworking

                 EXPERIENCE
                                      2005-2006             Abacus Engineering              Portland, OR.
                                      Cost Accounting Trainee
                                      =    Calculated cost variance for different cost centers.
                                      m=   Prepared quarterly budget reports
                                      =    Coodinated with employees at different levels for data
                                           collection
                                      2007-till date           Bourke Winodws                 Fairfax, VA

                                      Costing Manager
                                      =    Monitored 12 cost centers
                                      a    Implemented policies that reduced costs by 25%
                                      =    Supervised a staff of three, including one cost accountant.
                                      =    | also produced multiple G/L reports for the production
                                           department as well as upper management

                 EDUCATION
                                      2001-2005    Edward Young University, Perry, OH
                                      = B.A., accounting.
                                      = Currently pursuing CMA of Institute of Management Accounting

                 INTERESTS
                                      Country music, computers, fishing, golf



                                             Jamal Robinson
                                                 1212 S. E. Avenue, Earl, PA
                                            (111) 112-1121-jr8@pearinews.com

                  Qualification Summary                                                 ;
                  Skills in controling and reucing costs, experience with GAAP and CAS, skills in cost
                  analyses, project management, CMA (IMA), member of the Financial Management
                  Association International, well-versd with ERP software
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                             Chapter12       Building Résumés                              405



                   Education
                          =    Certification in Management Accounting
                               Graduation—2007
                               Institute of Management Accountants
                          w    True Blue University, Roald, PA
                               Graduation—2006
                               Degree—Bachelor of Sciences (BS)
                               Major—Accounting, G.P.A. 3.55

                   Experience
                   Silverstein Windows and Doors, Earl, PA                                      2007-Till date

                          Cost Accountant
                          m    Estimate, review, budget, analyze, and forecast direct / indirect and vari-
                               able and fixed costs for all stages of production
                          =    Work on the ERP system to genrate reports and data sheets giving cost
                                analyses
                          =     Suggested a procedure in a contract that saved the company $35,000
                          =     Worked with the Marketing Department on the costing / pricing of lower-
                                priced vinyl casement windows

                   Achievements
                           =    Volunteered   more than 100 hours for the Habitat for Humnity Award
                                2005-2006
                           =    Visted door and widow manufacturing plants in Argentina, Belgium, and
                                Japan
                           m    Received the best employee of the month award at Silverstein Windows
                                and Doors
                           =   Wrote articles for Financial Control Weekly, a publication of Costing Pro-
                               fessionals Association
                    References
                       Available upon request


                 Note: This exercise was written by Anish Dave.



12.15    Preparing a Résumé

Write a résumé that you could use in your job search.            c.     Adapt your résumé to a specific company you hope
ne        Peetractar direct                                             to work for. Write a memo to your instructor explain-
  2 tend ioe : ig rt a           eee           je     aoe               ing the specific adaptations you make and why.
a. Write a résumé for the field in which you hope to            d.      Write a résumé for the dream job you developed in
     a job.                                                                   ;
                                                :      ’                Exercise 12.10.
b. Write two different résumés for two different job
     paths you are interested in pursuing. Write a memo
     to your instructor explaining the differences.



12.16    Critiquing Your Résumé, |

Answer the following overview questions for your                      2. What are your concerns with applying for this
résumé:                         ¢                                        position?
 1. Exactly what position are you applying for? How                   3. What could the concerns of your audience be with your
    did you choose the position?                                         application? How did you try to address these concerns?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




406                             Part4   The Job Hunt


 4. How do you think the audience will perceive your           2. Does the order of the headings highlight your strongest
    résumé? Explain.                                              qualifications?
 5. Does your résumé target your employer and posi-            3. Is the work history listed from most recent to past
    tion specifically?                                            positions?
Answer the following questions on your design choices:         4. Do you omit high school information? If not,
 1. Does the page look balanced?                                  explain your choice.
 2. Does the résumé look original or based on a                5. Do you provide details for your best qualifications?
    template?                                                  6. Do you use numbers to support your
 3. Does the length of your résumé fit your situation             accomplishments?
    and position?                                              7. Is the information provided relevant to the position?
 4. Does your résumé include clear headings, bullets,          8. Does the information support your claim that you
    and white space?                                              are qualified and the best person for this position?
 5. Do you use fonts appropriate for the career level          9. Does the information flow logically and easily?
    and industry?                                             10. Do your bulleted lists use parallel structure?
 6. Do you use consistent font sizes and spacing              11. Do you avoid grammar, punctuation, and spelling
    throughout the document?                                      errors?
 7. Does the design reflect your personality and your            Variation: Review a class member’s résumé using the
    career ambitions?                                         same questions.
Answer the following questions on the content of your
résumé.
 1. Are the résumé sections clearly, correctly, and con-
    sistently labeled?



12.17     Critiquing Your Résumé, II

Rate your résumé using the résumé checklist in the page       stating how you believe your résumé rates. Explain and
392 sidebar. Write a one-page memo to your instructor         support your position.



12.18     Creating a Web or Paper Portfolio

 Create a web or paper portfolio highlighting your pro-       projects, workplace samples, and other documents that
 fessional and academic accomplishments. Include course       support your professional accompliskments and goals.



 12.19     Evaluating Visual Résumés
 Working individually, in pairs, or in small groups, as             are the advantages of VisualCV over your own web
 your instructor directs,                                           page? Disadvantages?
 a.   Lookat five of the example student résumés on Visu-     b.    Discuss strengths and weaknesses of two résumés in
      alCV.com. What features do you like? Why? What                a memo to your teacher, a posting on the class web-
      features would you change or omit? Why? What                  site, or an oral presentation.




 12.20     Evaluating Linkedin Profiles
 Working individually, in pairs, or in small groups, as       =     Which one has the best recommendations? Why?
 your instructor directs, look at six profiles on LinkedIn.   =     Overall, which one has the best profile? Why?
 You could use those of your classmates, family members,           Discuss your conclusions in a memo to your teacher,
 or local businesspeople.                                     a posting on the class website, or an oral presentation.
 = Which one has the best résumé? Why?
 = How do the profiles and résumés differ?
Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




CHAPTER                                       |()




Delivering Negative
Messages

@ar-lelc-mOlenaliar~
Organizing Negative Messages                        B   Recasting the Situation as a Persuasive
   ® Giving Bad News to Clients and                     WissetereLs
         Customers                                Varieties of Negative Messages
    ®    Giving Bad News to Superiors               ® Claims and Complaints
    ™@ Giving Bad News to Peers and                 ™ Rejections and Refusals
       Subordinates                                 ® Disciplinary Notices and Negative
The Parts of a Negative Message                       Performance Appraisals
    ®    Subject Lines                              ® Layoffs and Firings
         Buffers                                  Solving a Sample Problem
         Reasons                                    @ Problem
      Refusals                                      ® Analysis of the Problem
      Alternatives                                  L BeDitvatistfolamesman\-usy-lna)elicusienielarelary
    @ Endings
                                                  Summary of Key Points
WV oto) (elel(-13
Tone in Negative Messages
Alternative Strategies for Negative
Situations
     ®    Recasting the Situation as a Positive
          Message
                                                                       Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




NEWSWORTHY                      COMMUNICATION

Metaphors in Negative News
                                                                            ‘burning platform,’ and we must decide how we are
                                                                            going to change our behaviour.”
                                                                               Using that story as a frame, Elop then outlined
                                                                            the advances of Nokia’s competitors and Nokia’s
                                                                            own missteps. “While competitors poured flames
                                                                            on our market share, what happened at Nokia?
                                                                             We fell behind, we missed big trends, and we lost
                                                                             time. .. . We poured gasoline on our own burning
                                                                             platform. I believe we have lacked accountability
                                                                             and leadership to align and direct the company
                                                                             through these disruptive times. We had a series of
                                                                             misses. We haven’t been delivering innovation fast
     haring negative messages is never easy, but                             enough. We’re not collaborating internally. Nokia,
     announcing to all of your employees that your                           our platform is burning.”
     company is failing could be the most difficult                              The     1,300-word        memo       details     market      losses,
message a CEO has to share. But in February 2011,                            failed devices, corporate failures, and bad decisions.
only days before announcing a major deal with      And yet, by the time Elop finishes the memo, he has
Microsoft, Nokia CEO Stephen Elop did just that.   delivered the message not as the death-knell of the
   Nokia, in spite of being     ne beeen                                 company, but as an opportu-
                                                                         nity to innovate and shape
the world’s largest maker     “By the time Elop finishes the memo,
of mobile phones, has been ~ he has delivered the message .. . as        the future of mobile commu-
struggling to maintain its                                               nication.  He concludes his
                              an opportunity to innovate and shape memo by returning to the
market lead in the face of
                              the future of mobile communication.”       burning platform once again:
increased competition from
Apple’s iPhone and Google’s                                              “The burning platform, upon
range of Android handsets. With shrinking demand                              which the man     found himself, caused the man to

for feature phones and no hit smartphone under its                            shift his behaviour, and take a bold and brave step
belt, Nokia is in real danger.                                                into an uncertain future. He was able to tell his story.
   Elop shared the harsh realities of the situation with                      Now, we have a great opportunity to do the same.”
all Nokia employees in an internal memo, framing                                 By delivering his negative message in a carefully
the entire message as an opportunity to improve. He                           constructed memo, Stephen Elop avoided creating
began with a dramatic story: an oil platform worker                           further problems for an already struggling com-
forced to choose between a fire behind him and the                            pany. Rather, he took the bold step of being direct
icy North Atlantic waters in front of him. Elop then                          and honest and asked for all of his employees to
challenged his workers: “We too, are standing on a                            help Nokia regain its lead in the market.
                                                                                            Platform’ Memo,” Engadget.com, February 8, 2011, http://www
Sources: Chris Ziegler, “Nokia CEO Stephen Elop Rallies Troops in Brutally Honest ‘Burning
                                                                                           if:
engadget.com/2011/02/08/ nokia-ceo-stephen-elop-rallies-troops-in-brutally-honest-burnin
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




278                    Part3   Basic Business Messages


                       Learning Objectives
                       After studying this chapter, you will know

                                      Different ways to organize negative messages.

                                      Ways to construct the different parts of negative messages.

                                      How to improve the tone of negative messages.

                                      Ways to construct different kinds of negative messages.



                       In a negative message, the basic information we have to convey is negative; we
                       expect the audience to be disappointed or angry. Some jobs entail conveying more
                       negative messages than others. Customer service representatives, employee rela-
                       tions personnel, and insurance agents all have to say no on a regular basis.
                          Negative communications such as refusals, rejections, recalls, and apologies
                       are hard to compose. Yet they are so important. Good ones restore corporate
                       reputations as well as customer and employee goodwill. Bad ones can lead to
                       lawsuits. Corporate officers can be promoted or fired on the basis of a negative
                       communication. Employees reporting negative situations (whistle-blowing)
                       are frequently penalized; one study found the percentage being penalized to
                       be 82%. In spite of the penalties, the study found that 19% of corporate fraud
                       was uncovered by employees.'
                          Negative messages are a vital part of business and administrative commu-
                       nication. One Silicon Valley company calculated the costs of negative com-
                       munications from a sales person known for negative interpersonal skills and
                       e-mails. Their costs included managerial time, HR time, anger management
                       training and counseling, among others, and came to $160,000 for just one year.
                       The company also deducted 60% of that cost from the employee’s bonus. A
                       British study estimated the costs of bullying in firms with 1,000 employees to
                       be about $2 million a year per firm.”
                          The other side of the coin, and a classic illustration of how to handle nega-
                       tives, is the 1982 Tylenol recall. When Johnson and Johnson learned that seven
                       people in the Chicago area had died from cyanide-laced Tylenol capsules, they
                       immediately communicated their knowledge. They ordered the entire supply
                       withdrawn from store shelves, and they offered to replace Tylenol capsules in
                       people’s homes with tablets. This decision cost the company tens of millions
                       of dollars. But it was the right decision. When Tylenol was released again sev-
                       eral months later in new, tamper-resistant containers, it recovered its market
                       share. The company’s forthright communications of the situation confirmed
                       its integrity.’ This chapter will follow the 1982 Tylenol path and look at some
                       of the preferred ways to convey negative messages.
                           Negative messages include rejections and refusals, announcements of pol-
                       icy changes that do not benefit the audience, requests the audience will see as
                       insulting or intrusive, negative performance appraisals, disciplinary notices,
                       and product recalls or notices of defects.
                           A negative message always has several purposes:
                             Primary purposes:

                         =     To give the audience the bad news.
                         =     To have the audience read, understand, and accept the message.
                         =     To maintain as much goodwill as possible.
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter 10   Delivering Negative Messages                                     279


                                                                                                           Delivering Cancer
                                                                                                           News
                                                                                                  =        Oncologists, idocters
                                                                                                           who specialize in treating
                                                                                                cancer, have one of the toughest
                                                                                                jobs when it comes to delivering
                                                                                                negative news. These doctors
                                                                                                often inform patients that they
                                                                                                have a difficult battle to face or
                                                                                                that there is almost no hope and
                                                                                                death may be imminent.
                                                                                                  Some medical schools now
                                                                                                insist that students learn how
                                                                                                to deliver bad news to patients,
                                                                                                particularly those suffering from
Sometimes corporations earn more bad publicity by keeping quiet about negative events           cancer. These medical programs
than they would by explaining them. Rolls-Royce received much negative publicity when           have added classes where stu-
it delayed responding to the failure of one of its engines on an Airbus A380 superjumbo jet.    dents learn to give the negative
                                                                                                news through verbal and non-
      Secondary purposes:                                                                       verbal forms of communication.
                                                                                                Some of these schools also use
                                                                                                role-playing with patient actors.
 =     To maintain, as much as possible, a good image of the communicator
                                                                                                The medical students have to
       and the communicator’s organization.
                                                                                                inform the actors of an unwanted
 =     To reduce or eliminate future communication on the same subject so the                   diagnosis and appropriately deal
       message doesn’t create more work for the sender.                                         with the actor's response. Some
                                                                                                studies suggest that the manner
                                                                                                 in which bad news is presented
      In many negative situations, the communicator and audience will continue                  to a patient has significant effects
to deal with each other. Even when further interaction is unlikely (for exam-                    on their overall health.
ple, when a company rejects a job applicant or refuses to renew a customer’s                        As an additional resource for
insurance), the firm wants anything the audience may say about the company                       doctors to be upfront with their
to be positive or neutral rather than negative.                                                  patients, the American Society
   Some messages that at first appear to be negative can be structured to cre-                   of Clinical Oncology has devel-

ate a positive feeling: a decision that may be negative in the short term may be                 oped a booklet. It helps patients

shown to be a positive one in the long term; or the communication of a prob-
                                                                                                 understand their options when
                                                                                                 they learn they have cancer.
lem can be directly connected to an effective solution.                                          The goal is to help improve their
   Even when it is not possible to make the audience happy with the news we                      quality of life, maximize their
must convey, we still want the audience to feel that                                              remaining time, and plan for end-
                                                                                                 of-life care. The society believes
  =     They have been taken seriously.                                                          that currently less than 40% of
                                                                                                  patients have conversations with
  =     Our decision is fair and reasonable.                                                      their doctors about their options.
  =     If they were in our shoes, they would make the same decision.
                                                                                                 Adapted from Dawn Sagario, “Doctors
                                                                                                 Learn to Convey Facts in Appropri-
                                                                                                 ate, Thoughtful Way,” Des Moines

 ORGANIZING NEGATIVE MESSAGES                                                                    Register, October 17, 2006, E1, E2;
                                                                                                 “Oncology Group Promotes Candor
                                                                                                 on End-of-Life-Care,” Des Moines
 The best way to organize a negative message depends on your audience and on                     Register, February 8, 2011, 6A.
 the severity of the negative information. This chapter presents several possible
 patterns and connects them with their most likely contexts. Be sure to always
 consider your particular situation when choosing an organizing pattern.

 Giving Bad News to Clients and Customers
 When you must give bad news to clients and customers, you need to be clear,
 but you also need to maintain goodwill. People are increasingly skeptical and
 have a hard time trusting organizations. One study found that in order to
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




280                                  Part3   Basic Business Messages


Figure 10.1            How to Organize Negative Messages

  Negative messages                             Negative messages                                   Negative messages to peers
  to clients and customers                      to superiors                                        and subordinates

  1. When you have a reason that                1. Describe the problem.                            1. Describe the problem.
      the audience will understand                 Tell what’s wrong, clearly and                       Tell what’s wrong, clearly and
      and accept, give the reason                  unemotionally.                                       unemotionally.

      before the refusal.                       2. Tell how it happened.                            2. Present an alternative
      A good reason prepares the                    Provide the background. What                        or compromise, if one is
      audience to expect the refusal.               underlying factors led to this specific             available.
  2. Give the negative information                  problem?                                            An alternative not only gives the
     or refusal just once, clearly.                                                                     audience another way to get
                                                3. Describe the options for fixing it.
     Inconspicuous refusals can be                                                                      what they want but also suggests
                                                   If one option is clearly best, you may
     missed altogether, making it                                                                       that you care about them and
                                                   need to discuss only one. But if your
      aga        tes yiag      eee                  superiors will think of other options,              Hele     tat meet et Weces
                         ;                          or if different people will judge the           3. If possible, ask for input
  3. Present an alternative or                      options differently, describe all the              or action.
     compromise, if one is available.               options, giving their advantages and               People in the audience may be
      ee                mo           ee             disadvantages.                                      able to AES solutions. And
       u
      they want but also feels that              4. Recommend a solution and ask                        ees pM ps iro to
      you care about them and helping               for action.                                          accept the consequences.
                                                    Ask for approval so that you can
      them meet their needs.
                                                    make the necessary changes to fix
  4. End with a positive, forward-
                                                    the problem.
     looking statement.
a                                                                                            a UEaaESSEEIDE IIEAINSRnSSESE SRARIIESEEEERRERRRREnERREERE



                                     accept a message as true, more than 70% of people need exposure to it more
                                     than three times.* Compromises or alternatives can help you achieve clarity
                                     and goodwill. See the first column in Figure 10.1 for a way to organize these
                                     messages.
                                         Figure 10.2 illustrates another basic pattern for negative messages. This let-
                                     ter omits the reason for the policy change, probably because the change bene-
                                     fits the company, not the customer. Putting the bad news first (though pairing
                                     it immediately with an alternative) makes it more likely that the recipient will
                                     read the letter. If this letter seemed to be just a routine renewal, or if it opened
                                     with the good news that the premium was lower, few recipients would read
                                     the letter carefully, and many would not read it at all. Then, if they had acci-
                                     dents and found that their coverage was reduced, they’d blame the company
                                     for not communicating clearly. Emphasizing the negative here is both good
                                     ethics and good business.


                                        Giving Bad News to Superiors
                                        Your superior expects you to solve minor problems by yourself. But some-
                                        times, solving a problem requires more authority or resources than you have.
                                        When you give bad news to a superior, also recommend a way to deal with
                                        the problem. Turn the negative message into a persuasive one. See the middle
                                        column in Figure 10.1.


                                        Giving Bad News to Peers and Subordinates
                                        When passing along serious bad news to peers and subordinates, many peo-
                                        ple use the organization suggested in the last column in Figure 10.1.
                                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                                     Chapter 10   Delivering Negative Messages                                  281


Figure 10.2              A Negative Letter




        Vickers
              Insurance Company                                                                                     3373 Forbes Avenue
                                                                                                                    Rosemont, PA 19010
                                                                                                                          215) 572-0100
                                                                 e     ey:
                                                             Liability Coverage                     neg™
                                                                                                           ive
                                                                                                                         get
                   Negative information highlighted                                       re
                   cp reader wont ignoremess2a°           Tg Being Discontinued—
                                                          Here's How to Replace It! arvana

              Dear Policyholder:
   Negative
              When your auto insurance is renewed, it will no longer include liability coverage
              unless you select the new Assurance Plan. Here's why.                                                            Positive
                                                                                                                                informavion
                                            5         5      ‘
              Liability coverage is being discontinued. It, and the part of the premium which paid for it, dered
                Shea                   H

              will be dropped from all policies when they are renewed.                                     for emphasi?

              This change could leave a gap in your protection. But you can replace the old Liability
              Coverage with Vickers' new Assurance Plan.                                     No reason is given. The change
                                                                                                                                     probably
   Alternative
                                                                                                                 benefits
              With the new Assurance Plan, you receive benefits for litigation or awards arising from an              ee
              accident—regardless of who's at fault. The cost for the Assurance Plan at any level   is based on company
              the ages of drivers, where you live, your driving record, and other factors. If these change         rather
              before your policy is renewed, the cost of your Assurance Plan may also change. The actual        psa
              cost will be listed in your renewal statement.                                                       soitis
                                                                                                                                     omitted.

              To sign up for the Assurance Plan, just check the level of coverage you want on the enclosed
              form and return it in the postage-paid envelope within 14 days. You'll be assured of the
              coverage you select.
      Forward-looking
      ending emphasizes
      reader's choice
              Sincerely,

              Ch. Ign
               C.J. Morgan
               President
     Alternative
               PS. The Assurance Plan protects you against possible legal costs arising from an accident. Sign
               up for the plan today and receive full coverage from Vickers.




   No serious negative (such as being downsized or laid off) should come
as a complete surprise, nor should it be delivered by e-mail. Researchers
Timmerman and Harrison note that managers may be inclined to use elec-
tronic forms of communication to deliver bad news, but they should resist
the temptation in most situations. Their study outlines four factors that
should be considered when choosing a medium for delivering bad news: the
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




282                    Part3   Basic Business Messages




                       When Chrysler cut 25% of its dealers, it sent the bad news the same day it went public
                       with the list of cut dealerships. Thus, many dealers first heard about their cuts on the
                       news, not from Chrysler’s letter, and created even more bad press for Chrysler.



                       severity of the message, the complexity of the explanation, the type of expla-
                       nation, and the relationship between the superior and subordinates. Timmer-
                       man and Harrison suggest managers must always juggle the efficiency of
                       delivering the message with its impact on receivers. Typically, managers who
                       deliver bad news in face-to-face settings are more appreciated and accepted
                       by employees.°
                          Managers can prepare for possible negatives by giving full informa-
                       tion as it becomes available. It is also possible to let the people who will
                       be affected by a decision participate in setting the criteria. Someone who
                       has bought into the criteria for retaining workers is more likely to accept
                       decisions using such criteria. And in some cases, the synergism of groups
                       may make possible ideas that management didn’t think of or rejected as
                       “anacceptable.”
                          Some workplaces incorporate employee suggestion systems to help reduce
                       excess costs and improve organizational effectiveness. Nokia, for example,
                       runs a BlogHub and Sphere. Both are social media sites that employees can
                       use to critique products, rant about the company, and ask questions. Mangers
                       hope that these sites, which allow employees to give anonymous honest opin-
                        ions, will spawn new ideas and innovations.°
                           When the bad news is less serious, as in Figure 10.3, try using the pattern
                        in the first column of Figure 10.1 unless your knowledge of the audience sug-
                        gests that another pattern will be more effective. The audience’s reaction is
                        influenced by the following factors:

                               Do you and the audience have a good relationship?
                               Does the organization treat people well?
                               Has the audience been warned of possible negatives?
                               Has the audience bought into the criteria for the decision?
                               Do communications after the negative decision build goodwill?
                                                                  Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                          Chapter10    Delivering Negative Messages                          283


Figure 10.3             A Negative Memo to Subordinates




                                                                                        FIRST BANK
                                                                                        Great Plains, Nebraska

                                                                                                             Memo

                    Date:    January 10, 2012
                    To:      All Employees
                    From:    Floyd E. Mattson Fem

                     Subject: Group Dental Insurance

                     First Bank is always seeking to provide employees with a competitive benefits package
                     that meets their needs.

                  In response to many requests, the Human Resource Department solicited bids for expanded
       eagon      dental coverage. At this time none of the responses from insurers serving our area are
   given beforé \ affordable for us. We continue to negotiate, but with costs rising at 20% per year, success
     negate          seems unlikely. Other banks in the area are ina similar situation, so our current benefits
                  bepackage matches or exceeds what they offer.
     Positive

                    First Bank continues to offer enrollment in an employee-funded group plan with ABC
   Alternatives      Dental. The coverage includes 37 dentists in our county and pays 50 percent of allowable
                     fees. Many of our employees have found this coverage helpful. Employees also may use
                     their medical savings account for dental care. Consider one of these options for the present,
     Positive     ey and First Bank will continue to investigate new opportunities for expanded coverage.
       close




THE PARTS OF A NEGATIVE MESSAGE
This section provides more information about wording each part of a negative
message.

Subject Lines
Many negative messages put the topic, but not the specific negative, in the
subject line.

   Subject: Status of Conversion Table Program

 Other negative message subject lines focus on solving the problem.

   Subject: Improving Our Subscription Letter
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




284                                       Part3   Basic Business Messages


              How to Tell a Partner          Use a negative subject line in messages when you think readers may ignore
Pa            about an STD                what they believe is a routine message. Also use a negative subject line when
              “Datin         etiquette    the reader needs the information to make a decision or to act.
  =                    is
            demands it—and so
                               :
 does public health. If you have a           Subject: Elevator to Be Out Friday, June 17
 sexually transmitted disease, you
 need to tell your partner.
   But finding the right moment for
                                          Many people do not read all their messages, and a neutral subject line may
 that awkward conversation isn’t
                                          lead them to ignore the message.
 easy. Whether out of fear, shame,
 or anger, people diagnosed with
                                          Buffers
 STDs often fail to tell.
   So how about sending an                Traditionally, textbooks recommended that negative messages open with buf-
 e-card? That's an approach               fers. A buffer is a neutral or positive statement that allows you to delay the
 developed in part by the San             negative. Some research suggests that buffers do not make readers respond
 Francisco Department of Public           more positively,” and good buffers are hard to write. However, in special situ-
 Health. Called the inSPOT pro-
                                          ations, you may want to use a buffer. The first sentence in the First Bank letter
 gram, it lets you send special-
                                          (Figure 10.3) is a buffer.
 ized STD alert e-cards to break
 the news. Since its launch a few
                                             To be effective, a buffer must put the reader in a good frame of mind, not
 years ago, more than 30,000              give the bad news but not imply a positive answer either, and provide a natu-
 people have sent more than               ral transition to the body of the letter. The kinds of statements most often used
 49,500 cards. Considering the            as buffers are good news, facts and chronologies of events, references.to enclo-
 19 million new STD cases diag-           sures, thanks, and statements of principle.
 nosed each year in the U.S.,
 that’s a drop in the bucket, but         1. Start with any good news or positive elements the letter contains.
 it’s certainly a step in the right
 direction.                                   Starting Thursday, June 26, you'll have easier access to your money 24 hours a day
      E-cards come in various designs,
                                              at First National Bank.
 and the sender can choose a spe-
 cific STD from a pull-down menu.
 One message reads: ‘It’s not what            Letter announcing that the drive-up windows will be closed for two days while new
 you brought to the party, it's what          automatic teller machines are installed
 you left with. | left with an STD.
 You might have, too. Get checked          2. State a fact or provide a chronology of events.
 out soon.’ It then directs recipients
 to testing centers in their area.
 The e-cards can be sent anony-
                                              As aresult of the new graduated dues schedule—determined by vote of the Delegate
 mously, and according to inSPOT,             Assembly last December and subsequently endorsed by the Executive Council—
 it doesn’t collect data about site           members are now asked to establish their own dues rate and to calculate the total
 users or card recipients.”                   amount of their remittance.

 Copyright 2009 Dr. Ranit Mishori. Ini-
 tially published in Parade magazine.
                                              Announcement of a new dues structure that will raise most members’ dues
 All rights reserved.
                                           3. Refer to enclosures in the letter.


                                              A new sticker for your car is enclosed. You may pick up additional ones in the office
                                              if needed.

                                              Letter announcing increase in parking rental rates

                                           4. Thank the reader for something he or she has done.

                                              Thank you for scheduling appointments for me with so many senior people at First
                                              National Bank. My visit there March 14 was very informative.


                                              Letter refusing a job offer
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                     Chapter10    Delivering Negative Messages                          285


5. State a general principle.

  Good drivers should pay substantially less for their auto insurance. The Good Driver
 Plan was created to reward good drivers (those with five-year accident-free records)
  with our lowest available rates. A change in the plan, effective January 1, will help
 keep those rates low.


  Letter announcing that the company will now count traffic tickets, not just accidents, in
  calculating insurance rates—a change that will raise many people’s premiums

   Some audiences will feel betrayed by messages whose positive openers delay
the central negative point. Therefore, use a buffer only when the audience (indi-
vidually or culturally) values harmony or when the buffer serves another purpose.
For example, when you must thank the reader somewhere in the letter, putting
the “thank you” in the first paragraph allows you to start on a positive note.
   Buffers are hard to write. Even if you think the reader would prefer to be let
down easily, use a buffer only when you can write a good one.

Reasons
Research shows that audiences who described themselves as “totally sur-
prised” by negative news had many more negative feelings and described
their feelings as being stronger than did those who expected the negative.® A
clear and convincing reason prepares the audience for the negative, resulting
in people who more easily accept it.
   The following reason is inadequate.
   Weak reason:     The goal of the Knoxville CHARGE-ALL Center is to provide our customers
                    faster, more personalized service. Since you now live outside the Knoxville
                    CHARGE-ALL service area, we can no longer offer you the advantages of
                    a local CHARGE-ALL Center.

   If the reader says, “I don’t care if my bills are slow and impersonal,” will
the company let the reader keep the card? No. The real reason for the nega-
tive is that the bank’s franchise allows it to have cardholders only in a given
geographic region.
   Real reason:     Each local CHARGE-ALL center is permitted to offer accounts to custom-
                    ers in a several-state area. The Knoxville CHARGE-ALL center serves cus-
                    tomers east of the Mississippi. You can continue to use your current card
                    until it expires. When that happens, you'll need to open an account with a
                    CHARGE-ALL center that serves Texas.

   Don’t hide behind “company policy”: your audience will assume the policy
is designed to benefit you at their expense. If possible, show how your audi-
ence benefits from the policy. If they do not benefit, don’t mention policy at all.
   Weak reason:     | cannot write an insurance policy for you because company policy does
                    not allow me to do so.

   Better reason:   Gorham insures cars only when they are normally garaged at night. Stan-
                    dard insurance policies cover a wider variety of risks and charge higher
                    fees. Limiting the policies we write gives Gorham customers the lowest
                    possible rates for auto insurance.

    Avoid saying that you cannot do something. Most negative messages exist
 because the communicator or company has chosen certain policies or cutoff
 points. In the example above, the company could choose to insure a wider
 variety of customers if it wanted to do so.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




286                                     Part3      Basic Business Messages


             Waiting Impacts               As a middle manager, you will often enforce policies that you did not
             Business                   design and announce decisions that you did not make. Don’t pass the buck by
      ==    The longer customers        saying, “This was a terrible decision.” Carelessly criticizing your superiors is
           wait, the more annoyed       never a good idea.
 they can become. A team of mar-           If you have several reasons for saying no, use only those that are strong
 keting professors examined the         and watertight. If you give five reasons and the audience dismisses two of the
 waiting experiences of 844 cus-        them, the audience may feel that they’ve won and should get the request.
 tomers at banks, hair salons, res-
                                           Weak reason:                         You cannot store large bulky items in the dormitory over
 taurants, and oil change shops.
                                                                                the summer because moving them into and out of storage
 The researchers identified five
 pieces of advice that affect how                                               would tie up the stairs and the elevators just at the busiest
 customers respond to waiting.                                                  times when people are moving in and out.
 1. Give customers a focus other        If students say they will move large items before or after the two days when most
    than the wait: If customers
                                        people are moving in or out, you are still not going to grant the request, because
    are doing something, they are
                                        you do not have the storage room. If you do not have a good reason, omit the
                                        reason rather than use a weak one. Even if you have a strong reason, omit it if it
    less focused on how long the
    wait lasts.
                                        makes the company look bad.
 2. Try to reduce anxiety of wait-
      ing: Providing wait estimates            Reason that hurts company:       Our company is not hiring at the present time because prof-
      or music can help reduce                                                  its are down. In fact, the downturn has prompted top man-
      customer anxiety.                                                         agement to reduce the salaried staff by 5% just this month,
 3. Show fairness in waiting: If                                                with perhaps more reductions to come.
      customers are waiting, they
                                               Better:                           Our company does not have any openings now.
      don’t want to see (or per-
      ceive) other people getting
      special treatment.                Refusals
 4. Create a relaxed environment:
    Make sure seating, tempera-         Deemphasize the refusal by putting it in the same paragraph as the reason,
    tures, and noise levels are all     rather than in a paragraph by itself.
    appropriate when customers             Sometimes you may be able to imply the refusal rather than stating it
    wait.                               directly.
 5. Support regular customers.                 Direct refusal:    | You cannot get insurance for just one month.
 Adapted from David Elbert, “Waiting           Implied refusal:    The shortest term for an insurance policy is six months.
 Warps Customers’ Sense of Time,
 Raises Dander,” Des Moines Register,       Be sure the implication is crystal clear. Any message can be misunderstood,
 November 29, 2009, ID, 2D.              but an optimistic or desperate audience is particularly unlikely to understand
                                         a negative message. One of your purposes in a negative message is to close the
                                         door on the subject. You do not want to have to send a second message saying
                                         that the real answer is no.

                                         Alternatives
                                         Giving your audience an alternative or a compromise, if one is available, is a
                                         good idea for several reasons:

                                           ®      It offers the audience another way to get what they want.
                                           =      It suggests that you really care about your audience and about helping
                                                  to meet their needs.
                                           =      It enables your audience to reestablish the psychological freedom you
                                                  limited when you said no.
                                           =      It allows you to end ona positive note and to present yourself and your
                                                  organization as positive, friendly, and helpful.

                                            When you give an alternative, give your audience all the information they
                                         need to act on it, but don’t take the necessary steps. Let your audience decide
                                         whether to try the alternative.
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                   Chapter 10   Delivering Negative Messages                                       287



   Negative messages limit your audience’s freedom. People may respond toa                                    Disgruntled
                                                                                                              Customer with a
limitation of freedom by asserting their freedom in some other arena. Sharon                                  Hammer
and Jack Brehm calls this phenomenon psychological reactance.” Psychologi-                     Biss}


cal reactance is at work when a customer who has been denied credit no lon-                            7       Providing good cus-
ger buys even on a cash basis, a subordinate who has been passed over for                        tomer service should be a goal

a promotion gets back at the company by deliberately doing a poor job, or                        of any business. When it’s not,
                                                                                                 customers get angry and can
someone who has been laid off sabotages the company’s computers.                                 exert their frustrations in negative
   Analternative allows your audience to react in a way that doesn’t hurt you.                   ways.
By letting your audience decide for themselves whether they want the alterna-                       In Bristow, Virginia, Mona Shaw,
tive, you allow them to reestablish their sense of psychological freedom.                        a 75-year-old woman who wanted
   The specific alternative will vary depending on the circumstances. In                         phone, Internet, and cable service
Figure 10.4, the company suggests using a different part. In different circum-                   installed, vented her frustrations
stances, the writer might offer different alternatives.                                          with Comcast by going to their
                                                                                                 office and smashing a keyboard,
                                                                                                  monitor, and telephone . . . with a
Endings                                                                                           hammer.
                                                                                                    She claims her frustration was
If you have a good alternative, refer to it in your ending: “If you can use A515                 the result of poor customer ser-
grade 70, please let me know.”                                                                    vice. She waited for an installa-
    The best endings look positively to the future.                                               tion technician who showed up
                                                                                                  two days late. Once there, he
  Wherever you have your account, you'll continue to get all the service you’ve learned           never finished the job. To top
to expect from CHARGE-ALL, and the convenience of charging items at over a mil-                   things off, two days later Com-
 lion stores, restaurants, and hotels in the United States and abroad-and in Knoxville,           cast cut all her services. The tip-
  too, whenever you come back to visit!                                                           ping point came when she waited
                                                                                                  two hours to talk to a Comcast
                                                                                                  manager before being informed
   Letter refusing to continue charge account for a customer who has moved                        he had left for the day.
                                                                                                    For her brash response, Shaw
   Avoid endings that seem insincere.                                                             received a fine and three-month
                                                                                                  suspended sentence. She is also
   We are happy to have been of service, and should we be able to assist you in the future,       forbidden to go near the Com-
   please contact us.                                                                             cast office. She eventually got her

This ending lacks you-attitude and would not be good even in a positive mes-
                                                                                                   phone, Internet, and cable work-

sage. In a situation where the company has just refused to help, it’s likely to
                                                                                                   ing, but with different providers.

sound sarcastic.                                                                                   Adapted from “Woman, 75, Fined for
                                                                                                   Smashing Comcast Office with Ham-
                                                                                                   mer in Customer Service Dispute,”
APOLOGIES                                                                                          Associated Press Archive, October
                                                                                                   19, 2007.
Apologizing is never an easy task, but it’s something most of us do. New
research suggests that people, on average, say they're sorry four times a week.
And most people have an easier time saying they're sorry to friends and
strangers than they do family members or partners. :
   Organizations have to routinely offer apologies, too. The news frequently has
stories of corporations providing apologies. Southwest Airlines CEO offered
an apology to customers and safety regulators for poor maintenance measures
 in an effort to restore a tarnished reputation.’ Descriptions of other apologies
 from JetBlue and the Los Angeles Times can be found in sidebars in this chapter.
    Timing is crucial for apologies. After Toyota vehicles had an issue with
 sticking gas pedals that forced a recall of about 6 million cars, they issued full
 page pledges in most major newspapers to their customers on how they’re fix-
 ing the situation. The president of Toyota, Akio Toyoda, also issued a formal
 apology. However, some critics were upset that Toyota Motors sent an Ameri-
 can sales executive, Jim Lentz, to initially handle questions rather than Toyado
 himself as the face of the company. Others believe that Toyota mishandled the
 situation by offering a slow response, minimizing the problem, and delaying
 the recall.’
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




288                                   Part3   Basic Business Messages


Figure 10.4            A Refusal with an Alternative

                                                                 yp

                                                     creel Fabrication
                                               “Serving the needs of America since 1890"
                             1800 Olney Avenue * Philadelphia, PA 19140 * 215*555*7800 » Fax: 215°555*9803


                 April 27, 2012

                 Mr. H. J. Moody
                 Canton Corporation
                 2407 North Avenue
                 Kearney, NE 68847

                 Subject: Bid Number 5853, Part Number D-40040


                  Dear Mr. Moody:

           puller. Thank you for requesting our quotation on your Part No. D-40040.

      cessor      Your blueprints call for flame-cut rings 1/2" thick AS16 grade 70. To use that grade, we'd
                  have to grind down from 1" thick material. However, if you can use A515 grade 70, which
                  we stock in 1/2" thick, you can cut the price by more than half.

                  Quantity         Description                          Gross Weight       — Price/Each

                  75               Rings Drawing D-40040,               12 Ibs.              $15.08
                                   A516 Grade 70 1" thick                                                  Alternative
                                   ¥ 6 O.Die.6 Ll:                                                        (Dependingon
                                   ground to .5" thick,                                                   circumstances,
                                                                                                             different
                  75                Rings Drawing D-40040,               6 lbs.               $6.91       alternatives
                                                                                                                    may
                                    A515 Grade 70 1/2"                                                        exist.)
                                    thick x 6" O.D. x 2.8" LD.
                                                                                     Leaves decision up toreader to
                  If you can use A515 grade 70, please let me know,                re-establish psycholagical freeaom

                  Sincerely,
                      f°
                  / ater       i
                               fbn
                               /

                  Valerie Prynne

                  VP:we
      GO         Ba




                                           Not all negative messages, however, need to include apologies. In business
                                        documents, apologize only when you are at fault. If you need to apologize,
                                        do it early, briefly, and sincerely. Do so only once, early in the message. Do
                                        not dwell on the bad things that have happened. The reader already knows
                                        this negative information, Instead, focus on what you have done to correct the
                                        situation,
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                         Chapter10   Delivering Negative Messages                                      289


                                                                                                                 Star Apology
                   ~
                                                                           ff
                                                                      <<                                           The     Los     Angeles
                                                                                                                   Times ran an article

             We fell.Wegot up. End of apology                                                                      that implied associates
                                                                                                       of rapper Sean Combs (a.k.a.
                                                                                                       “Diddy’) carried out the 1994
                                                                                                       robbery and shooting of rapper
                                                                                                       Tupac Shakur, and that Combs
                                                                                                       knew about it ahead of time. The
                                                                                                       Times initially reported that FBI
                                                                                                       records, interviews   with people at
                                                                                                       the crime scene, and statements
                                                                                                       to the FBI by an informant      were
                                                                                                       the source of the article. How-
                                                                                                       ever, none were actually named
                                                                                                       in the article.
                                                                                                          Combs and his lawyers were
                                                                                                        outraged about the attacks on
Schwinn needed a new product line to attract sophisticated cyclists. This apology for                   his character and stated that
its old, boring line moves quickly to a discussion of its new technology. By evoking an                 he had no involvement in the
experience every cyclist has had, the headline also suggests that falling is a minor event.             murder.
                                                                                                         After The Smoking Gun website
   No explicit apology is necessary if the error is small and if you are correct-                      posted doubt about the validity
                                                                                                       of the FBI documents, the Times
ing the mistake.
                                                                                                       ran its own investigation. The
   Negative:    We're sorry we got the nutrition facts wrong in the recipe.                            Smoking Gun noted the docu-
                                                                                                       ments   appeared  to be written on
   Better:      You're right. We’re glad you made us aware of this. The correct amounts are
                                                                                                       a typewriter, not a computer,  and
                2 grams of fat and 4 grams of protein.
                                                                                                       contained unusual blacked-out
   Do not apologize when you are not at fault. The phrase “I’m sorry” is gener-                        sections.  These  investigations of
ally interpreted to mean the sorry person is accepting blame or responsibility.                        the sources of the article led the

When you have done everything you can and when a delay or problem is due                               Times to eventually retract its

to circumstances beyond your control, you aren’t at fault and don't need to
                                                                                                       story and offer a public apology.

apologize. It may, however, be appropriate to include an explanation so the
                                                                                                         Public apologies   are never easy
                                                                                                       but sometimes    are necessary.
reader knows you weren’t negligent. In the previous example acknowledging
an error, the writer might indicate the source of the error (such as a reference                        Adapted from “LA Times Apologizes,

book or a government website). If the news is bad, put the explanation first. If                        Says Documents Used for Tupac
                                                                                                        Shakur Story Likely Fabricated,”
you have good news for the reader, put it before your explanation.                                      Associated Press Archive, March 27,
                                                                                                        2008.
   Negative:                       I'm sorry that | could not answer your question sooner.
                                   | had to wait until the sales figures for the second quarter
                                   were in.
   Better (neutral or bad news):   We   needed     the sales figures for the second      quarter to
                                   answer     your question.   Now   that they're in, | can tell you
                                   nat ...%
    Better (good news):            The new advertising campaign is a success. The sales fig-
                                   ures for the second quarter are finally in, and they show
                                   that. . ..

    If the delay or problem is long or large, it is good you-attitude to ask the
 audience whether they want to confirm the original plan or make different
 arrangements.
    Negative:    I'm sorry that the chairs will not be ready by August 25 as promised.
    Beiter:      Because of a strike against the manufacturer, the desk chairs you ordered will
                                                                                           like
                 not be ready until November. Do you want to keep that order, or would you
                 to look at the models available from other suppliers?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




290                                       Part3        Basic Business Messages


                  JetBlue’s Nightmare
                                                                                                            SS
                  On February 14, 2007,
     . A    JetBlue    attempted
                                                                                                                 APDLOGIANG NEVER TASHENSD GOD?
            to continue    opera-
 tions during an ice storm. They
 boarded passengers and rolled
 planes to runways for de-icing,
 betting that planes would be able                                                 “ear
 to take off as the storm subsided.                                                  Sos
      Other planes were subsequently                                                     ies.
 parked at terminal gates, prevent-
 ing JetBlue planes from returning
 to the gates to unload passen-
 gers. Hundreds of passengers
 were held aboard planes, some for
 as long as 11 hours. Thousands
 more        passengers    and   mounds
 of baggage were stranded at the
 terminal.
   JetBlue’s problems were exac-
 erbated by the company’s poor
 communication:
 =      Posting delays for flights
        instead of cancellations kept
        passengers waiting for hours.
  ms Passengers stranded on
     planes reported they were
     not given information about
        their status because the          This cereal box mocks the accelerating trend for apologies in the workplace.
        flight crews
                 4
                     were not being       Source: The Denver Post and The Flip Side Staff, “Eating Crow,” Columbus Dispatch, September 8, 2004, F8.
        ee
        informed.

  =     The JetBlue phone number
        was overloaded. Callers
        experienced lengthy holds,              Sometimes you will be in a fortunate position where you can pair your
        and many could not get             apology with an appropriate benefit.
        through at all.

  = The airline's computer system           = When the Hallmark Flowers web site stopped taking orders the week
    Biel Fog Cor  UME core                    before Mother’s Day, Hallmark sent an e-mail asking customers to try
        ware were inadequate for the                         :                     .              Pea       pe                       13
                                                            ain an                Trin           hippin                  a       é
        task of scheduling crews after                 ag            d offe     ee Ae    8 Hee
                                                                                             1:
        the storm, slowing the return       =          When Apple sharply cut the price on the iPhone a few months after it
        forrilcanices                                  came on the market, Steve Jobs offered an apology to earlier buyers and
       JetBlue publicly apologized and         provided them with a $100 Apple store credit.
     offered refunds, free fight vouch-      ™ Many airlines now have computer programs that generate apology let-
     ers, and penalty-free rebooking.          ters for customers on flights with lengthy delays or other major prob-
     Besides the damage to the com-            lems; the letters frequently offer additional frequent-flyer miles or
     pany’s reputation, estimated costs                discount vouchers for future trips.
     to JetBlue included $14 million in
     customer refunds, $16 million in              f                          :                         ;                    .                    ;
     vouchers, and $4 million in staff            Sincere apologies go hand in hand with efforts to rectify the problem.
      overtime.                            Some hospitals have found that disclosing medical errors, apologizing, and
                       '                   quickly offering a financial settlement to the victims actually reduces litiga-
      Sache Peniawiel eetfea               tion and prevents future mistakes. After a program was established at the
      Jet Blew It” Newsweek, March 6,      University of Illinois Medical Center in Chicago to help communicate with
      2007, 26; and Jesus Sanchez and      wronged patients, the number of lawsuits declined 40% in four years, even
                                                                                                   mistakes happen,
      oeBae PhotCoat  Wiesel es            though the number of procedures increased by 23%. When
                 February 19,2007,
      Chicago Tribune,                     the hospital also tries to establish new protocols to avoid similar problems
                                           in the future.!°
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                       Chapter 10    Delivering Negative Messages                                        291


                                                                                                                Workplace Violence

                                                                                                                An increasing number
                                                                                                                of people respond vio-
                                                                                                                lently to bad news.
                                                                                                      In August 2010, a man killed
                                                                                                    nine people at a distributor in
                                                                                                    Hartford, Connecticut, after he
                                                                                                    signed a resignation letter as
                                                                                                    the result of disciplinary action.
                                                                                                    He brought two handguns, which
                                                                                                    he used to shoot his victims, to
                                                                                                    work in a red metal lunchbox.
                                                                                                       In another incident in July 2010,
                                                                                                    a former employee of Emcore,
                                                                                                    a fiber optics company in Albu-
It’s easy to get angry in negative situations; avoid that temptation.                               querque, New Mexico, killed
                                                                                                    two co-workers and himself and
                                                                                                    injured four more.

TONE IN NEGATIVE MESSAGES                                                                              These workplace incidents are
                                                                                                    only a few of many that routinely

Tone—the implied attitude of the author toward the reader and the subject—                          occur in businesses. In fact, the
                                                                                                     Bureau of Labor Statistics reports
is particularly important when you want readers to feel that you have taken                         that in 2008, the year with the
their requests seriously. Check your draft carefully for positive emphasis and                       most recent statistics, 421 work-
you-attitude (see Chapter 3), both at the level of individual words and at the                       ers nationwide were homicide
level of ideas. In many situations, empathizing with your audience will help                         victims. Typically, workplace vio-
you create a more humane message.                                                                   lence ensues when a person
   Figure 10.5 lists some of the words and phrases to avoid in negative mes-                        feels mistreated or betrayed
sages. Figure 3.3 in Chapter 3 suggests more negative words to avoid.                               by an organization. Many busi-
   Even the physical appearance and timing of a message can convey tone. An                         nesses now have formal work-
obvious form rejection letter suggests that the writer has not given much con-                      place procedures to cope with
sideration to the reader’s application. An immediate negative suggests that                         these incidents.

the rejection didn’t need any thought. A negative delivered just before a major                     Adapted   from     Ross Arrowsmith,
holiday seems especially unfeeling.                                                                 “Gunman Came Prepared to Con-
                                                                                                    necticut Shooting,” Workplace Vio-
                                                                                                    lence News, August 4, 2010, http://
ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES FOR NEGATIVE                                                                  workplaceviolencenews.com/2010/08/
                                                                                                     04/gunman-came-prepared-to-
SITUATIONS                                                                                           connecticut-shooting/, Ben Cassel-
                                                                                                     man, “Albuquerque Shooting Leaves
Whenever you face a negative situation, consider recasting it as a positive or                       3 Dead,” Wall Street Journal, July 13,

persuasive message. Southwest Airlines, the low-cost airline, is famous for
                                                                                                     2010, http://online.wsj.convVarticle/SB1
                                                                                                     00014240527487042882045753631
saying no to its customers. It says no to such common perks as reserve seats,                        33284257738.html; and U.S. Bureau
                                                                                                     of Labor Statistics, “Workplace Shoot-
                                                                                                     ings,” July 2010, http:/Avww.bls.gov/iif/
                                                                                                     oshwe/cfoi/osar0014.htm.

Figure 10.5            Avoid These Phrases in Negative Messages
  Phrase                Because

  | am afraid that      You aren't fearful. Don’t hide behind empty phrases.
     we cannot
  | am sorry that we    You probably are able to grant the request; you simply choose not
     are unable           to. If you are so sorry about saying no, why don’t you change
                          your policy and say yes?
  | am sure you will    Don’t assume that you can read the reader’s mind.
     agree that
  Unfortunately         Unfortunately is negative in itself. It also signals that a refusal is
                          coming.
 SnSn T
      D U
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




292                                        Part3   Basic Business Messages


              International Firing         meals, and interairline baggage transfers. But it recasts all those negatives
              “When doing busi-
                                           into its two biggest positives, low-cost fares and conveniently scheduled fre-
              ness in another coun-        quent flights.’
              try, it is often easy to
assume that things there are the           Recasting the Situation as a Positive Message
same as in your country. . . . It
is wise to know the proper way
                                           If the negative information will directly lead to a benefit that you know readers
to dismiss an employee when                want, use the pattern of organization for informative and positive messages:
working with other cultures. This             Situation:                Your airline has been mailing out quarterly statements of frequent-
is a difficult task to perform in a                                     flier miles earned. To save money, you are going to stop mailing
familiar territory but it is especially
                                                                        statements and ask customers to look up that information at your
tricky when one is in a foreign
                                                                        website.
country and does not always fully
understand the local culture. An              Negative:                 Important     Notice:   This is your last Preferred        Passenger     paper
American manager stationed in                                           statement.
Indonesia reportedly discovered
                                              Positive emphasis:      |New, convenient online statements will replace this quarterly mailing.
this when he tried to fire an oil-
                                                                       Now you can get up-to-the-minute statements of your miles earned.
rig employee. Rather than notify-
                                                                       Choose e-mail updates or round-the-clock access to your state-
ing the employee privately of this
                                                                       ment at our website, www.aaaair.com. It’s faster, easier, and more
dismissal, the manager publicly
told the timekeeper to send the                                         convenient.
 man ‘packing.’ In Indonesia, this
                                              After Taco Bell had a law firm voluntarily withdraw a suit that questioned
 public dismissal was considered
 unacceptable ‘loss of face’ which
                                           the amount of meat in their ground beef, the company turned the negative
 offended both the dismissed man
                                           situation into a positive. Taco Bell bought full pages in the Wall Street Journal
 and his friends. So, rather than          and New York Times and ran advertisements with a headline, “Thank you for
 leave quietly, the man grabbed            suing us.” They used the rest of the space to discuss the ingredients in their
 fire axes and ran after the Ameri-        ground beef and to avoid a public relations scandal.'”
 can manager. Reportedly, the
 American was barely rescued in            Recasting the Situation as a Persuasive Message
 time. Obviously, it is dangerous to
 ignore local management prac-             Often a negative situation can be recast as a persuasive message. If your organi-
 tices and customs!”                       zation has a problem, ask the audience to help solve it. A solution that workers
                                           have created will be much easier to implement.
 Quoted from David A. Ricks, Blun-
 ders in International Business, 4th ed.
                                               When the Association for Business Communication raised dues, the Execu-
 (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing,        tive Director wrote a persuasive letter urging members to send in renewals
 2006), 105.                               early so they could beat the increase. The letter shared some of the qualities of




                                            After an alligator escaped from his cage at the Los Angeles Zoo, a spokesperson recast the
                                            negative situation as a positive by telling reporters that the escape proved the alligator
                                            was smart and healthy.
                                            Source: Justin Scheck and Ben Worthen, “When Animals Go AWOL, Zoos Try to Tame Bad PR,” Wall Street Journal,
                                            January 1, 2008, A1, A10.
                                                      Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                              Chapter 10   Delivering Negative Messages                                      293


any persuasive letter: using an attention-getting opener, offsetting the nega-                       Turning Tables on
tive by setting it against the benefits of membership, telling the reader what Pa                    Complaints
to do, and ending with a picture of the benefit the reader received by acting.  SS
                                                                                                      While consumers have
More recent increases, however, have been announced directly.                                         many     avenues     for
                                                                                          complaining, the organizations
   If you are criticizing someone, your real purpose may be to persuade the
                                                                                          that are complained about may
reader to act differently. Chapter 11 offers patterns for problem-solving per-
                                                                                          feel a bit powerless. However,
suasive messages.                                                                         the Alamo Drafthouse, a movie
                                                                                          theater in Austin, Texas, found
VARIETIES OF NEGATIVE MESSAGES                                                            a way to turn the tables on one
                                                                                          complainer.
Some of the most common negative messages are claims and complaints. Three                   The movie theater has one sim-
of the most difficult kinds of negative messages to write are rejections and              ple rule: don’t text or use a phone
refusals, disciplinary notices and negative performance appraisals, and layoffs           during the movie. One woman
and firings.                                                                              broke this simple rule and was
                                                                                           kicked out of the theater. She
                                                                                          then called the theater to com-
Claims and Complaints                                                                     plain about the situation; she
                                                                                          believed they were ripping her off.
Claims and complaint messages are needed when something has gone wrong:                     The theater now uses this
you didn’t get the files you needed in time for the report; the supplier didn’t           woman's      ridiculous     message
send enough parts; the copy machine breaks down daily. Many claims and                    as a public service announce-
complaints are handled well with a quick phone call or office visit, but some-            ment that shows before all mov-
times you will need a paper trail.                                                        ies begin to remind movie goers
   Technology has certainly influenced the way complaints are processed.                  of the one simple rule. In other
United Airlines stopped their customer relations phone service. Complaint                 words, instead of allowing the
responses are now handled by United representatives through e-mail and let-               customer, who was clearly in the

ters. The company believes customers will get a better quality of feedback.”              wrong, to create negative public-
                                                                                          ity, the theater owners created a
Delta Air Lines has a team of customer service agents who monitor social                  positive situation for their busi-
media applications like Twitter for real-time complaints. When travelers com-             ness. You can watch the video
plain about the company, the agents try to solve problems before they go viral            at the web address in the source
by offering updated gate information or rebooking details. Sometimes they                 below.
even bend the rules to null complaints in the Twittersphere. In one instance, a              In another instance, a pizza
passenger got frequent flier miles that she wasn’t entitled to receive because            shop in New York turned the
she posted complaining tweets about Delta.”                                               tables by printing T-shirts for
   A lot of consumers are angry these days, and organizations should be respon-            employees with the negative
sive to their complaints. According to the Edelman Trust Barometer, people                 reviews they received online

believe negative news about an organization with a low trust level after one               at Yelp. The strategy helped

or two encounters, while people believe positive news only after four or five.
                                                                                           increase business and create
                                                                                           more loyal customers.
   Organizations, like Delta, need fast response times in handling complaints                What do you think? Are the
before a situation tarnishes their brand. The speed of complaints is growing               actions of these businesses justi-
faster with websites exclusively dedicated to the issue. Sites such as Angie’s             fied? How else can organizations
List, Consumer Affairs, Planet Feedback, Ripoff Report, Tello, and Yelp offer              gain more power in this electronic
forums for disgruntled customers. Many of these sites also have smartphone                 age when it is so easy for anony-
applications that allow consumers to report incidents almost instantaneously.              mous consumers to complain?
To stay on top of the reviews, new electronic tools are emerging that help orga-           Adapted from Lani Rosales, “Austin
nizations scan for key words and monitor reviews related to their brand.                   Business Proves That Social Media Cuts
   When writing a claim or complaint, you generally will use a direct organi-              Both Ways,” AGBeat, June 6, 2011,
zation: put a clear statement of the problem in the first sentence. An indirect            http://agentgenius.com/real-estate-
                                                                                           technology-new-media/austin-
 approach, such as starting with a buffer, may be interpreted as a weak claim.             business-proves-that-social-media-
    Give supporting facts—what went wrong, the extent of the damage. Give                  cuts-both-ways/.

identifiers such as invoice numbers, warranty codes, and order dates. If this is
a claim, specify what is necessary to set things right (be realistic!). Avoid anger
and sarcasm; they will only lessen your chances of a favorable settlement. In
particular, avoid saying you will never use the company, service, machine again.
Such a statement may eliminate your audience's will to rectify the problem. See
Figure 10.6 for the Wall Street Journal’s suggestions for e-mail claims to airlines.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




294                    Part3   Basic Business Messages


                       Figure 10.6              Airline Complaint Tips
                       ES
                        These tips can improve your chances of a favorable response from an airline:
                        e Ask for the compensation you want.
                        ° Be realistic. You will not get compensation for a routine delay.
                        ¢ Be direct and short. Do provide flight, reservation, and frequent-flyer numbers.
                        ¢ Don’t threaten. Particularly don’t say you will never fly with them again.
                        e Write to Customer Service. Your complaint will eventually end up there no matter where
                           you send it.
                       en
                       Source: Scott McCartney, “What Airlines Do When You Complain,” Wall Street Journal, March 20, 2007, D1.



                       Rejections and Refusals
                       When you refuse requests from people outside your organization, try to give
                       an alternative if one is available. For example, you may not be able to replace
                       for free an automotive water pump that no longer is on warranty. But you may
                       be able to offer your customer a rebuilt one that is much less expensive than a
                       new pump.
                          Politeness and length help. In two different studies, job applicants preferred
                       rejection letters that said something specific about their good qualities, that




                                              TE PEOPLE ASK WHY
                                                    youfe WEARING 2
                                                |                                    Bar 4
                                                                                          (2)

                                                               ©                      ix
                                                                                          HEAD
                                                                                        aND
                                                                             © ReneMe

                                                                   ApS               Teyeo/-NUPY:
                                                                         you ird3 (2.



                        Hallmark has expanded their line of cards to address the health concerns many people are
                        experiencing. The inside of this card says, “They'll have no follow-up questions.”
                                                                     Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                            Chapter10    Delivering Negative Messages                                               295


phrased the refusal indirectly, that offered a clear explanation of the proce- Po                                         Dumpster Diving
dures for making a hiring decision, that offered an alternative (such as another                                          Anyone?
position the applicant might be qualified for), and that were longer.”! Further-                                          Northwest           Airlines,
more, businesses that follow this pattern of organization for rejection letters                                           which filed for bank-
will retain applicants who still view the organization favorably, who will rec- _ ™uptey and underwent reorga-
ommend the organization to others interested in applying there, and who will      "ation Poe eran awi)
not file lawsuits.                                                                Delta, sent out a handbook

    Double-check the words in a refusal to be sure the reason can’t backfire                               OE SNES ee
if it is applied to other contexts. The statement that a plant is too dangerous                            ee O 1, area
for a group tour could be used as evidence against the company in a work-—                                 qga and anne er
er’s compensation claim. Similarly, writing resignation letters for a variety Of  offered employees some use-
reasons—leaving a job, opting out of a fellowship—can be a delicate practice      ful information about retirement
and can have serious future implications. Many audiences will see the letter as _ benefits and résumé assistance.
a statement that their organization is not good enough. The best letters try to   However, the handbook also
neutralize these feelings. A negative and poorly worded resignation letter can    Offered some unconventional
impact your chances for receiving a positive recommendation or reference in                                assistance, such as a listing of
                                                                                                           “401 Ways to Save Money.”
the future.
   When you refuse requests within your organization, use your knowledge                                        ee             eEAMe         By ioc
                                                                                                           quoted        lis
of the organization’s culture and of the specific individual to craft your mes-                            =     Buy spare parts for your car
sage. Some organizations share more negative information than others. Some ,                                     at the junkyard
individuals prefer a direct no; others may find a direct negative insulting. The                           =     Get hand-me-down clothes
sample problem at the end of this chapter is a refusal to someone within the                                     and toys for your kids from
op ally:                                                                                                         family and friends
  a:                                                    ‘                                                  = Buy old furniture at yard sales
Disciplinary Notices and Negative                                                                            and refinish it yourself
Performance Appraisals                                                                                     # Hang clothes out to dry
                                    :                       of   8                   :            aA              B            d       for a big   night
                   4      :                                                                                                        ated
Performance appraisals, discussed in detail in Chapter 11, will be positive                                r meoi oe
when they are designed to help a basically good employee improve. But when                                   shop
an employee violates company policy orfails to improve after repeated Nega-                                = _Don'tbe shy about pulling
tive appraisals, the company may discipline the employee or build a dossier to                                    something you like out of a
support firing him or her.                                                                                       dumpster
   Present disciplinary notices and negative performance appraisals directly,                                   Northwest employees                were
with no buffer. A buffer might encourage the recipient to minimize the mes-                                appalled by this list of outrageous
sage’s importance—and might even become evidence in a court case that the       suggestions. The vice president
employee had not been    told to shape up  “or else.” Cite quantifiable obser-  for  ground operations quickly
vations of the employee’s behavior, rather than generalizations or inferences — apologized, and the chief execu-
based on it.                                                                                               tive officer sent a letter of apology
                                                                                                           to the affected employees who
                                            work.                                                          received the handbook.
   Weak:       Lee   is apathetic   about


   Better:     Lee was absent 15 days and late by one hour 6 days in the quarter beginning                 Adapted        and quoted from Michelle
               January 1.                                                                                  Singletary, “Dumpster-Diving Advice
           ;          :              F              j                                                          Doesn’t     Fly,”   Washington      Post,
   Weak:       Vasu is careless with her written documents.                                                August 24, 2006, D2.

   Better:     Vasu had multiple spelling errors in her last three client letters; a fourth letter omit-
               ted the date of the mandatory federal training seminar.

   Not all disciplinary notices are as formal as performance                              appraisals.
Blanchard and Johnson, of One Minute Manager fame, present what they call
the One Minute Reprimand. Much of the effectiveness of these reprimands
comes from the fact that supervisors tell their employees from the beginning,
before any reprimands are needed, that there will be explicit communication
 about both positive and negative performances. The reprimand itself is to
 come immediately after negative behavior and specify exactly what is wrong.
 It distinguishes between positive feelings for the employee and negative feel-
 ings for his or her performance in the specific situation. 2
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




296                                       Part3   Basic Business Messages


             Effective Negative           Layoffs and Firings
             Letters
                                          If a company is in financial trouble, management needs to communicate the
                                          problem clearly. Sharing information and enlisting everyone’s help in finding
ls           Researcher    Catherine
            Schryer asked      writ-
 ers at an insurance company to           solutions may make it possible to save jobs. Sharing information also means
 evaluate the firm’s letters deny-        that layoff notices, if they become necessary, will be a formality; they should
 ing claims. She found four differ-       not be new information to employees.
 ences between the letters judged            Give the employee an honest reason for the layoff or firing. Based on
 effective and the letters judged         guidance from your organization’s human resource experts, state the rea-
 ineffective:                             sons in a way that is clear but does not expose the organization to legal
      Good letters were easier to         liabilities.
      read. Poor letters contained           Show empathy for affected employees; think about how you would feel if
      more jargon; longer words           you were losing your job. Show how the company will help them with sever-
      and sentences; and stiff,           ance pay and other aid, such as job search advice. Remember that many stud-
      awkward phrasing.
                                          ies show that layoffs may temporarily help the bottom line, but they rarely
      Good letters gave fuller rea-       provide long-term savings. They also hurt the productivity of remaining
      sons for the rejection. Poor
                                          employees.”
                                              Firings for unsatisfactory performance have always been a part of
      letters often used boilerplate
      and did not explain terms.
                                          business. Now, however, as technology blurs the line between work and
      Good letters were less
                                          home, firings are also happening for personal reasons, even if the behav-
                                          ior is not tied to work and occurs off-site. The CEO of HBO was asked to
      likely to talk about the
      reader's emotions (“angry,”
      “disappointed’).                    resign after he was accused of assaulting his girlfriend in a parking lot.
      Good letters were more likely
                                          Kaiser Aluminum’s CFO had to resign because of a personal relationship
      to portray the writer and           with another employee, as did Boeing’s former president and CEO Harry
      reader as active agents.            Stonecipher.”
                                             Information about layoffs and firings is normally delivered orally but
 Adapted from Catherine Schryer,          accompanied by a written statement explaining severance pay or unemploy-
 “Walking a Fine Line: Writing Negative
 Letters in an Insurance Company,”
                                          ment benefits that may be available. RadioShack made negative headlines
 Journal of Business and Technical        when it fired 400 employees with a two-sentence e-mail.
 Communication 14 (October 2000):
 445-97.

                                           SOLVING A SAMPLE PROBLEM
                                          Solving negative problems requires careful analysis. The checklist at the end
                                          of the chapter can help you evaluate your draft.


                                           Problem
                                           You’re Director of Employee Benefits for a Fortune 500 company. Today, you
                                           received the following memo:

                                              From: Michelle Jagtiani
                                              Subject: Getting My Retirement Benefits

                                              Next Friday will be my last day here. | am leaving [name of company] to take a posi-
                                              tion at another firm.
                                              Please process a check for my retirement benefits, including both the deductions
                                              from my salary and the company’s contributions for the last six and a half years. |
                                              would like to receive the check by next Friday if possible.


                                              You have bad news for Michelle. Although the company does contribute
                                           an amount to the retirement fund equal to the amount deducted for retire-
                                           ment from the employee’s paycheck, employees who leave with less than
                                           seven years of employment get only their own contributions. Michelle will
                                                     Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                             Chapter 10   Delivering Negative Messages                                      297


get back only the money that has been deducted from her own pay, plus 412%                           www.useit.com/

interest compounded quarterly. Her payments and interest come to just over               @           alertbox/20000123
                                                                                                      html
$17,200; the amount could be higher depending on the amount of her last
paycheck, which will include compensation for any unused vacation days                   General guidelines for saying
and sick leave. Furthermore, since the amounts deducted were not consid-                 no can be applied to specific

ered taxable income, she will have to pay income tax on the money she will               situations. Web guru Jakob
                                                                                         Neilsen explains how to tell users
receive.                                                                                 that your website can’t do what
   You cannot process the check until after her resignation is effective, so you         they want. Neilsen suggests
will mail it to her. You have her home address on file; if she’s moving, she             telling users “no” upfront
needs to let you know where to send the check. Processing the check may take             when your website cannot do
                                                                                         something. Otherwise, users will
two to three weeks.                                                                      spend too much time looking for
   Write a memo to Michelle.                                                             the desired feature, and in the
                                                                                         process will develop negative
                                                                                         feelings for the site.
Analysis of the Problem                                                                      He also suggests if your site
Use the analysis questions in the first chapter to help you solve the problem.           cannot meet a user's needs,
                                                                                         that you direct them to another
1. Who is (are) your audience(s)?                                                        site that will. This referral builds
                                                                                         goodwill and will make your
     Michelle Jagtiani. Unless she’s a personal friend, I probably wouldn’t              site the starting point for the
      know why she’s leaving and where she’s going.                                      customer’s next search. If an
           There’s a lot I don’t know. She may or may not know much about                item will be available reasonably
      taxes; she may or may not be able to take advantage of tax-reduction               soon, you can allow customers
                                                                                         to preorder or provide their
      strategies. I can’t assume the answers because I wouldn’t have them in             e-mail for notification when the
      real life.                                                                         product or service becomes
                                                                                         available.
2. What are your purposes in communicating?                                                   Log onto Neilsen’s site and
      To tell her that she will get only her own contributions, plus 4’4% inter-         read the rest of his advice for
      est compounded quarterly; that the check will be mailed to her home                telling users no. Can you think
       address two to three weeks after her last day on the job; and that the            of other ways to tell website
                                                                                         users “no” that Neilsen hasn’t
       money will be taxable as income.                                                  suggested?
           To build goodwill so that she feels that she has been treated fairly
       and consistently. To minimize negative feelings she may have.
           To close the door on this subject.
3. What information must your message include?
      When the check will come. The facts that her check will be based on
       her contributions, not the employer’s, and that the money will be tax-
       able income. How lump-sum retirement benefits are calculated. The fact
       that we have her current address on file but need a new address if she’s
       moving.
4. How can you build support for your position? What reasons or benefits
   will your audience find convincing?
       Giving the amount currently in her account may make her feel that she
       is getting a significant sum of money. Suggesting someone who can give
       free tax advice (if the company offers this as a fringe benefit) reminds
       her of the benefits of working with the company. Wishing her luck with
       her new job is a nice touch.
5. What aspects of the total situation may be relevant?
       Since this is right after taxes are due, she may be particularly interested
       in the tax advice. With the weak economy, she may have been count-
       ing on the extra money. On the other hand, most people take another
       job to get more money, so maybe she is too. I don’t know for sure.
       Since she and I don’t know each other, I don’t know about her special
        circumstances.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




298                                                  Part3          Basic Business Messages


                                                     Discussion of the Sample Solutions
                                                     The solution in Figure 10.7 is not acceptable. The subject line gives a bald neg-
                                                     ative with no reason or alternative. The first sentence has a condescending
                                                     tone that is particularly offensive in negative messages; it also focuses on what
                                                     is being taken away rather than what remains. Paragraph 2 lacks you-attitude
                                                     and is vague. The memo ends with a negative. There is nothing anywhere in
                                                     the memo to build goodwill.
                                                         The solution in Figure 10.8, in contrast, is effective. The policy serves as a
                                                     buffer and explanation. The negative is stated clearly but is buried in the para-
                                                     graph to avoid overemphasizing it. Paragraph 2 emphasizes the positive by
                                                     specifying the amount in the account and the fact that the sum might be even
                                                     higher.
                                                         Paragraph 3 contains the additional negative information that the amount
                                                     will be taxable but offers the alternative that it may be possible to reduce taxes.
                                                     The writer builds goodwill by suggesting a specific person the reader could
                                                     contact.
                                                         Paragraph 4 tells the reader what address is in the company files (Michelle
                                                     may not know whether the files are up-to-date), asks that she update
                                                     it if necessary, and ends with the reader’s concern: getting her check
                                                     promptly.
                                                         The final paragraph ends on a positive note. This generalized goodwill is
                                                     appropriate when the writer does not know the reader well.



 Figure 10.7                          An Unacceptable Solution to the Sample Problem
      3 Untitled             Message {Rich Text)
      ? Bile Edt             View Insert Format             Iools    Actions   Help
      £ Sagend|bed ch                      3, Bh | ll ttach
                                                         osAdobe P
      ? Times
          New Roman



      FES,                      WENT S11) en                                      ce oe           re              Serene                        eee                      za
             From...         _| Lisa Nia         2                                                                       ESS                                         —

             Bcc...

        seni                    Denial of Matching Funds _                                Negative subject line          a
                      Give                 No salutation                                                                                            negative tone

                 reason             You cannot receive a check the last day of work and you will get only your own and diction
                  before            contributions, not a matching sum from the company, because you have not worked for the
                  refusal           Company for at least seven full years.                           Better to be specific

       This io lifted |Your payments and interest come to just over $17,200; the amount could be higher
       straight from depending on the amount of your last paycheck, which will include compensation for any M
        ;             bent          unused vacation days and sick leave. Furthermore, since the amounts deducted were not                                           Om
        as:ées                : considered taxable income, you will have to pay income tax on the money you receive.                                          negatives |
        The languag
        inproblem®                  The check will be sent to your home address. If the address we have on file is incorrect,
        is often                    please correct it so that your check is er                      hate Negative
            negative and             Sey
                                                              No signature or         g                ;                     t you hhave on file?
            stuffy; information IS                             contact information               How will reader know edfoe as you have it.
                    ani ed.
            ,disorganiz                                                                          Better to give curren
                                                   use your          own word 5 to
            Think about        the situat iion and
                                             message
            create a satisfactory
                                                 5     “+
                                i     ,;
            cae
                                                                  Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                          Chapter10   Delivering Negative Messages                           299




                              +Alene nenanS
      To.. | Michelle Jagtiani
                  April 21,2012                                                                      .



     —            _Receiving Employee Contributions from.Retirement Accounts _a
|             Dear Ms. Jagtiani:
    scavte    Employees who leave the company with at least seven full years of employment are entitled both
                                                                                                        to
 | -egsoni’ to the company contributions and the retirement benefit paycheck deductions contributed
                                                                                                 years of
 |chird-pe™2" retirement accounts. Those employees who leave the company   with  less than seven
       to bee employment will receive the employee paycheck contributions made to their retirement accounts.
 1    ae é                               Good to be specific
       n  ~ You now have $17,240.62 in your account which includes 4.5% interest compounded quarterly. The
            amount you receive could be even higher since you will also receive payment for any unused
            leave and vacation days.
   Goode    Because you now have access to the account, the amount you receive will be considered
 | chowho” income for tax purposes. Beth Jordan in Employee Financial Services can give you information
 compa"     about possible tax deductions and financial investments which can reduce or defer payment of
 _canhelP         your income taxes.
     Good vo ve   The check will be sent to your home address on May 16. The address we have on file is 2724
       speci¢     Merriman Road, Akron, Ohio 44313. If your address changes, please let us know so you can
                                                                                                   receive.
                                          Positive emphasis
                  Good luck with your new job!
                                       Forward-looking ending.
                  Lisa Niaz
                  Director of Employee Benefits
                  760-1477 Ext. 986




 C1 Is the subject line appropriate?
 C1 Is the organization and content appropriate for the audience?
 C Ifa buffer is used, does it avoid suggesting either a positive or a negative response?
 C1 Is the reason, if it is given, presented before the refusal? Is the reason watertight, with
      no loopholes?
 C1 Is the negative information clear?
 C1 Is an alternative given if a good one is available? Does the message provide all the
    information needed to act on the alternative but leave the choice up to the audience?
 C1 Does the last paragraph avoid repeating the negative information?
 — Is tone acceptable—not defensive, but not cold, preachy, or arrogant either?
Originality in a negative message may come from
 Cl An effective buffer, if one is appropriate.
 OJ Aclear, complete statement of the reason for the refusal.
 CA good alternative, clearly presented, which shows that you're thinking about what the
   audience really needs.
 C Adding details that show you're thinking about a specific organization and the specific
   people in that organization.
                                              errr               earner                  Vn
een                   Ree
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




300        :                     Part3   Basic Business Messages




                                 =   Ina negative message, the basic information is negative; we expect the
                                     audience to be disappointed or angry.
                                 =   A good negative message conveys the negative information clearly while
                                     maintaining as much goodwill as possible. The goal is to make the audi-
                                     ence feel that they have been taken seriously, that the decision is fair and
                                     reasonable, and that they would have made the same decision. A second-
                                    ary purpose is to reduce or eliminate future communication on the same
                                    subject.
                                 = The best way to organize negative messages depends on the particu-
                                    lar audiences and situations involved. Figure 10.1 suggests possible
                                    organizations.
                                 = A buffer is a neutral or positive statement that allows you to delay the
                                    negative message. Buffers must put the audience in a good frame of mind,
                                    not give the bad news but not imply a positive answer either, and provide
                                    a natural transition to the body of the message. Use a buffer only when the
                                    audience values harmony or when the buffer serves a purpose in addition
                                    to simply delaying the negative.
                                 = A good reason prepares the audience for the negative and must be water-
                                    tight. Give several reasons only if all are watertight and are of compa-
                                    rable importance. Omit the reason for the refusal entirely if it is weak
                                    or if it makes your organization look bad. Do not hide behind company
                                    policy.
                                 = Make the refusal crystal clear.
                                 m Giving the audience an alternative or a compromise
                                    = Offers the audience another way to get what they want.
                                    = Suggests that you really care about the audience and about helping to
                                         meet their needs.
                                    = Allows you to end on a positive note and to present yourself and your
                                         organization as positive, friendly, and helpful.
                                  = When you give an alternative, give the audience all the information they
                                     need to act on it, but don’t take the necessary steps for them. Letting the
                                     audience decide whether to try the alternative allows the audience to rees-
                                     tablish a sense of psychological freedom.
                                  = Many negative situations can be redefined as informative, positive, or per-
                                     suasive messages.



                                                                                                 *Go to www.mhhe.com/locker10e for
                           and Problems acthna Backes aie
           AO Oe Exercises
        TR 10
   CHAPTER
 CHAP            AE ID OEE        a    eae
 10.1.         Reviewing the Chapter

 1.   What are the reasons behind the patterns of organi-          4.   When should you not apologize? (LO 10-2)
      zation for negative messages in different situations         5.   What are some ways you can maintain a caring tone
      (Figure 10.1)? (LO 10-1)                                          in negative messages? (LO 10-3)
 2.   What are the parts of negative messages? How may             6.   What are some different varieties of negative mes-
      those parts be changed for different contexts?                    sages? What are some examples from the chapter
      (LO 10-2)                                                         text and sidebars? (LO 10-4)
 3.   When should you not use a buffer? (LO 10-2)
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication,
                                                                                                     Tenth Edition




                                                     Chapter 10    Delivering Negative Messages                          301


10.2     Reviewing Grammar

Negative news is frequently placed in dependent clauses             modifiers. Do the exercise from Appendix B on improv-
to help de-emphasize it. Unfortunately, some depen-               . ing modifiers (B.6) to help you learn to recognize this
dent clauses and phrases are dangling or misplaced                  error.


10.3     Letters for Discussion—Credit Refusal

As director of customer service at C’est Bon, an upscale            which he’s made just the minimum payment for the last
furniture store, you manage the store’s credit. Today               three months.
you are going to reject an application from Frank Steele.              The following letters are possible approaches to giv-
Although his income is fairly high, his last two pay-               ing him the news. How well does each message meet the
ments on his college loans were late, and he has three              criteria in the checklist for negative messages?
bank credit cards, all charged to the upper limit, on

           Ls     Dear Mr. Steele:

                  Your request to have a C’est Bon charge account shows that you are a discriminat-
                  ing shopper. C’est Bon sells the finest merchandise available.

                  Although your income is acceptable, records indicate that you carry the maximum
                  allowable balances on three bank credit cards. Moreover, two recent payments on
                  your student loans have not been made in a timely fashion. If you were given a C’est
                  Bon charge account, and if you charged a large amount on it, you might have dif-
                  ficulty paying the bill, particularly if you had other unforeseen expenses (car repair,
                  moving, medical emergency) or if your income dropped suddenly. If you were unable
                  to repay, with your other debt you would be in serious difficulty. We would not want
                  you to be in such a situation, nor would you yourself desire it.

                   Please reapply in six months.

                   Sincerely,



                   Dear Frank:


                   No, you can’t have a C’est Bon credit card—at least not right now. Get your financial
                   house in order and try again.

                   Fortunately for you, there’s an alternative. Put what you want on layaway. The furni-
                   ture you want will be held for you, and paying a bit each week or month will be good
                   self-discipline.

                   Enjoy your C’est Bon furniture!

                   Sincerely,



                    Dear Mr. Steele:


                    Over the years, we’ve found that the best credit risks are people who pay their bills
                    promptly. Since two of your student loan payments have been late, we won’t extend
                    store credit to you right now. Come back with a record of six months of on-time pay-
                    ments of all bills, and you’ll get a different answer.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




302                           Part3   Basic Business Messages


                 You might like to put the furniture you want on layaway. A $50 deposit holds any item
                 you want. You have six months to pay, and you save interest charges.

                 You might also want to take advantage of one of our Saturday Seminars. On the first
                 Saturday of each month at 11 AM, our associates explain one topic related to furni-
                 ture and interior decorating. Upcoming topics are

                        How to Wallpaper a Room                 February 5

                        Drapery Options                         March 6

                        Persian Carpets                         April 1

                 Sincerely,




10.4     E-Mails for Discussion—Saying No to a Colleague

A colleague in another state agency has e-mailed you          The following messages are possible approaches to
asking if you would like to use the payroll software her _ giving her the news. How well does each message meet
agency developed. You wouldn’t. Switching to a new _ the criteria in the checklist for negative messages?
program would take a lot of time, and what you have
works well for you.


                 Subject: Re: Use Our Software?

                  No.



          7
                  Subject: Re: Use Our Software?

                  Thanks for telling me about the payroll software your team developed. What we have
                  works well for us. Like every other agency, we’re operating on a bare-bones budget,
                  and no one here wants to put time (that we really don’t have) into learning a new
                  program. So we’ll say, no, thanks!



          3.
                  Subject: Re: Use Our Software?

                  The payroll software your team developed sounds very good.

                  | might like to use it, but the people here are computer phobic. They HATE learning
                  new programs. So, being a good little computer support person, | soldier on with the
                  current stuff. (And people wonder why state government is SO INEFFICIENT! Boy,
                  the stories | could tell!)

                  Anyway, thanks for the offer. Keep me posted on the next development—maybe it
                  will be something so obviously superior that even the Neanderthals here can see its
                  advantages!
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                  Chapter10    Delivering Negative Messages                               303


10.5       Analyzing a Bad News Message
Today you received    the following message      in your
mailbox:


                 Dear (Your Name),

                 Thank you for your membership with Fit4Life. We hope you are enjoying our fit-
                 ness club and that you’re reaching your health and wellness goals along the way. As
                 always, we’re excited to help you in any way.

                 We're writing to let you know about an upcoming change in your Fit4Life monthly
                 dues. Effective June 15, the dues for your membership will increase $10 per month—
                 plus any associated taxes.

                  We strive to keep dues increases as infrequent and minimal as possible. If you have
                  questions about the increase or if there is anything else we can do to improve your
                  experience with Fit4Life, please contact me on your next visit to the club.

                  Thank you again for your membership with Fit4Life. We enjoy serving you and look
                  forward to seeing you soon!

                  Sincerely,

                  Lawrence Josel

                  Fit4Life General Manager




As your instructor directs,                                     b. Rewrite this message so that it does a better job of
                                                                     delivering the negative news. Then, write a memo to
a. Write an e-mail in which you analyze this message                 your instructor explaining why you chose to make
    using the guidelines for negative messages that you              these revisions.
   ‘learned in this chapter.



 10.6      Revising a Negative Message

Rewrite the following negative message:


                  Dear Madam:

                  Unfortunately, because you have not paid your account for the last three months, we
                  have absolutely NO CHOICE but to turn off your heat soon. We know that winter is upon
                  us and it’s a horrible time to be without heat, but you really brought this on yourself.

                   Next time, we recommend PAYING your bills ON TIME.

                   If you get us your outstanding payments soon, you can keep your heat.

                   As always, we appreciate your business and value you as our customer.

                   Sincerely,

                   WarmHomes Customer Service Team
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




304                               Part3   Basic Business Messages


10.7        Notifying Baby Boomers about Housing Rules
Erin and TJ Bouda are baby boomers who live in a                       Take on the role of the homeowners association and
55-plus Clearwater, Florida, housing development run                write to the Boudas telling them that their grandson
by WaterBlue Homeowners Association. They have lived                has to leave (which is not an option) or that they have
in their current house for five years and plan to live the          to give up their home. As you write, be sure to con-
rest of their lives in this home.                                   sider the audience and the effect your letter will have
      A few months ago, the Boudas started raising their            on them.
three-year-old grandson, Riley, because his mother has              Hints:
a substance abuse problem and his father is deceased.               = What reasons besides “policy” can you offer the
Unfortunately, WaterBlue Homeowners Association has                     Boudas to help them understand the situation?
a policy that prohibits children under 18 years of age as
permanent residents. Two neighbors of the Boudas have               = What help can you offer them?
already complained about Riley.                                     = Are there any alternatives that you can offer?




10.8        Notifying College Seniors That They May Not Graduate
State University asks students to file an application to            and specific information that must be merged into the
graduate one term before they actually plan to graduate.            message:
The application lists the courses the student has already           a. Students who have not taken enough total hours.
had and those he or she will take in the last term. Your            b. Students who have not fulfilled all the requirements
office reviews the lists to see that the student will meet the          for their majors.
requirements for total number of hours, hours in the major,         c. Students who are missing one or more general edu-
and general education requirements. Some students have                  cation courses.
forgotten a requirement or not taken enough courses and             d. Advisers of students who do not meet the require-
cannot graduate unless they take more courses than those                ments for graduation.
they have listed.
As your instructor directs,
Write form e-mail messages to the following audi-
ences. Leave blanks for the proposed date of graduation




 10.9       Correcting a Mistake

Today, as you reviewed some cost figures, you realized              b.     The correct numbers are
they didn’t fit with the last monthly report you filed.
                                                                          Personnel                  $2,845,490
You had pulled the numbers together from several
sources, and you're not sure what happened. Maybe you                     Office supplies              $84,500
miscopied, or didn’t save the final version after you'd
                                                                          Telephone                   $468,240
checked all the numbers. But whatever the cause, you’ve
                                                                    Variations for each situation:
 found errors in three categories. You gave your boss the
 following totals:                                                   1.    Your boss has been out of the office; you know she
      Personnel                 $2,843,490                                 hasn’t seen the data yet.
      Office supplies              $43,500                          2.     Your boss gave a report to the executive committee
      Telephone                  $186,240                                  this morning using your data.
 E-mail your boss to correct the information.                       Hints:
                                                                    = How serious is the mistake in each situation?
 As your instructor directs,                                        = In which situations, if any, should you apologize?
 Write e-mail messages for the following situations:                = Should you give the reason for the mistake? Why or
 a. The correct numbers are                                             why not?
      Personnel                 $2,845,490                          = How do your options vary depending on whether
      Office supplies              $34,500                              your job title gives you responsibility for numbers
      Telephone                   $186,420                              and accounting?
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                     Chapter 10   Delivering Negative Messages                                 305


10.10     Refusing to Pay an Out-of-Network Bill
Your employees’ health insurance allows them to choose            company six months ago, he (like all new employees)
from one of three health maintenance organizations                received a thick booklet explaining the HMO options.
(HMOs). Once employees have selected an HMO, they                 Perhaps he did not take the time to read it carefully. But
must get all medical care (except for out-of-state emergency      that’s not your fault. Alvin can change plans during
care) from the HMO. Employees receive a listing of the doc-       the next open enrollment, but even if he switched to an
tors and hospitals affiliated with each HMO when they join        HMO that included St. Catherine’s, that HMO wouldn’t
the company and pick an HMO and again each October                pay for surgery performed before he joined that HMO.
when they have a one-month “open enrollment period” to               Write an e-mail message to Alvin giving him the
change to another of the three HMOs if they choose.               bad news.
    As Director of Employee Benefits, you've received an           Hints:
angry e-mail from Alvin Reineke. Alvin had just received
                                                                   =   What tone should you use? Should you be sympathetic?
a statement from his HMO stating that it would not pay
                                                                       Should you remind him that this is his own fault?
for the costs of his hernia operation two months ago at
St. Catherine’s Hospital in your city. Alvin is furious: one       =   Is there any help you can give Alvin (e.g., informa-
of the reasons he accepted a job with your company six                 tion about credit-union short-term loans or even
months ago was its excellent health care coverage. He                  information about negotiating payment terms with
feels the company lied to him and should pay for his                   the hospital)?
(rather large) hospital bill since the HMO refuses to do so.       =   What can you do to make Alvin feel that the
   The HMO which Alvin had selected uses two hos-                      company has not lied to him?
pitals, but not St. Catherine’s. When Alvin joined the

10.11     Announcing a Reduction in Benefits

In years past, your company has had a generous health              only to generic drugs. For brand-name drugs, employees
insurance policy, fully funded by the employer. Employ-            will have to pay more.
ees pay only a $10 copayment for doctor visits and a $6            As your instructor directs,
copayment for prescriptions. However, the cost of health
                                                                   Write an e-mail message to the employees of
insurance has risen much faster than the company’s other
expenses and much faster than the prices your company              a. A large advertising agency in a big city. The agen-
can charge its customers. Most other companies now                     cy’s billings have fallen 30% in the last six months,
expect their employees to contribute part of the cost of               and 10% of the-staff have already been laid off.
their health insurance through payroll deductions, and             b. Amanufacturing company. The company is still
management has determined that your company must                       making a profit, but just barely. Unless the company
begin doing the same. For a group insurance policy simi-               saves money, layoffs may be necessary.
lar to the one employees have received in the past, they            c. Asuccessful service business. The business is doing
will now have to pay $50 per month, and the copayment                  well, but most of the employees earn only the mini-
for doctor visits will rise to $15 per visit. The coverage for         mum wage. They do not own stock in the company.
prescriptions will vary, with the $6 copayment applying

 10.12     Recommending a Policy on Uncivil Behavior

 Assume that your small team comprises your organi-
 zation’s Labor-Management Committee. This e-mail
 arrives from the CEO:

                       | read that PepsiCo created a policy to deal with unfriendly behavior on the job, and
                       that sounds like a good idea. When someone’s rude, inconsiderate, or shows bad
                       manners, that can ruin your day and ruin your productivity. | know that we have harass-
                       ment policies, but what about a rudeness policy? Put one together, and send it to me.


     Asa team, write a response recommending an appropri-              managers in reporting such behaviors, and outline
 ate policy for dealing with uncivil behavior in the workplace.        clear guidelines for dealing with violations.

 Hint:                                                                 Source: Adapted from Diane Bandow and Debra Hunt, “
 Be sure to define what your organization considers unac-              Developing Policies about Uncivil Workplace Behavior,” Busi-
 ceptable behavior, describe the roles of employees and                ness Communication Quarterly 71, no. 1 (2008), 103-6.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




306                              Part3   Basic Business Messages


10.13     Complaining about the Dead

You are traveling on a first-class flight from New Delhi           As your instructor directs,
to London. When you wake, you find the corpse of a                 m     Write a complaint letter to the airline.
woman, who died in the economy section of the airplane,            =     Write an apology letter from the perspective of the
sitting next to you. After flagging down the flight atten-               airline who has just received your complaint.
dant, you're told the crew moved the woman who died
so her family could have some privacy to grieve. They              Source: Jennifer Quinn, “Passenger Dies on International
could not put the body in the aisle or the attendant sta-          Flight, Body Moved to First-Class Cabin,” Associated Press
tion for safety reasons. Needless to say, you're appalled          Archive, March 19, 2007.
by the situation.


10.14     E-Mailing Bad News about Lab Hours

You’re the administrator of your university’s computer             will open one hour later each morning as a cost-saving
labs. Many students have asked for longer lab hours, and           measure.
you presented the request to your superiors. However,                 Write an e-mail message, including subject line, to all
you've just been informed that, beginning next term, the           students, informing them of this change.
hours for the computer labs are being reduced. The labs


10.15     Telling Employees to Remove Personal Websites

You’re Director of Management and Information Sys-                 Personal pages are dangerous. Can you imagine the flak
tems (MIS) in your organization. At your monthly brief-            we'd get if someone posted links to pornography?”
ing for management, a vice president complained that                   You said, “I don’t think that’s very likely. If it did hap-
some employees have posted personal web pages on the               pen, as system administrator, I could remove the page.”
company’s web server.                                                  The third speaker said, “I think we should remove
    “It looks really unprofessional to have stuff about cats       all the pages. Having any at all suggests that our people
and children and musical instruments. How can people               have so much extra time that they’re playing on the web.
do this?”                                                          That suggests that our prices are too high and may make
    You took the question literally. “Well, some people            some people worry about quality. In fact, I think that
have authorization to post material—price changes,                 we need a new policy prohibiting personal pages on the
job listings, marketing information. Someone who has               company’s web server. And any pages that are already
authorization could put up anything.”                              up should be removed.”
    Another manager said, “I don’t think it’s so terrible—             A majority of the managers agreed and told you to
after all, there aren’t any links from our official pages to       write a message to all employees. Create an e-mail mes-
these personal pages.”                                             sage to tell employees that you will remove the personal
    A third person said, “But we’re paying for what's              pages already posted and that no more will be allowed.
posted—so we pay for server space and connect time.                Hint:
Maybe it’s not much right now, but as more and more
people become web-literate, the number of people put-              m Suggest other ways that people can post personal
ting up unauthorized pages could spread. We should                     web pages.
put a stop to this now.”                                           = Give only reasons that are watertight and make the
    The vice president agreed. “The website is care-                   company look good.
 fully designed to present an image of our organization.


 10.16    Refusing to Waive a Fee

 As the Licensing Program Coordinator for your school,             office; the 6.5% royalty goes into a student scholarship
 you evaluate proposals from vendors who want to make              fund. At well-known universities or those with loyal stu-
 or sell merchandise with the school’s name, logo, or mas-             dents and alumni, the funds from such a program can
 cot. If you find the product acceptable, the vendor pays              add up to hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.
 a $250 licensing fee and then 6.5% of the wholesale cost                 On your desk today is a proposal from a current stu-
 of the merchandise manufactured (whether or not it is                 dent, Meg Winston.
 sold). The licensing fee helps to support the cost of your
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                   Chapter 10   Delivering Negative Messages                           307



                 | want to silk-screen and sell T-shirts printed with the name of the school, the mascot,
                 and the words “We’re Number One!” (A copy of the design | propose is enclosed.)
                 | ask that you waive the $250 licensing fee you normally require and limit the 6.5%
                 royalty only to those T-shirts actually sold, not to all those made.

                  | am putting myself through school by using student loans and working 30 hours a
                  week. | just don’t have $250. In my marketing class, we’ve done feasibility analyses,
                  and I’ve determined that the shirts can be sold if the price is low enough. | hope to
                  market these shirts in an independent study project with Professor Doulin, building
                  on my marketing project earlier this term. However, my calculations show that | can-
                  not price the shirts competitively if just one shirt must bear the 6.5% royalty for all
                  the shirts produced in a batch. | will of course pay the 6.5% royalty on all shirts sold
                  and not returned. | will produce the shirts in small batches (60-100 at a time). | am
                  willing to donate any manufactured but unsold shirts to the athletic program so that
                  you will know I’m not holding out on you.

                  By waiving this fee, you will show that this school really wants to help students get
                  practical experience in business, as the catalog states. | will work hard to promote
                  these shirts by getting the school president, the coaches, and campus leaders to
                  endorse them, pointing out that the money goes to the scholarship fund. The shirts
                  themselves will promote school loyalty, both now and later when we’re alumni who
                  can contribute to our alma mater.

                  | look forward to receiving the “go-ahead” to market these shirts.




   The design and product are acceptable under your              deal Meg is asking for. (The policy also lets the school
guidelines. However, you've always enforced the fee              control the kinds of items on which its name appears.)
structure across the board, and you see no reason to             Just last week, your office confiscated about 400 T-shirts
make an exception now. Whether the person trying to              and shorts made by a company that had used the school
sell merchandise is a student or not doesn’t matter; your        name on them without permission; the company has
policy is designed to see that the school benefits when-         paid the school $7,500 in damages.
ever it is used to sell something. Students aren’t the               Write a letter to Meg rejecting her special requests.
only ones whose cash flow is limited; many businesses            She can get a license to produce the T-shirts, but only
would find it easier to get into the potentially lucrative       if she pays the $250 licensing fee and the royalty on all
business of selling clothing, school supplies, and other         shirts made.
items with the school name or logo if they got the same


10.17     Correcting Misinformation

You’re the director of the city’s Division of Water. Your
mail today contains this letter:


                   When we bought our pool, the salesman told us that you would give us a discount
                   on the water bill when we fill the pool. Please start the discount immediately. | tried
                   to call you three times and got nothing but busy signals.

                   Sincerely,

                   Larry, Shadlurn-bubler


                   Larry Shadburn-Butler
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




308                                Part3   Basic Business Messages


   The salesperson was wrong. You don’t provide dis-                 As your instructor directs,
counts for pools (or anything else). At current rates,               a. Write a letter to Mr. Shadburn-Butler.
filling a pool with a garden hose costs from $8.83 (fora             Write a letter to all the stores that sell swimming
                                                                            1      rpeiyh wehe, eee  sate     t         ce
1,800-gallon pool) to $124.67 (for 26,000 gallons) in the
city. Filling’a pool from any other water source would                  Pee irae Fee eee                              ae
cost more. Rates are 30%oO,
                            higher
                              1
                                   in
                                   }
                                      the suburbs and 50%0,          c. Write a notice for the one-page newsletter that you
           uruncor porated Tiras
Digner mtpeople                    sano) et ao aae                       include with quarterly water bills. Assume that you
enough           to answer phones. You tried a voicemail                                                        :
system but eliminated it when you found people didn’t                    can have half a page for your information:
have time to process all the messages that were left. But
the city budget doesn’t allow you to hire more people.




10.18         Analyzing Job Rejection Letters

1.    Here are three rejections letters to an applicant who
      applied for an accounting position.

                     Letter 1

                     We realize that the application process for the accounting position at AlphaBank required
                     a substantial amount of thought, time, and effort on your part. Therefore, we would like to
                     express our sincere appreciation for your willingness to participate in the search process.

                     The task of selecting a final candidate was difficult and challenging due to the quality
                     of the applicant pool. We regret to inform you that we selected another candidate
                     who we believe will best meet the needs of AlphaBank.

                     We thank your for your interest in employment at AlphaBank and extend our best
                     wishes as you pursue your professional goals.


                     Letter 2


                     Thank you for your interest in the accounting position at AlphaBank. I’m sorry to
                     inform you that you were not one of the finalists. The position has now been filled.

                     The search committee and | wish you the best in your future employment searches.


                     Letter 3

                     Thank you for your interest in the accounting position at AlphaBank.

                     I’m sorry to inform you that the search committee has decided to offer the position
                     to another candidate. This was an extremely difficult decision for us to make. We
                     were all impressed with your résumé and credentials.

                      Again, thank you for your interest in AlphaBank.



 1.   Analyze these three job rejection letters by answer-           =   What reasons do the letters give, if any?
      ing the following questions:                                   =   Does the letter attempt to build goodwill with the
 ™    Do these letters use buffers? If so, how effective are             audience? If yes, how so?
      they?                                                          =   Doany of the letters offer an alternative?
                                                                   Business and Administrative Communication,
                                                                                                          Tenth Edition




                                                         Chapter 10   Delivering Negative Messages                                   309


=        How do you think recipients will react to each of the         =         Do the letters attempt to build goodwill with the
         letters? Which (if any) are more preferable?                            audience? If yes, how so?
                                                                       =         Doany of the letters offer an alternative?
As your instructor directs,                                            =         How do you think recipients will react to each of the
a. Discuss your findings in a small group.                                       letters? Which (if any) are more preferable?
b. Present your findings orally to the class.
                                                                       As your instructor directs,
 c. Present your findings in a memo to your instructor.
                                                                       a.        Discuss your finding in a small group.
2        Collect job rejection letters mailed to seniors on your
         campus. Analyze the letters, answering the follow-            b.        Present your findings orally to the class.
         ing questions:                                                 c.       Present your findings in a memo to your instructor.
®        Do these letters use buffers? If so, how effective are        d         Join with other students to write a report based on
         they?                                                                   your findings.
=        What reasons do the letters give, if any?



10.19          Creating Equal Work Distribution

You noticed recently that Clare, the woman who works                    =        Partner up with a classmate and role-play the
next to you at a call center, takes extended lunches and                         situation of confronting Clare. One of you is the
makes a lot of personal phone calls. As the result of her                        employee and one of you is Clare.
phone calls and breaks, you and your co-workers com-                    Hints:
plete more work throughout the day. After discussing
the situation with a close friend, you decide you are                   =        How can you deliver the negative news without
going to tell the boss about her behavior.                                       sounding like a tattletale?
                                                                        =        How can you make the situation seem severe
As your instructor directs,
                                                                                 enough so that your boss takes action?
=        Write a memo or e-mail to your boss in which you
         discuss Clare’s behavior and ask for a resolution.
=        Partner up with a classmate and role-play the situa-
         tion of telling the boss. One of you is the employee
         and one of you is the boss.



    10.20       Dumping Your Trash
                                                                                  After the two messages are drafted, write      a memo
    With the economic downturn, organizations are look-                     c.
    ing for any possible cost-cutting measures. Today, your                       to your instructor that discusses which message was
    supervisors tell you about a new program they are start-                      easier to create and why. You should also discuss
    ing next week to reduce costs. From now on, employees                         which message you believe makes a stronger argu-
    will be responsible for dumping their own trash into a                        ment.
    common bin. Employees who work for the state of Texas,                 Hints:
    the University of Washington, and Dartmouth College
    already participate in this project and have saved their               ®      Pick a business, government, or nonprofit organiza-
    organizations thousands of dollars. Your supervisors                          tion you know something about.
    believe the same savings will happen at your company.                  =      What benefits can you stress to employees about the
        All employees in your organization will have two                          new policy?
    cans at their desks: a large one for recyclables and smaller            =     How can you complain to your supervisor so that
    one for trash. In addition to the estimated money that the                    he/she takes you seriously?
    organization will save from custodial needs, they also                  m     Whatare the disadvantages of reducing work for the
    hope to gain more revenue from the recycling bins.                            lowest-paid employees?
    As your instructor directs,                                             Based on Sudeep Reddy, “Memo to All Staff: Dump Your
    a.     Write to everyone in your company and explain the                Trash,” Wall Street Journal, November 1, 2010, A3.
           new trash policy.
    b.     Write a complaint memo io your supervisors as an
           employee concerned about the new trash policy.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




310                                Part3   Basic Business Messages


10.21    Turning Down a Faithful Client

You are Midas Investment Services’ specialist in estate              say whether this is an extra series or whether this will
planning. You give talks to various groups during the                replace next February’s series.
year about estate planning. You ask nonprofit groups                    You can’t do it. Your spouse, a geneticist is giving an
(churches, etc.) just to reimburse your expenses; you                invited paper at an international conference in Paris next
charge for-profit groups a fee plus expenses. These fees             month and the two of you are taking your children, ages
augment your income nicely, and the talks also are mar-              13 and 9, on a three-week trip to Europe. (You’ve made
velous exposure for you and your company.                            arrangements with school authorities to have the kids
   Every February for the last five years, Gardner Manu-             miss three weeks of classes.) You've been looking for-
facturing Company has hired you to conduct an eight-                 ward to and planning the trip for the last eight months.
hour workshop (two hours every Monday night for four                    Unfortunately, Midas Investment Services is a small
weeks) on retirement and estate planning for its employ-             group, and the only other person who knows anything
ees who are over 60 or who are thinking of taking early              about estate planning is a terrible speaker. You could
retirement. These workshops are popular and have gen-                suggest a friend at another financial management com-
erated clients for your company. The session last Febru-             pany, but you don’t want Gardner to turn to someone
ary went smoothly, as you have come to expect.                       else permanently; you enjoy doing the workshops and
    Today, out of the blue, you got a letter from Hope               find them a good way to get leads.
Goldberger, Director of Employee Benefits at Gard-                       Write the letter to Ms. Goldberger.
ner, asking you to conduct the workshops every Tues-
day evening next month at your usual fee. She didn’t



10.22    Getting Information from a Co-worker

Your boss has been pressuring you because you are                    colleague, Matt Churetta, finishes his section. Right now,
weeks late turning in a termination report. However,                 he is the problem. Here is a series of e-mail exchanges
you cannot begin your section of the report until your               between you and Matt:


                   7/25/2012

                   Matt,

                   The boss wants the termination report now. Send over your section as soon as you
                   finish.

                   Thanks,



                   Matt’s reply:

                   7/31/2012

                   My apologies about the report.

                   On another note, I’m waiting to see my oncology surgeon to see what the course of
                   treatment will be for the esophageal cancer. | will keep you posted on the process.

                   Please let me know if there is anything else coming up.

                   Thanks,
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter10   Delivering Negative Messages                               311



                   8/15/2012

                   Matt,


                   | had no idea that you are dealing with esophageal cancer. Definitely keep me posted
                   on your condition. Best wishes as you work through your treatment.

                   | need your section of the termination report as soon as you finish it. The boss has
                   been waiting patiently for the finished version.

                   Thanks,




                    Matt’s reply:

                    8/26/2012

                    Report is coming along. The last two weeks have been difficult dealing with all the
                    tests, doctors’ appointments, etc. | will beat this deal!!!

                    Take Care,


   It is now September, and over a month has passed              _b.      Write a memo to your boss explaining the situation.
from the termination report's original due date. While            —_¢,_   Write a memo to your instructor that focuses on the
you are sympathetic to Matt’s situation, the boss is                      ethical choices you had to make while constructing
demanding the finished report.                                            the two messages.
As your instructor directs,
a.   Write an e-mail to Matt telling him you have to have
     his portion of the report as soon as possible. You are
     concerned for your job security, as well as his, if this
     report is not finalized soon.



10.23      Sending Negative Messagesto Real Audiences

As your instructor directs, write a negative letter that          m       Identify a television advertisement with which you
responds to one of the following scenarios:                               disagree. Write a letter to the company explaining
=    Write a letter to the owner of a restaurant where you                your position and neuer’ that theiadvertisement Pe
     received poor service.                                               altered or taken off the air.

=    Write a letter to a company whose product unsatis-           Hints:
     factorily met your expectations or needs.         ,          =       Forall of these scenarios, your main goal should be
=    Identify a current political topic on which you dis-                 to promote change.
     agree with your congressional representative. Write           =      Express your complaint as positively as possible.
     a letter that outlines your views for him/her and             m      Remember to consider your audience’s needs; how
     calls for change.                                                    can you build support for your position?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




CHAPTER                                        |3




Writing Job
Application Letters

Chapter Outline
How Content Differs in Job Letters and             B® Showing What Separates You from
Résumés                                               Other Applicants

How to Find Out about Employers and Jobs           m The Last Paragraph
Tapping into the Hidden Job Market               Faioll Application Letters
   = Information interviews                      Creating a Professional Image
   ®   Referral interviews                         ® Writing Style
                                                        Positive Emphasis
Content and Organization for Job
                                                        You-Attitude
Application Letters
                                                        Paragraph Length and Unity
   ®   How to Organize Solicited Letters                Letter Length
       How to Organize Prospecting Letters                                           e
                                                        eolidiavep-lalemmacronia=r-r
                                                                                  liars)
       First Paragraphs of Solicited Letters
                                                    ®   Follow-Up
       First Paragraphs of Prospecting Letters
       Showing a Knowledge of the Position       Application Essays
       and the Company                           Summary of Key Points
                                                                                        Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




         NEWSWORTHY                          COMMUNICATION

         Unconventional Job Tactics


                                                                6          an
                                                              HIRE ME
                                                               QUAL IFIED IN:
                                                       Be PACKAGING ENGINEERING     9
                                                                               NS
                                                          OPERATIONS MAN \GEME




                                                     Ss
                                                              317-748-2850 |
                                                          i




                           ith high U.S. unemployment rates, even                              But do these unusual tactics work? In some cases.
                        the best-qualified candidates may strug-                            Only 9% of the hiring managers surveyed reported
                        gle to make an impression in a sea of other                         having hired someone who used an unconventional
           job seekers. Some may turn to unconventional meth- tactic to get noticed. However, most of the unusual
           ods to get noticed by hiring directors and recruiters.   tactics they list benefit the hiring company in some
              Nathan Schwagler, for example, chose an innova- way: one candidate submitted a business plan for
           tive way to get past the traditional hiring process at one of the company’s products; another presented
           Ingram Micro. He dressed up                                       =               a solution to one of the com-
           as a deliveryman, complete                                                        pany’s    problems. As you
                                               “Remember that most innovative
           with a clipboard, a bouquet                                                       ponder your tactics, keep in
                                               methods backfire.”                            mind that the other 91% of the
           of flowers, and a Candygram.
           He got through security and                                                       people hired used standard
                                                                                                                  letter and
           to the office of Jessica, the company’s recruiter. techniques, including a strong application
           When he finally met her, Schwagler stripped off his a well-designed résumé.
            coveralls to reveal his business suit underneath and         Remember that most innovative methods back-
         _ presented Jessica with his résumé, in addition to the     fire. Take Nathan Schwagler. After delivering his
          flowers and candy.                                                                 résumé, he followed up a week later, only to find
             These kinds of innovative methods to get noticed                                himself talking with the head of security: Schwa-
          are on the rise in the United States. One survey of                                gler had been barred from entering the premises
          hiring managers conducted by CareerBuilder.com                                     or calling again. As one of his professors told
          showed that unconventional methods are rising,                                     him later, “The world is not ready for that type of
          with 22% of the managers seeing unusual tactics.                                   creativity.”
                                                                                                         http:// www.careerbuilder.com/ article /cb-1076-job-search-
           Sources: Rachel Zupek, “Unusual Job Search Tactics,” CareerBuilder, accessed April 9, 2011,
                           rch-tactics /; and “More  Employers  Seeing Unusual Tactics from  Job Seekers  in 2010, Finds New CareerBuilder Survey,” CareerBuilder, June 9,
           unusual-job-sea
                         /www.careerbui   lder.com/share /aboutus /pressreleases detail.aspx?id =pr574&sd   =6/9/ 2010&ed=12/31/2010&siteid=cbpr&sc_cmp1=cb_pr574_.
           2010, http:/




— ames
 Sen
s=e
ie i
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




410                                         Part4    The Job Hunt


                                            Learning Objectives
                                            After studying this chapter, you will know how to

                                            Te¥E            Find the information you need to write a good job letter to a
                                                            specific employer.

                                            Te ES?          write a job letter that makes you look attractive to employers.



              Multiple Career               The purpose of a job application letter is to get an interview. If you get a job
              Changes                       through interviews arranged by your campus placement office or through
              You will probably need        contacts, you may not need to write a letter. Similarly, if you apply electroni-
              a cover letter as you         cally through a company’s website, a letter may not be part of the materials
 change careers during your life-           you submit. However, if you want to work for an organization that isn’t inter-
 time. One widely touted figure you         viewing on campus, or later when you change jobs, you may need a letter. A
 may have heard many times is               survey conducted by Robert Half International, the world’s largest specialized
 that U.S. workers average seven            staffing firm, found 86% of executives said cover letters were still valuable
 career changes during their work-          components of job applications in the electronic age.!
 ing years.
                                              The co-founder of one software firm says,
   Unfortunately, that number is a
 myth. It has been attributed to the              We ignore résumés. . . Résumés reduce people to bullet points, and most people
 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics so               look pretty good as bullet points.
 many times that the bureau now                       What we do look at are cover letters. Cover letters say it all. They immediately
 posts a disclaimer on its website.               tell you if someone wants this job or just any job. And cover letters make something
   The bureau does not estimate                   else very clear: They tell you who can and who can’t write. . . When in doubt,
 lifetime career changes for a simple             always hire the better writer.”
 reason: no consensus exists for
 the definition of a career change. If         Job letters can play an important role in your personal branding (p. 371).
 a worker takes a company promo-            They can show your personality and, through careful reference to well-chosen
 tion to move from being an active          details about the organization, interest in a particular job.
 engineer to becoming a manager,               Job letters are frequently seen as evidence of your written communication
 is that a career change? Just a
                                            skills, so you want to do your best work in them. Flaws in your letter may well
 promotion? The work being done
                                            be seen as predicting shoddy job performance in the future.
 will certainly change. If someone
 laid off from her financial career
 takes a landscaping job for six
 months to pay bills before her next
                                            HOW CONTENT DIFFERS IN JOB LETTERS
 financial job comes along, is that         AND RESUMES
 a career change? Will it count as
 a double career change when she             The job application letter accompanies your résumé and serves as its cover
  returns to finance?                        letter. Make the most of your letter; it is your chance to showcase the features
                                             that set you apart from the crowd. Here you bring to life the facts presented
  Adapted   from “National   Longitudinal
  Surveys Frequently Asked Questions:
                                             in your vita; here you can show some personality (don’t overdo it). The cover
  Does BLS Have Information on the           letter is your opportunity to “sell” yourself into an interview.
  Number     of Times People Change              Although résumés and job letters overlap somewhat, they differ in three
  Careers   in their Lives?” Bureau of
  Labor Statistics, last modified Sep-
                                             important ways:
  tember 23, 2010, http://www.bls.gov/
  nis/nisfags.htm.
                                              = The résumé summarizes all your qualifications. The letter expands your
                                                best qualifications to show how you can help the organization meet its
                                                needs, how you differ from other applicants, and how much knowledge
                                                of the organization you possess.
                                              = The résumé avoids controversial material. The job letter can explain in a pos-
                                                itive way situations such as career changes or gaps in employment history.
                                              = The résumé uses short, parallel phrases and sentence fragments. The let-
                                                ter uses complete sentences in well-written paragraphs.
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                        411



HOW TO FIND OUT ABOUT
EMPLOYERS AND JOBS
To adapt your letter to a specific organization, you need information both
about the employer and about the job itself. You'll need to know

 =     Thename and address of the person who should receive the letter. To
       get this information, check the ad, call the organization, check its web-
       site, or check with your job search contacts. An advantage of calling is
   that you can find out what courtesy title (p. 69) the individual prefers
   and get current information.
 = What the organization does, and some facts about it. Knowing the
   organization’s larger goals enables you to show how your specific work
   will help the company meet its goals. Useful facts can include market
   share, new products or promotions, the kind of computer or manufac-
   turing equipment it uses, plans for growth or downsizing, competitive
   position, challenges the organization faces, and the corporate culture
   (p. 91).
 = What the job itself involves. Campus placement offices and web listings
   often have fuller job descriptions than appear in ads. Talk to friends who
   have graduated recently to learn what their jobs involve. Conduct informa-
   tion interviews to learn more about opportunities that interest you.

   The websites listed in Figure 13.1 provide a wide range of information. For
instance, the Forbes and Money sites have good financial news stories; prars.
com is a good source for annual reports. As a consumer, you have probably
already used the Better Business Bureau (bbb.org) site.
   More specific information about companies can be found on their websites.
To get specific financial data (and to see how the organization presents itself to
the public), get the company’s annual report from your library or the web. (Note:
Only companies whose stock is publicly traded are required to issue annual
reports. In this day of mergers and buyouts, many companies are owned by
other companies. The parent company may be the only one to issue an annual
report.) Recruiting notebooks at your campus placement office may provide
information about training programs and career paths for new hires. To learn
about new products, plans for growth, or solutions to industry challenges, read
business newspapers such as the Wall Street Journal, business magazines such as
Fortune or Bloomberg BusinessWeek, and trade journals.

 Figure 13.1              Web Sources for Facts about Companies

     Company Facts                            http://www.bbb.org/
     http://www. jobbankinfo.org/             http://legacy.www.nypl.org/research/sibl/
     http://www.wetfeet.com/                    company/c2index.htm
     http://www.forbes.com/                   http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/BUSI/
     http://www..irin.com/tf/IRIN/            http://online.wsj.com/public/page/news-
       home?path=/&host=irin.com&               career-jobs.html
     http://www.corporateinformation.com/     Salary Calculators
     http://www.vault.com/                    http://salaryexpert.com/
     http://www.stockmarketyellowpages.com/   _http://www.indeed.com/salary
     http://www.prars.com/                    http://www.payscale.com/
     http://money.cnn.com/           r        http://www.salary.com/mysalary.asp
     http://www.inc.com/inc5000/
 SR
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




412                                        Part4    The Job Hunt


              Dream Jobs
                                           TAPPING INTO THE HIDDEN JOB MARKET
                                           Many jobs are never advertised—and the number rises the higher on the job lad-
        _ ___ Asurvey of over 6,000
        7a    employees found that
              nearly 85% said they
                                           der you go. In fact, some authorities put the percentage of jobs that are not adver-
 were not in their dream jobs.             tised as high as 80%.° Many new jobs come not from responding to an ad but
 According to survey results, having       from networking with personal contacts. Some of these jobs are created especially
 fun at work was the most impor-           for a specific person. These unadvertised jobs are called the hidden job market.
 tant characteristic of a dream job        Information and referral interviews are two organized methods of networking.
 (39%); making a difference in the
 world was second (17%).                   information Interviews
   Among the professionals, police
 and firefighters were the most likely     In an information interview you talk to someone who works in the area you
 to believe they held dream jobs           hope to enter to find out what the day-to-day work involves and how you can
 (35%), followed by teachers (32%),        best prepare to enter that field. An information interview can let you know
 real estate professionals (28%),          whether or not you'd like the job, give you specific information that you can
 and engineers (25%). Those least          use to present yourself effectively in your résumé and application letter, and
 likely to believe they held dream
                                           create a good image of you in the mind of the interviewer. If you present your-
                                           self positively, the interviewer may remember you when openings arise.
 jobs were workers in hotel and
 food services (9%), manufacturing
 (9%), and retail (10%).
                                              In an information interview, you might ask the following questions:
      What is your dream job?
                                                   How did you get started in this field?
 Adapted     from    CareerBuilder.com,
 “National ‘Dream Jobs’ Survey Reveals             What have you been working on today?
 Four out of Five U.S. Workers Are Still           How do you spend your typical day?
 Searching for Their Dream Job,” press
 release, January 25, 2007, http://www             Have your duties changed a lot since you first started working here?
 .careerbuilder.com/share/aboutus/
 pressreleasesdetail.aspx?id=pr347&
                                                   What do you like best about your job? What do you like least?
 sd=1/25/2007 &ed=12/31/2007.                      What do you think the future holds for this kind of work?
                                                   What courses, activities, or jobs would you recommend as preparation
                                                   for this kind of work?

                                              To set up an information interview, you can phone or write an e-mail like
                                           the one in Figure 13.2. If you do e-mail, phone the following week to set up a
                                           specific time.

                                            Referral Interviews
                                            Referral interviews are interviews you schedule to learn about current job
                                            opportunities in your field. Sometimes an interview that starts out as an infor-
                                            mation interview turns into a referral interview.
                                                Areferral interview should give you information about the opportunities cur-
                                            rently available in the area you're interested in, refer you to other people who can
                                            tell you about job opportunities, and enable the interviewer to see that you could
                                            make a contribution to his or her organization. Therefore, the goal of a referral
                                            interview is to put you face-to-face with someone who has the power to hire you:
                                            the president of a small company, the division vice president or branch manager
                                            of a big company, the director of the local office of a state or federal agency.
                                                Start by scheduling interviews with people you know who may know
                                            something about that field—professors, co-workers, neighbors, friends, for-
                                            mer classmates. Use your alumni website to get the names and phone num-
                                            bers of alumni who now work where you would like to work. Talk to them to
                                            get advice about improving your résumé and about general job-hunting strat-
                                            egy, but also to get referrals to other people. In fact, go into the interview with
                                            the names of people you'd like to talk to. If the interviewer doesn’t suggest
                                            anyone, say, “Do you think it would be a good idea for me to talk to—?”
                                               Armed with a referral from someone you both know, you can call peo-
                                            ple with hiring power, and say, “So-and-so suggested I talk with you about
                                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                           Chapter 13       Writing Job Application Letters                                413


Figure 13.2            E-mail Requesting an Information Interview
 & Untitled - Message (Rich Text)
 |= File Edit View    Insert Format   Tools   Actions   Help
                         <3     | oh 7 TE Attach asAdobe PDF |           Wi& is
                        mgt?     gas A | B de Ul           j=       =:


                                00g
  fgeeees imaxtempleton@appletown               eee
  Sa Pec creel
  a                   na        aa
           ORD.          ANON 3Cs BeBe adie Neea ee rome
      Subject:    Informational Interview _
                  Dear Mr. Templeton:                          ~~    if starting with the request seems too abrupt, ==                 |
                                                                                work up to it more gradually.
                   Because your organization has an outstanding reputation as one of the top 10 real
                   estate agencies in the country, I am interested in setting up an informational interview
                   with you to learn about real estate finance from Appletown Realty. lam currently
                   working on my Associate of Arts degree in Financial Management from East Coast
                   Community College.

        Refer tO your talk last month at ECCC’s sales club got me thinking about how to follow; your                                        |
        any          ;                            ;         :        :     A                                                                |
        previous advice to focus. My recent experience working as a financial sales representative
        contact as led me to want to learn more about real estate and Appletown Reality. I would
        with the appreciate the opportunity to meet with you briefly and discuss your work, specifically
        reader, small business acquisition.                                                    Ofennga                                      |

                   During the meeting, I would also like to find out what courses you believe                      eae ese                  |
                   would be most helpful as preparation to work in the real estate business.                       gigayssion               |
                   I'm also interested in knowing the skills and qualities you look for                            may make the
                   in job candidates.                                                                              interview seem
                                                                                                                   doable for the
                                                                                                 reader.                                     |
                   Could we set up a meeting sometime within the next two weeks? I will
                                                  an appointment . I look forward to meeting you                                             |
  |                call early next week to set up
                   and learning more about your insight into real estate.                          Take the
                                                                                                                     initiative to call.

                   Sincerely,            Even though you shouldn't
                                         depend on the reader to
                   Lee Cheng             call you, it's polite to give
                   732-403-5718          your phone number under                                                                             |
                                         your name.



job-hunting strategy.” Even when you talk to the person who could create a job
for you, you do not ask for a job. But to give you advice about your résumé, the
person has to look at it. If there’s a match between what you can do and what
the organization needs, that person has the power to create a position for you.

                 WARNING:       Many businesspeople are cynical about information and
              referral interviewing; they know the real purpose of such interviews, and they
      resent the  time needed. Therefore you need to prepare carefully for these interviews.
      Prepare a list of good questions; know something about the general field or industry;
      research the specific company.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




414                                      Part4    The Job Hunt



              http://www.google             Always follow up information and referral interviews with personal thank-
              .com/about/corporate       you letters. Use specifics to show that you paid attention during the interview,
                                         and enclose a copy of your revised résumé.
               Many websites give

                                         CONTENT AND ORGANIZATION
               you all the information
 you need to write a good job
 letter. Google’s Corporate
 Information page under                  FOR JOB APPLICATION LETTERS
                                         Job letters help show employers why they should interview you instead of other—
 Everything Google has links to
 jobs, news, company information
 and investor relations, where           sometimes hundreds of others—qualified applicants. In your letter, focus on
 you will find financial information
 and annual reports. Follow the                  Your qualifications to meet major requirements of the job.
 “Company” link to learn about
 topics such as Google's history,                Points that separate you from other applicants.
 initiatives, and philosophy.                    Points that show your knowledge of the organization.
                                                 Qualities that every employer is likely to value: the ability to write and
                                                 speak effectively, to solve problems, to work well with people.

                                             Two different hiring situations call for two different kinds of application let-
                                         ters. Write a solicited letter when you know that the company is hiring: you’ve
                                         seen an ad, you've been advised to apply by a professor or friend, you've read
                                         in a trade publication that the company is expanding. This situation is similar
                                         to a direct request in persuasion (p. 321): you can indicate immediately that
                                         you are applying for the position. Sometimes, however, the advertised posi-
                                         tions may not be what you want, or you may want to work for an organization
                                         that has not announced openings in your area. Then you write a prospecting
                                         letter. (The metaphor is drawn from prospecting for gold.) The prospecting
                                         letter is like a problem-solving persuasive message (p. 323).
                                             Prospecting letters help you tap into the hidden job market. In some cases,
                                         your prospecting letter may arrive at a company that has decided to hire but
                                         has not yet announced the job. In other cases, companies create positions to
                                         get a good person who is on the market. Even ina hiring freeze, jobs are some-
                                         times created for specific individuals.
                                              In both solicited and prospecting letters you should

                                           =     Address the letter to a specific person (a must for a prospecting letter).
                                           =     Indicate the specific position for which you’re applying.
                                           =     Be specific about your qualifications.
                                           =     Show what separates you from other applicants.
                                           m     Showa knowledge of the company and the position.
                                           =     Refer to your résumé (which you would enclose with the letter).
                                           =     Ask for an interview.

                                             The following discussion follows the job letter from beginning to end. The two
                                          kinds of letters are discussed separately where they differ and together where
                                          they are the same. Letters for internships follow the same patterns: use a solic-
                                          ited letter to apply for an internship that has been advertised and a prospecting
                                          letter to create an internship with a company that has not announced one.

                                          How to Organize Solicited Letters
                                          When you know the company is hiring, use the pattern of organization in Fig-
                                          ure 13.3. A sample solicited letter for a graduating senior is shown in Figure 13.4. A
                                          solicited letter following up from a career fair and requesting an internship is shown
                                          in Figure 13.7. The job ad for the letter in Figure 13.4 is printed in Exercise 13.20.
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                                      415


                                                                                                                Passion
Figure 13.3          How to Organize a Solicited Job Application Letter
                                                                                                          _     [Lucinda B. Watson,
1. State that you’re applying for the job (phrase the job title as your source phrased it).             =~     career counselor and
   Tell where you learned about the job (ad, referral, etc.). Include any reference number                     author of How They
   mentioned in the ad. Briefly show that you have the major qualifications required by            Achieved: Stories of Personal
   the ad: a college degree, professional certification, job experience, etc. Summarize            Achievement and Business Suc-
   your other qualifications briefly in the same order in which you plan to discuss them in        cess, transcribes in her book an
   the letter.                                                                                     interview with Ted Bell, the former
2. Develop your major qualifications in detail. Be specific about what you've done; relate         Vice Chairman and Worldwide
   your achievements to the work you'd be doing in this new job.                                   Creative Director of Young and
                                                                                                   Rubicam. An excerpt]
3. Develop your other qualifications, even if the ad doesn’t ask for them. Show what
                                                                                                   “My advice to young people is to just
   separates you from the other applicants who will also answer the ad. Demonstrate
                                                                                                   be passionate about whatever it is you
   your knowledge of the organization.
                                                                                                   do. Be the most passionate person in
4. Ask for an interview; tell when you’ll be available to be interviewed and to begin work.        the room. Not the smartest or the clev-
   Thank them for considering your application. End on a positive, forward-looking note.           erest, but the most passionate. Total
rT                                                                                                 passion. Say thank you. Say please.
                                                                                                   Don't take credit, take the blame. Do
                                                                                                   all that stuff, that’s good. But if you
How to Organize Prospecting Letters                                                                are the most passionate person, you'll
                                                                                                   probably win. Care more about it than
When you don’t have any evidence that the company is hiring, you cannot                            anybody and you'll be the one that
use the pattern for solicited letters. Instead, use the pattern of organization in                 wins. People love that. People gravi-
Figure 13.5. A sample prospecting letter for a student desiring to change fields                   tate toward that.”
is shown in Figure 13.6.                                                                           Quoted from Lucinda Watson, How
                                                                                                   They Achieved: Stories of Personal

First Paragraphs of Solicited Letters
                                                                                                   Achievement and Business Success
                                                                                                   (New York: John Wiley, 2001), 66.

When you know that the firm is hiring, announcing that you are applying
for a specific position enables the firm to route your letter to the appropriate
person, thus speeding consideration of your application. Identify where you
learned about the job: “the position of junior accountant announced in Sun-
day’s Dispatch,” “William Paquette, our placement director, told me that you
are looking for... .”
   Note how the following paragraph picks up several of the characteristics of
the ad:
   Ad:       Business Education Instructor at Shelby Adult Education. Candidate must pos-
             sess a Bachelor's degree in Business Education. Will be responsible for providing
             in-house training to business and government leaders. . . . Candidate should have
             at least one year teaching experience.

   Letter:   | am applying for your position in Business Education that is posted on your
             school website. In December, | will receive a Bachelor of Science degree from
             North Carolina A & T University in Business Education. My work has given me two
             years’ experience teaching word processing and computer accounting courses
             to adults plus leadership skills developed in the North Carolina National Guard.

   Your summary sentence or paragraph covers everything you will talk
about and serves as an organizing device for your letter.

   Through my education, | have a good background in standard accounting principles
   and procedures and a working knowledge of some of the special accounting prac-
   tices of the oil industry. This working knowledge is enhanced by practical experience
   in the oil fields: |have pumped, tailed rods, and worked as a roustabout.



   My business experience, familiarity with DeVilbiss equipment, and communication
   skills qualify me to be an effective part of the sales staff at DeVilbiss.
PROFESSION AL WRITING




Figure 13.4 A Solicited Letter from a Graduating Senior
                                                                                                 831.503.4692

     Jeff Moeller                                                                              51 Willow Street
                                                                                          San José, CA 95112
                                                                                           jmoeller@csmb.edu
               April 4, 2012

               Mr. Richard Grove
               Telltale Games
               On Box Gir
               San Rafael, CA 94912

               Dear Mr. Grove:                           Tell where you learned about the job.
  In paragraph 1, show you                               If the job has a reference number, provide it.
  have the |am applying for your Game Designer position posted on your website. As an
  qualifi- _avid player of Telltale games, | believe that | have all the qualifications to do a
  cations   great job. With my degree in Computer Science and Information Technology and
  ithe ad   my experience creating game content, | will be able to apply many skills to the
  lists.       Game Designer position. My passion for becoming part of the gaming industry, —This summary
          combined with my oral and written communication skills, makes me a great fit                    sentence
  Shows _ for the Telltale team.                                                                          forecasts the
  enthusiasm                   P                     ;       :                     ‘                      structure of
  forthe     Since | was five, | have had a strong interest in computers and video games,    the rest
  profession and my interest and knowledge have only increased in recent years. Not only     of the letter.
  and picks 40 | play video games, | discuss them with others, read news articles about them
  up on the online, and consider ways to improve or change a specific game. | have also used
  program- game editors to create my own content in games. When it comes to computers,
  ming         | have a keen interest in staying current with the latest technology, and | apply
  experiencemy knowledge hands-on by building systems. These experiences give me an
  emphasis Understanding of how modern computers and video game systems function.
  in the job | also have experience with several programming languages, from both
  aad.       taking courses and learning them on my own. This has increased my eye for
             detail, a necessary ability for any game designer.                        Provides
                                                                                                   evidence
               My passion for creating video games was recognized this year in President           for his
               Obama's National STEM video game challenge. With a team of students in              achievements
               Professor Kent Olbernath’s game development class at California State               in the
               University, | produced “Parrot Villa,” the first level of an immersive game         profession.
               where players solve mysteries on a unique jungle world. The programming
               quality and detailed story line helped my team earn second place in the             Relates what
                                     You can see a demo of “Parrot Villa” at
               nationwide competition.                                                             he has done
               www.STEMChallenge.gov/2011_Winners.                                                 to what he
                                                                                                   could do for
  ib           Along with my enthusiasm for games, | have strong oral and written                  the company.
  pees        communication skills. lama confident public speaker, and | have an ability to relay
  siete       information in a clear and concise manner. More importantly, though, | have
  ne jee      developed the ability in my creative writing courses to create engaging and     Shows
  Bical       coherent narratives, which will be a large component of developing new games. familiarity
  anviee      In addition to my coursework and experience, |have honed my skills online by with
           writing articles about games. In covering the video game industry for Point         company’s
              Network, | have reviewed Telltale’s own Tales of Monkey Island.                 products.

                Working in the video game industry is my goal, and | would be a great asset to
                Telltale Games. | would love to come in for an interview to discuss the position and
                the contributions | can make. | have always enjoyed playing Telltale’s games, and
                | look forward to the possibility of working on them one day soon.

                Sincerely,
               Goff Macller
                Jeff Moeller
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                                           417


                                                                                                                       Jocks Rock in the
Figure 13.5           How to Organize a Prospecting Letter                                                             Workplace
ee
                                                                                                                      Some employers are
 1. Catch the reader's interest.
                                                                                                                      seeking athletes to fill
 2. Create a bridge between the attention-getter and your qualifications. Focus on what                     jobs because athletes possess
    you know and can do. Since the employer is not planning to hire, he or she won’t be                     qualities which lead to success
    impressed with the fact that you’re graduating. Summarize your qualifications briefly in                in the workplace. For example
    the same order in which you plan to discuss them in the letter. This summary sentence                   Gretchen Tonnesen, former flying
    or paragraph then covers everything you will talk about and serves as an organizing                     halfback captain for the Princ-
    device for your letter.                                                                                 eton   University women’s   rugby
 3. Develop your strong points in detail. Be specific. Relate what you've done in the past                  team, now works at JP Morgan
    to what you could do for this company. Show that you know something about the                           Chase & Co. where she exam-
    company. Identify the specific niche you want to fill.                                                  ines technology, media, and tele-
                                                                                                            communications companies for
 4. Ask for an interview and tell when you'll be available for interviews. (Don’t tell when
                                                                                                            the investment bank. JP Morgan
    you can begin work.) Thank them for considering your application. End on a positive,
                                                                                                            chose her because of her pas-
    forward-looking note.
  eee EU ERE NSNSEIIESEENRRRREEERE                                              RRRRERSEREREERERRenErennl   sionate involvement in sports.
cn
                                                                                                               Recruiters and employers rec-
                                                                                                            ognize that college athletes pro-
First Paragraphs of Prospecting Letters                                                                     vide leadership, competitiveness,

Ina prospecting letter, asking for a job in the first paragraph is dangerous: unless                        and a sharp focus on goals.

the company plans to hire but has not yet announced openings, the reader is
                                                                                                            Athletes also understand team

likely to throw the letter away. Instead, catch the reader’s interest. Then in the
                                                                                                             responsibility, time management,
                                                                                                            and dedication. In addition, ath-
second paragraph you can shift the focus to your skills and experience, showing                              letes from top schools typically
how they can be useful to the employer and specifying the job you are seeking.                               have the drive and stamina that
   Here are some effective first and second paragraphs that provide a transi-                                matches the 80-hour high pres-
tion to the writer’s discussion of his or her qualifications.                                                sure workweeks found in many

   First two paragraphs of a letter to the director of publications at an oil
                                                                                                             Wall Street jobs.
                                                                                                                By the way, Tonnesen got her
company:                                                                                                     job through the Alumni Athlete
                                                                                                             Network, founded by a Harvard
   If scarcity of resources makes us use them more carefully, perhaps it would be a                          basketball captain. The carefully
   good idea to ration words. If people used them more carefully, internal communica-                        selected students in the Net-
   tions specialists like you would have fewer headaches because communications                              work’s program have average
   jobs would be done right the first time.                                                                   GPAs of 3.6 and average SAT
                                                                                                              scores of 1320.
   For the last six years | have worked on improving my communications skills, learning                        How can you capitalize on your
   to use words more carefully and effectively. | have taught business communication                         extracurricular activities to help
   at a major university, worked for two newspapers, completed a Master’s degree in                          your job search?
   English, and would like to contribute my skills to your internal communications staff.
                                                                                                             Adapted from John DeBruicker, “If

First two paragraphs of a letter applying to be a computer programmer for an
                                                                                                             You're A Jock, You Rock,” Business-
                                                                                                             Week, September 18, 2006, 67.
insurance company:

   As you know, merging a poorly written letter with a database of customers just sends
                                                                                       can
   out bad letters more quickly. But you also know how hard it is to find people who
   both program computers and write well.
                                                                                        my
   My education and training have given me this useful combination. I’d like to put
                          computer   technology  and  my  business  experience  writing  to
   associate’s degree in
   customers to work in State Farm’s service approach to insurance.

Notice how the second paragraph provides a transition to a discussion of
qualifications.
   Questions work well only if the answers aren’t obvious. The computer pro-
grammer above should not ask this question:

    Do you think that training competent and motivated personnel is a serious concern
    in the insurance industry?
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




418                                  Part4   The Job Hunt



Figure 13.6           A Prospecting Letter from a Career Changer

                                                                                                266 Van Buren Drive
                  Molly Schooner                                             Molly uses a       Lawrence, KS 66044
                  www.ukansas.edu/~Schoonerm88/home.htm                      “letterhead”       schoonerm @ ukansas.edu
                                                                             that hamonizes     785-897-1534 (home)
                  March 29, 2012                                             with her resume. 785-842-4242 (cell)
                                                                             (see Figure 12.7)
                  Mr. Franklin Kohl
                  PDF Productions
                  3232 White Castle Road
                  Minneapolis, MN 85434                In a prospecting letter, open with a sentence which
                                                       (1) will seem interesting and true to the reader and
                  Dear Mr. Kohl:                       (2) provides a natural bridge to talking about yourself.
                  The Wall Street Journal says that PDF Productions is expanding operations into Shows
                  Kansas, Minnesota, and Nebraska. My experience in technical writing, design, know/edge
                  and computers would be an asset to your expanding organization.                                 ofthe
                                                                                                                  organization.

                    While working at a local animal shelter, Iused my technical writing skills to create a
                    website that allows users to easily access information. To improve the website,
      Briefly shows
                    I conducted usability tests which provided useful feedback that I incorporated
      a variety of
      reannical     1 modify the overall design. In addition, I was also responsible for writing and
      writing and editing the shelter's monthly newsletter, which was distributed to roughly
      computer      1,200 “Friends of the Shelter.” I have extensive computer and design skills,
      skills.     which I am anxious to put to use for PDF Productions.
                                                                                                                  Shows how
                   Course work has also prepared me well for technical writing. Ihave written                     fer course-
                   technical material on a variety of levels ranging from publicity flyers for the                work /s an
                   animal shelter to scientific reports for upper-level science courses. My course                asset.
      Rolates
      ak          work in statistics has shown me how to work with data and present it accurately
      she's done for various audiences. Because of my scientific background, I also have a strong
      to what she vocabulary in both life sciences and chemistry. This background will help me
                                                                                              Names specific
      coulddo — get up to speed quickly with clients such as ChemPro and Biostage. My
      for this    background in science has also taught me just how important specific        clients, showing
                                                                                                              more knowledge
      company.     details can be.
                                                                                                              of company.

                   In May, I will complete my degree from the University of Kansas and will be most
                   interested in making a significant contribution to PDF Productions. I am available
                   every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday for an interview (785-897-1534). Thank you
                   for considering my appliction. I look forward to talking with you about technical
                   writing I can do for PDF Productions.

                   Sincerely,

                   Wally Fehaanet
                   Molly Schooner
                                                 Chapter 13.   Writing Job Application Letters                             419


Figure 13.7           Letter Following Up from a Career Fair and Requesting an Internship


                                                  Lee Cheng
                                                  chengl@eccc.edu
                      Campus Address                                           Panne             Permanent Address
                      1524 Main Street                                         mndighaainie      2526 Prairie Lane
                      New Brunswick, NJ 08901                                  FeEtAG:           Middlesex, NJ 08846
                      732-403-5718                                                               402-442-7793

                      January 23, 2012

                      Ms. Deborah Pascel, HR Department
                      Prime Financial
                      401 Prime Park Place
                      New Brunswick, NJ 08901

                      Dear Ms. Pascel:

    Deshi             Mary Randi at the East Coastal Community College Career Fair suggested I send
    Bantact           you my résumé for the Sales Advisor internship. My education, combined with
    immediately.      ™y past work experiences, makes me a strong candidate for Prime Financial.

   eras he has        While working toward my Associate of Arts degree in Financial Management
   been getting       from East Coastal Community College, I have learned the value of fiscal
   full value from    responsibility. For example, in my social financial planning course, I developed
   his schooling.     a strategic plan to eliminate credit card debt for a one-income household with payors io
                      two children. Moreover, in my business communication course, I improved MYKnowledge
                      oral communication ability so that I could effectively communicate my plans           gained at
                      to potential clients. This ability will be an asset to Prime Financial as the         career fair.
   Paragraphs 2       organization works to maintain the strong relationship with the community
   and 3 show         and small business owners that Ms. Randi informed me about.
                                                                                                            Provides
   he has skills
                      My financial education, combined with my previous work experiences in                 details
   hecanuse
                                                                                                            about his
   immediately       — sales, will allow me to thoroughly analyze investment opportunities and
                       establish a strong client base for Prime Financial. For example, I started           sales
   as anintern.
                       the A-Plus T-Shirt Company that sold graphic T-shirts to high school                 naa
                       students; it had a routine client base of over 150 customers. From managing          his reader.
                       this business, I know what it takes to be reliable and responsive to customer
                       needs. I am looking forward to learning new approaches from Prime Financial's
                       internship, particularly new ways to work with small businesses.

                       With my education and experience, I can provide the innovative and competitive
                       edge necessary to be part of your team. I would welcome an interview to discuss
                       your internship and the contributions I could make at Prime Financial.

                       Sincerely,

                      Lee Cherg
                       Lee Cheng
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                        Part4   The Job Hunt


            Unfortunate Cover           If the reader says yes, the question will seem dumb. If the reader says no, the
            Letter Statements           student has destroyed his or her common ground. The computer programmer,
            a   “Please find my         however, could pose this question:
                résumé.” Did you
                look under the             How often do you see a programmer with both strong programming skills and good
                couch?                     communication skills?
   “| have integrity so | will not
   steal office supplies and take       This question would give him or her an easy transition into paragraphs about
   them home.” Good to know.            his/her programming and communication skills.
   “Please, please, please hire
   me for this job. | will be wait-
   ing by the phone.” Don’t wait        Showing a Knowledge of the Position and the Company
   too long.
                                        If you could substitute another inside address and salutation and send out the
   “What interested me about
   this job is that it’s with a pres-
                                        letter without any further changes, it isn’t specific enough. A job application
   tigious company.” Glad to            letter is basically a claim that you could do a specific job for a particular com-
   hear it.                             pany. Use your knowledge of the position and the company to choose relevant
   “After perusing my résumé, |         evidence from what you’ve done to support your claims that you could help
   am looking forward to hearing        the company. (See Figures 13.4 and 13.6.)
   from you soon.” If you don’t             The following paragraphs show the writer’s knowledge of the company.
   mind, we'd appreciate the
                                           A letter to PricewaterhouseCoopers’s Minneapolis office uses information
   opportunity to peruse it our-
   selves before we get back
                                        the student learned in a referral interview with a partner in an accounting
   to you.
                                        firm. Because the reader will know that Herr Wollner is a partner in the Berlin
                                        office, the student does not need to identify him.
   “I'm submitting the attached
   copy of my résumé for your
   consumption.” Yum.                       While | was studying in Berlin last spring, | had the opportunity to discuss account-
    “| perform my job with effort-          ing methods for multinational clients of PricewaterhouseCoopers with Herr Fritz
    less efficiency, effectiveness,         Woliner. We also talked about communication among PricewaterhouseCoopers’s
    efficacy, and expertise.” And           international offices.
    an awful lot of alliteration,
    apparently.                             Herr Wollner mentioned that the increasing flow of accounting information between
    “The interview you schedule             the European offices—especially those located in Germany, Switzerland, and
    will undoubtedly reveal my              Austria—and the U.S. offices of PricewaterhouseCoopers makes accurate transla-
    unmatched talent and suit-              tions essential. My fluency in German enables me to translate accurately; and my
    ability for the position.” Uh,          study of communication problems in Speech Communication, Business and Pro-
    don’t count your chickens. . . .        fessional Speaking, and Business and Technical Writing will help me see where
    “But wait . . . there’s more.           messages might be misunderstood and choose words which are more likely to com-
    You get all this business               municate clearly.
    knowledge plus a grasp
    of finance that is second
    nature.” If | act now, will you
                                            A letter to KMPG uses information the student learned in a summer job.
    throw in a set of kitchen
    knives?                                 As an assistant accountant for Pacific Bell during this past summer, | worked with
                                            its computerized billing and record-keeping system, BARK. | had the opportunity
 Quoted from “Resumania Archive,”
 Resumania,   accessed March 20,            to help the controller revise portions of the system, particularly the procedures for
 2011,    —_http://www.resumania.com/       handling delinquent accounts. When the KMPG audit team reviewed Pacific Bell’s
 ResumaniaArchive.                          transactions completed for July, | had the opportunity to observe your System 2170.
                                            Several courses in computer science allow me to appreciate the simplicity of your
                                            system and its objective of reducing audit work, time, and costs.


                                            One or two specific details about the company usually are enough to demon-
                                         strate your knowledge. Be sure to use the knowledge, not just repeat it. Never
                                         present the information as though it will be news to the reader. After all, the reader
                                         works for the company and presumably knows much more about it than you do.
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                    Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                                    421


                                                                                                               Study Abroad and
Showing What Separates You from Other Applicants                                                               Overseas Work

Your knowledge of the company can separate you from other applicants.
                                                                                                               Programs

You can also use coursework, an understanding of the field, and experience                                     Have you considered
in jobs and extracurricular events to show that you’re unique. Stress your                                     a studies abroad pro-

accomplishments, not your job responsibilities. Be specific but concise; usu-                      gram or international job?

ally three to five sentences will enable you to give enough specific support-
                                                                                                     If so, a variety of resources are
                                                                                                   available. These websites offer
ing details.                                                                                       assistance for students interested
   This student uses both coursework and summer jobs to set herself apart                          in study abroad programs:
from other applicants. Her research told her Monsanto had recently adopted                          http:/Avww.ciee.org/
new accounting methods for fluctuations in foreign currencies. Therefore, she                       http://studyabroad.com/
mentions relevant simulations from her coursework.
                                                                                                    http://iiepassport.org/
                                                                                                     For information regarding full-
  My college courses have taught me the essential accounting skills required to
                                                                                                   time overseas opportunities, visit
  contribute to the growth of Monsanto. In two courses in international accounting,
                                                                                                   the following websites:
  | compiled simulated accounting statements of hypothetical multinational firms
                                                                                                    http://www.monster.com/geo/
  in countries experiencing different rates of currency devaluation. Through these
                                                                                                    siteselection/.
  classes, | acquired the skills needed to work with the daily fluctuations of exchange
                                                                                                    http:/Awww.jobsabroad.com/
  rates and at the same time formulate an accurate and favorable representation of
                                                                                                    search.cfm
   Monsanto.
                                                                                                    http://transitionsabroad.conV

    ‘Both my summer jobs and my coursework prepare me to do extensive record keep-
     ing as well as numerous internal and external communications. As Office Manager
 - for the steamboat Julia Belle Swain, | was in charge of most of the bookkeeping and
     letter writing for the company. | kept accurate records for each workday, and | often
 ~ entered over 100 transactions in a single day. In business communication | learned
  ~ how to write persuasive messages and how to present extensive data in reports ina
   simplified style that is clear and easy to understand.

   In your résumé, you may list activities, offices, and courses. In your letter,
give more detail about what you did and show how those experiences will
help you contribute to the employer’s organization more quickly.
   When you discuss your strengths, don’t exaggerate. No employer will
believe that a new graduate has a “comprehensive” knowledge of a field.
Indeed, most employers believe that six months to a year of on-the-job train-
ing is necessary before most new hires are really earning their pay. Specifics
about what you've done will make your claims about what you can do more
believable and ground them in reality.


The Last Paragraph
 In the last paragraph, indicate when you'd be available for an interview. If
 you're free anytime, you can say so. But it’s likely that you have responsibili-
 ties in class and work. If you’d have to go out of town, there may be only cer-
 tain days of the week or certain weeks that you could leave town for several
 days. Use a sentence that fits your situation.

   November 5-10 I'll be attending the Oregon Forestry Association’s annual meeting
   and will be available for interviews then.



   Any Monday or Friday | could come to Memphis for an interview.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                                           Part4    The Job Hunt


              Email Horror Story              Should you wait for the employer to call you, or should you call the
              “| sent a digital resume     employer to request an interview? In a solicited letter, it’s safe to wait to be
        P&,   and cover letter via         contacted: you know the employer wants to hire someone, and if your letter
           email to apply for a            and résumé show that you’re one of the top applicants, you'll get an interview.
              position as a technical      In a prospecting letter, call the employer. Because the employer is not plan-
writer. Within a few hours, a mes-         ning to hire, you'll get a higher percentage of interviews if you're assertive.
sage from the director in charge of            If you’re writing a prospecting letter to a firm that’s more than a few hours
hiring came via email. Full of antici-     away by car, say that you'll be in the area the week of such-and-such and
pation, | opened the email to find         could stop by for an interview. Companies pay for follow-up visits, but not for
a terse message: ‘your resume is
                                           first interviews. A company may be reluctant to ask you to make an expensive
infected with a virus and has been
                                           trip when it isn’t yet sure it wants to hire you.
                                               End the letter on a positive note that suggests you look forward to the inter-
quarantined.’ A person cannot
recover from an infected resume. |
did not pursue the position further.”      view and that you see yourself as a person who has something to contribute,
                                           not as someone who just needs a job.
Quoted from “Horror Stories,” ResumeEdge
com, accessed April 5, 2011, http://
www. resumeedge.convcontentpartners/             | look forward to discussing with you ways in which | could contribute to The Limited’s
interviews13.html.                               continued growth.

                                              Do not end your letter with a variation of the negative cliché “Please do not
                                           hesitate to contact me.” Why do you think they would hesitate? Also avoid
                                           this other tired cliche: “Thank you for your time.” Using an overworked end-
                                           ing dumps you right back in the pool with all the other applicants.
                                              Oh yes, one more thing. Don’t forget to sign your letter—with blue or black
                                           ink—legibly.

                                            E-MAIL APPLICATION LETTERS
                                           You will probably e-mail most of your applications. If your application is solic-
                                           ited, you can paste your traditional letter into your e-mail. If your application
                                           is prospecting, you need a shorter letter that will catch the reader’s attention
                                           within the first screen (see Figure 13.8). Your first paragraph is crucial; use it
                                           to hook the reader.
                                              Some experts are starting to recommend a shorter letter for both situations,
                                           but many caution that you need to include enough information to make you,
                                           not one of the numerous other applicants, the person for the job. Frequently
                                           that is hard to do in one screen.
                                              When you submit an e-mail letter with your résumé,

                                                   Include your name as part of the subject line.
                                             =     Put the job number or title for which you're applying in the first
                                                   paragraph.
                                             =     Prepare your letter in a word-processing program. Use a spell checker
                                                    to make it easier to edit and proof the document; then paste it into the
                                                    e-mail.
                                              =     Use   standard    business    letter features:    salutation,    standard    closing,
                                                    single-spacing with double-spacing between paragraphs.
                                              =     Keep line length to a maximum of 65 characters, including spaces, so
                                                    receivers won't get a strange mixture of long and short lines.
                                                    Don’t put anything in all capital letters.
                                                    Don’t use smiley faces or other emotions.
                                              m     Put your name at the end of the message.
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                     Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                          423


Figure 13.8           An E-mail with Application Letter and Resumé
  = Untitled - Message (Rich Text)




       TO...      _pascel@prime.com

                  _cheng]@eccc.edu_
      8CC.
                    =
    Subject: _Résumé—Lee Cheng
                   Dear Ms. Pascel:                                                                     Uses contact
                                                                                                        immediately
                   At the East Coast Community College Fair, Ms. Mary Randi said to e-mail you my
   | Tell what     résumé for the Sales Advisor internship. I have pasted my résumé below and have
     format the    also attached it as a PDF. My degree in Financial Management, combined with my
    attached        past work experiences, makes me a strong candidate for Prime Financial.
    résumé is in.
                    My course work honed professional skills. For example, in my social financial planning
                    course, I developed a strategic plan to eliminate credit card debt for a one-income
                    household with two children. In my business communication course, I improved        See Cheng’s
                    my oral communication ability so that I could effectively communicate my            longer letter
                    plans to potential clients.                                                         in Figurer 13.7.

                    My understanding of clients and their needs derives from my own work experiences.
    Pick your       I started the A-Plus T-shirt Company that sold graphic T-shirts to high school
    most        students; it had a routine client base of over 150 customers. From managing this
    impressive  business, I know what it takes to be reliable and responsive to customer needs.
    information I can provide the innovative and competitive edge necessary to be part of your
     for the        team. I would welcome an interview to discuss your internship and the contributions
    shortened       could make at Prime Financial.
     version.
                    Thank you,


                    Lee Cheng
     Send a
     Word           [Electronic résumé would be pasted here. PDF of résumé would be attached.|
     document
     or PDF file
     only if requested.
     Many employers will
     not open them
     because of viruses.




   Follow all guidelines posted by the company. Do not add attachments
unless you know doing so is OK. Test your e-mail by sending it to a friend;
have your friend recheck it for appearance and correctness.

 CREATING A PROFESSIONAL IMAGE
Every employer wants businesslike employees who understand professional-
ism. To make your application letter professional,
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




424                                         Part4     The Job Hunt


              You(r) Attitude
              Matters                        =      Create your letter in a word-processing program so you can use features
                                                    such as spell check. Use a standard font such as Times New Roman,
              lf you find getting a
                                                    Arial, or Helvetica in 12-point type.
              job difficult, your atti-
 tude may be the reason. Here                =      Address your letter to a specific person. If the reader is a woman, call the
 are four common career-blocking                    office to find out what courtesy title she prefers.
 attitudes and responses to them:            =      Don’t mention relatives’ names. It’s OK to use names of other people
 Attitude:     | deserve a good job                 if the reader knows those people and thinks well of them, if they think
               because | went to                    well of you and will say good things about you, and if you have permis-
               school for four years.               sion to use their names.
 Response:     Employers are look-           =      Omit personal information not related to the job.
               ing for who is best
                                             =      Unless you're applying for a creative job in advertising, use a conserva-
                                                    tive style: few contractions; no sentence fragments, clichés, or slang.
               for a job, not who
               “deserves”a job.
                                              =     Edit the letter carefully and proof it several times to make sure it’s per-
                                                    fect. Errors suggest that you’re careless or inept. Double-check the spell-
 Attitude:      | am open to any job.
                | have no idea what |
                want to do.
                                                    ing of the receiver’s name.
                Employers want work-
                                              =     Print on the same paper (both shade and weight) you used for your
 Response:
                ers who are focused.
                                                    résumé. Envelopes should match, too.
                | don't have experi-
                                              =     Useacomputer to print the envelope address.
 Attitude:
                ence because no one
                will give me a chance.
 Response:      Employers    do not         Writing Style
                employ    people to
                give them a “chance.”       Use a smooth, concise writing style (Chapter 5). Use the technical jargon of
                Employers are con-          the field to show your training, but avoid businessese and stuffy words like
                cerned with what an         utilize, commence, and transpire (for happen). Use a lively, energetic style that
                applicant can do for        makes you sound like a real person.
                them.
                                                Avoid words that can be interpreted sexually. A model letter distributed
 Attitude:      | am       so   down   on   by the placement office at a midwestern university included the following
                myself that it’s hard        sentence:
                to keep looking for a

                                                  I have been active in campus activities and have enjoyed good relations with my
                job.
  Response:     Get professional help,            classmates and professors.                                                    :
                because this attitude
                is poisonous to your
                                             Sentences like this get shared for laughs; that’s not the kind of attention you
                 life as well as your
                                             want to get!
                 career.
                                                Be sure your letter uses the exact language of the job ad and addresses all
  Adapted from Peter Vogt,“Self-Defeating    items included in the ad. If the ad mentions teamwork, your letter should
  Attitudes Will Stop Your Job Search        give examples of teamwork; don’t shift the vocabulary to collaboration. Many
  Cold,” Monster.com, accessed April 8,
  2011,     http://career-advice.monster
                                             readers expect their job ad language in applicants’ letters. If the language is
  .com/job-search/getting-started/self-      not there, they may judge the applicant as not fitting the position. And so may
  defeating-attitudes-job-search/article     their computer, since the vocabulary of the job ad probably contains crucial
  .ASpX.
                                             key words for the computer to find.


                                             Positive Emphasis
                                             Be positive. Don’t plead (“Please give me a chance”) or apologize (“I cannot
                                             promise that I am substantially different from the lot”). Most negatives should
                                             be omitted from the letter.
                                                Avoid word choices with negative connotations (see Chapter 3). Note how
                                             the following revisions make the writer sound more confident.
                                                    Negative:        | have learned an excessive amount about writing through courses in jour-
                                                                     nalism and advertising.
                                                              Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                     Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                        425


  Positive:        Courses in journalism and advertising have taught me to recognize
                   and to write good copy. My profile of a professor was published in the
                   campus newspaper; | earned an “A +” on my direct mail campaign for
                   the American Dental Association to persuade young adults to see their
                   dentist more often.

Excessive suggests that you think the courses covered too much—hardly an
opinion likely to endear you to an employer.
  Negative:        You can check with my references to verify what I’ve said.
  Positive:        Professor Hill can give you more information about my work on his
                   national survey.

Verify suggests that you expect the employer to distrust what you've said.


You-Attitude
Unsupported claims may sound overconfident, selfish, or arrogant. Create
you-attitude (Chapter 3) by describing accomplishments and by showing how
they relate to what you could do for this employer.
  Lacks you-attitude:        An inventive and improvising individual like me is a necessity in
                             your business.

  You-attitude:              Building a summer house-painting business gave me the
                             opportunity to find creative solutions to challenges. At the end
                             of the first summer, for example, | had nearly 10 gallons of
                             exterior latex left, but no more jobs. | contacted the home eco-
                             nomics teacher at my high school. She agreed to give course
                             credit to students who were willing to give up two Saturdays
                             to paint a house being renovated by Habitat for Humanity. |
                             donated the paint and supervised the students. | got a chari-
                             table deduction for the paint and hired the three best students
                             to work for me the following summer. | could put these skills in
                             problem solving and supervising to work as a personnel man-
                             ager for Burroughs.

Show what you can do for them, not what they can do for you.

   Lacks you-attitude:       A company of your standing could offer the challenging
                             and demanding kind of position in which my abilities could
                              flourish.
   You-attitude:              Omit.

   Remember that the word you refers to your reader. Using you when you
really mean yourself or “all people” can insult your reader by implying that
he or she still has a lot to learn about business:
   Lacks you-attitude:        Running my own business taught me that you need to learn to
                              manage your time.

   You-attitude:              Running my own business taught me to manage My time.

    Beware of telling readers information they already know as though they do
 not know it. This practice can also be considered insulting.
    Lacks you-attitude:       Your company has just purchased two large manufacturing
                              plants in France.

   You-attitude:              My thrée college French courses would help me communicate
                              in your newly acquired French manufacturing facilities.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




426                    Part4   The Job Hunt


                         Since you're talking about yourself, you'll use I in your letter. Reduce the
                       number of Is by revising some sentences to use me or my.
                          Under my presidency, the Agronomy Club ...
                          Courses in media and advertising management gave me a chance to...
                          My responsibilities as a summer intern included .. .
                          In particular, avoid beginning every paragraph with I. Begin sentences with
                       prepositional phrases or introductory clauses:
                          As my résumé shows, I. . .
                          In my coursework in media and advertising management, I. . .
                          Asasummer intern,!...
                          While I was in Italy, .. .

                       Paragraph Length and Unity
                       Keep your first and last paragraphs fairly short—preferably no more than four
                       or five typed lines. Vary paragraph length within the letter; it’s OK to have one
                       long paragraph, but don’t use a series of eight-line paragraphs.
                          When you have a long paragraph, check to be sure that it covers only one
                       subject. If it covers two or more subjects, divide it into two or more paragraphs.
                          Use topic sentences at the beginning of your paragraphs to make your letter
                       more readable.

                       Letter Length
                       Have at least three paragraphs. A short letter throws away an opportunity to
                       be persuasive; it may also suggest that you have little to say for yourself or
                       that you aren’t very interested in the job.
                          Without eliminating content, tighten each sentence (Chapter 5) to be sure
                       that you're using words as efficiently as possible. If your letter is a bit over a
                       page, use slightly smaller margins or a type size that’s one point smaller to get
                       more on the page.
                          If you have excellent material that will not fit on one page, use it—as long
                       as you have at least 6-12 lines of body text on the second page. The extra
                       space gives you room to be more specific about what you've done and to add
                       details about your experience that will separate you from other applicants.
                       Employers don’t want longer letters, but they will read them /fthe letter is well
                       written and ifthe applicant establishes early in the letter that he or she has the
                        credentials the company needs. Remember, however, that the trend is toward
                        shorter letters.


                        Editing and Proofreading
                        Be sure you edit and proofread your cover letter. Failure to do so can undo
                        all the work you put into it. The web abounds with humorous examples
                        of spelling errors making unintended statements (I’m excellent at spelling
                        and grammer). In fact, some companies post the best bloopers on their web
                        sites. For example, Robert Half International maintains Resumania (resuma-
                        nia.com); Killian Branding, an advertising agency, has “Cover Letters from
                        Hell” on their website (www.killianbranding.com/cover-letters-from-hell/):
                        the “poetic” Night-before-Christmas cover letter is amazing.
                           Check your content one last time to ensure that everything presents you as
                        a hard-working professional. Make sure you are not revealing any frustration
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                   Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                                       427


with the job search process in your content or diction. Check your tone to see                                Fatal Spelling Errors
that it is positive about your previous experiences and yourself. Don’t beg or                                These spelling errors
show too much gratitude for commonplaces such as reading your letter.                                         occurred     in     actual
                                                                                                              cover letters:

Follow-Up                                                                                         =   “| feel my rigorous education
                                                                                                      and subsequent internship
Follow up with the employer once if you hear nothing after two or three weeks.                        have prepared me for any
It is also OK to ask once after one week if e-mail materials were received. If                        obstical | might encounter.”
your job letter was prospecting, it is fine to follow up two or three times. Do                       Except the challenge of find-
not make a pest of yourself, however, by calling or e-mailing too often; doing                        ing misspelled words.
so could eliminate you from further consideration.                                                =   “| prefer a fast-paste work
                                                                                                      environment.” For life’s sticki-
                                                                                                      est situations.
APPLICATION ESSAYS                                                                                =   “lam very interested in
Some jobs and internships, and many scholarship and graduate school appli-                            the newspaper add for
                                                                                                      the accounting position.”
cations, ask for an application essay. In a sense, this essay is an extended cover
                                                                                                      And we're divided on your
letter, but one written in an essay format rather than letter format. It will detail
                                                                                                      qualifications.
your strengths for the job/internship /scholarship/graduate school slot and
                                                                                                  =   “lam extremely detailori-
show why you should be chosen instead of other applicants.
                                                                                                      ented.” I’m afraid we’re not
   The essay offers you a chance to expand on your best points in more detail                         convinced.
than does a cover letter. In so doing, you need to capture your readers’ atten-
                                                                                                  =   Name on letterhead: “Sam
tion and show that you are exceptional. Frequently this means you need to put                         Mevlin”; Signature: “Sam
some of your personality into your essay. Here you can spell out with more                            Melvin” Would the real Sam
interesting details skills you have already acquired from previous experiences                        please come forward?
and will bring to the new job or internship. Here you can elaborate on your
academic achievements so you seem worthy of a scholarship or able to thrive                       Robert Half International, “Cover Letter
                                                                                                  Statements,” accessed March 20, 2011,
in the rigors of graduate school. You can also expand more on general skills                      http://www.resumania.com/Resumania
such as communication, critical thinking, and teamwork. Show that you are                         Archive.
capable, hard working, and interesting.
   The essay also gives you room to include content that you would not put in
a cover letter. For instance, you might want to include an anecdote that shows
something about you as a developing professional (hint: make it interesting
but not melodramatic). Or you might talk some about future goals. How did
you arrive at these goals? How would this internship advance your career
goals? Why do you want to go to graduate school? What do you want to do
after the internship, scholarship, or graduate career is over?

             WARNING:        Becareful when giving goals for job application essays. You
              do not want your goals to make the job seem like a quick steppingstone to
      better opportunities.


   Remember to use the good writing techniques you have learned in this
course and your other communication classes.

  =     Follow the directions, especially word and page limits, precisely. If the
        essay is to respond to a question, make sure it answers the question.
  m     Have a focal point for your essay, a unifying theme. This will help pre-
        vent you from merely listing accomplishments (your résumé did that).
  =     Start your essay with an interesting paragraph to catch attention. Do not
        summarize your essay, or your reader may go no further.
  =     Remember your audience. Show what you can do for this company, or
        why you want to go to this particular graduate school. But most of all,
        show what's in it for them if they accept you.
|   PROFESSIONAL WRITING




    428                    Part4    The Job Hunt



                               = Use vivid details in the body of the essay. They don’t have to be wildly
                                 creative for a job essay; showing how you cut production time for the
                                 department newsletter by 15% will be interesting to your reader if the
                                 job is a good fit for you.
                               = Use some unique details. If your sentence could be used in many other
                                 applications, it is not showing why you should get the internship /job/
                                 scholarship / graduate school slot.
                                 Avoid unsupported generalities and clichés.
                               = Use topic sentences at the beginnings of your paragraphs. Remember
                                 these essays are frequently read quickly.
                               = Let your word choice reveal your personal voice. Since the essay is about
                                   you, it’s fine to use some first person. Avoid thesaurus diction.
                               =   End with a strong concluding paragraph. Remember, this is their last
                                   impression of you. Do not waste it on a boring summary of a one-page
                                   essay.




                           = Résumés differ from letters of application in the following ways:
                             s The résumé summarizes all your qualifications. The letter expands your
                                 best qualifications to show how you can help the organization meet its
                                 needs, how you differ from other applicants, and that you have some
                                 knowledge of the organization.
                             = The résumé avoids controversial material. The letter can explain in pos-
                                 itive ways situations such as gaps in employment history.
                             = The résumé uses short, parallel phrases and sentence fragments. The
                                 letter uses complete sentences in well-written paragraphs.
                           = Information and referral interviews can help you tap into the hidden job
                             market—jobs that are not advertised. In an information interview you
                             find out what the day-to-day work involves and how you can best prepare
                             to enter that field. Referral interviews are interviews you schedule to learn
                             about current job opportunities in your field.
                           = When you know that a company is hiring, send a solicited job letter. When
                              you want a job with a company that has not announced openings, send a
                              prospecting job letter. In both letters, you should
                              = Address the letter to a specific person.
                                  Indicate the specific position for which you’re applying.
                                  Be specific about your qualifications.
                                  Show what separates you from other applicants.
                                  Show a knowledge of the company and the position.
                                      Refer to your résumé (which you would enclose with the letter).
                                      Ask for an interview.
                            =      Use your knowledge of the company, your coursework, your understand-
                                   ing of the field, and your experience in jobs and extracurricular activities to
                                   show that you’re unique.
                            =      Don’t repeat information that the reader already knows; don’t seem to be
                                   lecturing the reader on his or her business.
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication,
                                                                                                  Tenth Edition




                                                  Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                                 429


=    Use positive emphasis to sound confident. Use you-attitude by supporting
     general claims with specific examples and by relating what you’ve done to
     what the employer needs.
=    Haveat least three paragraphs in your letter. Most job letters are only one page.
=    Application essays give you a chance to expand on your best points and
     show your personality.

                                                                                                 *Go to www.mhhe.com/locker10e for
      CHAPTER        13          Exercises and P r oblems                                        additional Exercises and Problems.




13.1.      Reviewing the Chapter

1. What are three ways that job letters differ from              4. What are the differences between solicited and pros-
     résumés? (LO 13-2)                                             pecting letters? (LO 13-2)
2. What are some ways to research specific employers?            5. What are five tips for writing a job letter that makes
   (LO 13-1)                                                        you look attractive to employers? (LO 13-2)
3. What is the difference between information and                6. What are 10 ways to create a professional image
   referral interviews? (LO 13-1)                                     with your letter? (LO 13-2)



a3.2       Reviewing Grammar

As you have read, it is crucial that your job letter be          word pairs like affect/effect. Practice choosing the correct
error-free. One common error in job letters, and one that        word with Exercises B.12, B.13, and B.14 in Appendix B.
spell-checking programs will not catch, is confusing



13.3       Analyzing First Paragraphs of Prosp ecting Letters

All of the following are first paragraphs in prospecting              rust-resistant, less expensive finish is a tough ques-
letters written by new college graduates. Evaluate the                tion. But similar questions must be answered daily
paragraphs on these criteria:                                         by your salespeople. With my experience in the
= Is the paragraph likely to interest readers and moti-               electroplating industry, I can contribute greatly to
    vate them to read the rest of the letter?                         your constant need of getting customers.
= Does the paragraph have some content that the stu-              5. Whata set of tractors! The new 9430 and 9630 die-
     dent can use to create a transition to talking about            sels are just what is needed by today’s farmer with
                                                                     his ever-increasing acreage. John Deere has truly
    his or her qualifications?
                                                                     done it again.
= Does the paragraph avoid asking for a job?
                                                                  6. Prudential Insurance Company did much to help
      For the past two and one-half years I have been                my college career as the sponsor of my National
      studying turf management. On August 1, I will                  Merit Scholarship. Now I think I can give something
      graduate from         University with a BA in Orna-            back to Prudential. I’d like to put my education,
      mental Horticulture. The type of job I will seek will          including a BS degree in finance from
      deal with golf course maintenance as an assistant              University, to work in your investment department.
      superintendent.                                             7. Since the beginning of Delta Electric Construction
2. Ann Gibbs suggested that I contact you.                           Co. in 1993, the size and profits have grown steadily.
 3. Each year, the Christmas shopping rush makes more                My father, being a stockholder and vice presi-
      work for everyone at Nordstrom’s, especially for the           dent, often discusses company dealings with me.
      Credit Department. While working for Nordstrom’s               Although the company has prospered, I understand
      Credit Department for three Christmas and summer               there have been a few problems of mismanagement.
      vacations, the Christmas sales increase is just one of         I feel with my present and future qualifications,
      the credit situations I became aware of.                       I could help ease these problems.
 4. Whether to plate a two-inch eyebolt with cadmium
      for a tough, brilliant shine or with zinc for a
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




430                                      Part4   The Job Hunt


13.4       Improving You-Attitude and Positive Emphasis in Job Letters

Revise each of these sentences to improve you-attitude               5.    Ihave been with the company from its beginning to
and positive emphasis. You may need to add information.                    its present unfortunate state of bankruptcy.
1. Iunderstand that your company has had problems                    6.    Iwish to apply for a job at Austin Electronics. I will
    due to the mistranslation of documents during                          graduate from Florida State in May. I offer you a
    international ad campaigns.                                            degree in electrical engineering and part-time work
2. Included in my résumé are the courses in Finance                        at Best Buy.
      that earned me a fairly attractive grade average.               7.   Iwas so excited to see your opening. This job is
3.    Iam looking for a position that gives me a chance to                 perfect for me.
      advance quickly.                                                8.   You will find me a dedicated worker, because I
4.    Although short on experience, I am long on effort                    really need a job.
      and enthusiasm.



13.5       Evaluating Letter Content

Improve the content of these passages from job coverlet-              4. I will be in Boston for a family reunion June 23-25
ters. You may need to add content.                                       and will drop by your office then for an interview.
1. My internship gave me lots of experience for this job.             5. I feel any of my bosses would tell you that I try hard
2. My job duties at Saxon Sport were to create                             and pay attention to to detail.
      displays, start an employee newsletter, and on                  6.   Iwish to apply for your job as a computer program-
      weekends I was part of the sales staff.                              mer. I have a computer science minor and two
3.    While at San Fernando State, I participated in                       summers of sales experience at Best Buy in their
      lots of activities. I played intramurals in baseball,                computer department.
      football, basketball, hockey, and volley ball. I was            7.   lama   very hard worker. In fact, I have a reputation
      treasurer and then president of the Marketing                        for finishing the jobs of other workers.
      Club. I was in the Gaffers’ Guild, where I made
      blown-glass creations. I was also in Campus
      Democrats.



 13.6       Evaluating Rough Drafts
 Evaluate the following drafts. What parts should be
 omitted? What needs to be changed or added? What
 parts would benefit from specific supporting details?

            ale
                     Dear            :
                     There is more to a buyer’s job than buying the merchandise. And a clothing buyer in
                     particular has much to consider.

                        Even though something may be in style, customers may not want to buy it. Buyers
                        should therefore be aware of what customers want and how much they are willing
                     to pay.

                        In the buying field, request letters, thank-you     letters, and persuasive letters are
                        frequently written.

                        My interest in the retail field inspired me to read The Gap’s annual report. | saw that a
                        new store is being built. An interview would give us a chance to discuss how | could
                        contribute to this new store. Please call me to schedule an interview.


                        Sincerely,
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                   Chapter 13.   Writing Job Application Letters                        431


                  Dear Sir or Madam:

                   | am taking the direct approach of a personnel letter. | believe you will under stand
                   my true value in the areas of practical knowledge and promotional capabilities.

                  | am interested in a staff position with Darden in relation to trying to improve the opera-
                  tions and moral of the Olive Garden Restaurants, which |think that | am capable of doing.
                  Please take a minute not to read my résumé (enclosed) and call to schedule an interview.

                   Sincerely,


                   Dear.         :

                   | would like to apply for the opening you announced for an Assistant Golf Course
                   Superintendent. | have the qualifications you are asking for.

                    Every year the Superintendent must go before the greens committee to defend its
                    budget requests. To prepare myself to do this, | took courses in accounting, busi-
                    ness and administrative writing, and speech.

                    | have done the operations necessary to maintain the greens properly.

                    | look forward to talking with you about this position.

                    Sincerely,



13.7.     Gathering Information about an Industry

Use six recent issues of a trade journal to report on three      = _b. Summarize your findings in a memo to your instruc-
or four trends, developments, or issues that are impor-                tor. Include a discussion of how you could use this
tant in an industry.                                                   information in your job letter and résumé.
                                                                    c. Present your findings to the class.
As your instructor directs,
a.   Share your findings with a small group of other               d. Join with a small group of other students to write a
                                                                       report summarizing the results of this research.
     students.


13.8      Gathering Information about Companies in Your Career Field

Use five different websites, such as those listed in               b.    Summarize your finding           s to your instruc-
                                                                                                   in a memo
Figure 13.1, to investigate three companies in your career               tor. Include a discussion of how you could use this
field. Look at salary guides for your level of qualifica-                information in your job letter and résumé.
tions, product/service information, news articles about             c.   Present your findings to the class.
the companies, mission/vision statements, main com-                gq. Join with a small group of other students to write a
petitors, annual reports, and financial reports.                       report summarizing the results of this research.
As your instructor directs,
a.   Share your findings with a small group of other
     students.


13.9      Gathering Information about a Specific Organization

Gather information about a specific organization, using              ™ Check the organization’s website.
several of the following methods:                                   @    Read the company’s annual report.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




432                                   Part4   The Job Hunt


=        Pick up relevant information at the Chamber of                   Summarize your findings in a memo to your instruc-
         Commerce.                                                        tor. Include a discussion of how you could use this
                                                                          information in your job letter and résumé.
=        Read articles in trade publications and the Wall Street
         Journal or that mention the organization (check the              Present your findings orally to the class.
         indexes).                                                        Write a paragraph for a job letter using (directly or
=        Read recruiting literature provided by the company.              indirectly) the information you found.

As your instructor directs,
a. Share your findings witha       small group of other students.




13.10          Conducting an Information Interview

Interview someone working in a field you're interested               b.   Write up your interview in a memo to your instruc-
in. Use the questions listed on page 412 or the shorter                   tor. Include a discussion of how you could use this
list here:                                                                information in your job letter and résumé.
= How did you get started in this field?                                  Present the results of your interview orally to the
= What do you like about your job?                                        class.
= What do you dislike about your job?                                     Write to the interviewee thanking him or her for tak-
                                                                          ing the time to talk to you.
= What courses and jobs would you recommend as
     preparation for this field?
As your instructor directs,
    a.    Share the results of your interview with a small
          group of other students.




    13.11       Conducting a Referral Interview

    a.    Write to a friend who is already in the workforce,                   job search? (Specify any organizations in which
          asking about one or more of the following topics:                    you're especially interested.)
          = Are any jobs in your field available in your                   List possible networking contacts from your
              friend’s organization? If so, what?                          co-workers, classmates, fraternity/sorority mem-
          = If ajob is available, can your friend provide infor-           bers, friends, family friends, former employers and
              mation beyond the job listing that will help you             co-workers, neighbors, faculty members, and local
              write a more detailed, persuasive letter? (Specify           business people. Who would be the most valuable
              the kind of information you'd like to have.)                 source of information for you? Who would you feel
                                                                           most comfortable contacting?
          = Can your friend suggest people in other orga-
              nizations who might be useful to you in your




     13.12      Writing a Solicited Letter
    Write a letter of application in response to an announced              ad that specifies the company, not a blind ad. Be sure
    opening for a full-time job (not an internship) you would              that you are fully qualified for the job.
    like.                                                                  If you have already worked somewhere, assume
        Turn in a copy of the listing. If you use option                   that your employer is asking you to apply for full-
    (a) below, your listing will be a copy. If you choose option           time work after graduation. Be sure to write a fully
    (b), you will write the listing.                                       persuasive letter.
    a. Respond to an ad in a newspaper, in a professional
           journal, in the placement office, or on the web. Use an
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                   Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                           433


13.13     Writing a Prospecting Letter

Pick a company you'd like to work for and apply for a            or the area vice president or branch manager of a large
specific position that is not being advertised. The posi-        company.
tion can be one that already exists or one that you would           Create a job description; give your instructor a copy
create if you could to match your unique blend of talents.       of it with your letter.
   Address your letter to the person with the power to
create a job for you: the president of a small company,



13.14      Critiquing a Job Letter

After you have written your job letter for Exercise 13.12        m   Have your classmate reread your job letter and make
or 13.13, bring it to class and share it with a classmate.           suggestions to enhance it.
= Read your cover letter aloud to your classmate not-            = Swap letters and go through the exercise again.
    ing any changes you would like to make and any               Write a memo to your instructor discussing the changes
     areas that may not sound appropriate.                       you will make to your job letter on the basis of this
                                                                 exercise.



13.15      Writing a Rhetorical Analysis of Your Job Letter
a.   Examine the job letter you wrote for Exercise 13.12 or             =   How did you adapt your tone and style for this
     13.13 and answer the following questions in a memo                     audience? How did you balance your need to
     to your instructor:                                                    promote yourself without bragging? Where
     =    Whois your audience? Identify them beyond                         did you use you-attitude, positive tone, and
          their name. What will they be looking for?                        goodwill?
     =    How did you consider this audience when                       = How did you show knowledge of the company
          selecting information and the level of detail to                  and the position without telling your audience
          use? What information did you exclude? How                        what they already know?
          did you shape the information about you to              b.    Review a class member’s cover letter using the same
          address your audience’s needs?                                questions.
      =   How did you organize your information for
          this audience?



13.16      Applying Electronically

Write an e-mail application letter with a résumé in the
text of the message.



13.17      Applying at Google

Using the Google sidebar on page 414, research possible
jobs at Google. Pick the one most appropriate for you
and write an electronic job letter to Google.



 13.18      Editing a Cover Letter

 In Chapter 12, Exercise 12.13, you critiqued the résumé             letter to improve it. Then write a memo to your instruc-
 of Jennifer Stanton. Below is her cover letter. Using the           tor discussing the strengths and weaknesses of the letter
 information about Jennifer from Exercise 12.13, redo her            and explaining why you made the changes you did.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




434                                 Part4   The Job Hunt



                   From:     wildechilde@gmail.com

                   To:       pattersj@micquant.com

                   Date:     13 February, 2012

                   Re:       Job!

                   Dear Ms. Patterson:

                   My name is Jennifer Stanton and | really want to work with you at Quantum National!
                   Your job looks a whole lot like the one | had at my internship this past summer, so I’m
                   pretty sure I’d be great at it.

                   | can’t start until this Summer, because I’m finishing up my degree at lowa State. I’m
                   currently working on a degree in Buisness Management, so I'd be a great manager
                   at your business. The one thing I’ve learned for sure in college is how to balance
                   deadlines to get everything done on time. I've had a few classes where we had.to
                   work in teams, and I’ve been the team leader every time: once | step in, people just
                   want to follow where | lead.

                   | think my work experience is exactly what you’re looking for, too. At my internship
                   last summer, | was basically unsupervised, so | had to learn fast! |managed cliet and
                   department needs, | did the budgets—twice!—and | worked with a sales and mar-
                   keting team to put together client information packages. | also did the scheduling for
                   the team the whole time, which was my supervisor's job but she delegated it to me,
                   because | am trustworthy. | also worked for years at my family’s bookstore, which
                   shows | can hold down a job.

                   Like | said, I’m really interested in this job. | think that this would be a great place
                   to start my career, and | know | can do the job! Give me a call on my cell when you
                   decide who you're interviewing!

                   Thanks,
                    Jennifer Stanton



 13.19    Reviewing Cover Letters

 All-Weather, Inc., invited applications for the position of of All-Weather’s vinyl windows in local markets, includ-
 Sales Representative (Residential Sales). To be based in _ ing single- and double-hung windows and casement win-
 Nebraska, this person will be mainly responsible for sales  dows. The job description for the position reads as follows:

                    The Sales Representative (Residential Sales) will be responsible for successful
                    market penetration of identified market segments. Specifically, the duties include
                    achieving targeted sales, conducting product demonstrations, contacting customers
                    and other stakeholders, gathering market intelligence, preparing market and sales
                    reports, communicating with internal customers, coordinating between customers
                    and the Service and Installation Group, participating in meetings of trade associa-
                    tions and government agencies, attending company training events, and performing
                    other duties assigned by managers. The ideal candidate will be someone with a BS
                    degree, preferably with a technical major. Additionally, the candidate must have at
                    least one year of sales experience, preferably in industrial products. Candidates with
                    experience in brand marketing will also be considered. Among skills for the job, the
                    candidate must possess computer skills, PR and communication skills, teamwork
                    skills, and the ability to perform basic mathematical computations.
                                                 Chapter 13.   Writing Job Application Letters                        435


Below are two cover letters received from applicants.           weaknesses of both. Judging just from their cover letter,
In a memo to your instructor, discuss the strengths and         which applicant would you prefer to hire? Why?



Figure 1         Antonio Ramirez’s Cover Letter

                  Antonio Ramirez aramirez@bestmail.com 164 Beet St. Houston, TX


                  October 12, 2012
                  Ms. Erin Lenhardt
                  1210 Polaroid Av.
                  St. Paul, MN

                  Dear Ms. Lenhardt:
                  Please consider this letter as my application for the post of Sales Representative
                  (Residential Sales). | learned about your job from the journal Plastics US (September
                  issue). | have a bachelor’s degree in chemistry from the University of Austin, Texas,
                  and have two years of experience selling PVC resin.
                  The last two years | have been a Sales Executive in Goodman Petrochemicals in
                  Houston, TX. My responsibilities include selling Goodman’s PVC resin to Houston-
                  based PVC processors of rigid and flexible applicatons.
                  As you suggest in your advertisement, my degree in chemistry will help me explain
                  to customers the important technical attributes of your vinyl windows. My focus dur-
                  ing my bachelor’s degree was inorganic chemistry, especially hydrocarbons and its
                  practical applications. Apart from my coursework, | also interned at Bright Fenestra-
                  tion Products in Austin, TX.
                  | look forward to discussing my experience and interst in your organization with you
                  in a face-to-face interview. I’m available for the interview anytime in the next two
                  weeks at a day’s notice. I’m confident |will meet—and exceed —all your expetations
                  for this important front line position.

                   Sincerely,

                   Antonio Ramirez
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




436                              Part4   The Job Hunt


Figure 2          Michelle Chang’s Cover Letter
                                                     Michelle Chang
                                            4334, Sunset Boulevard, Lincoln, NE
                                                   mchang@myemail.com

                   October 14, 2012
                   Ms. Erin Lenharadt
                   HR Manager
                   1210 Polaroid Av.
                   St. Paul, MN

                    Dear Ms. Lenhardt:

                   | wish to apply for the position of Sales Representative (Residential Sales) advertised
                   through Monster.com. After acquiring a bachelor’s degree in design, | joined Alba-
                   tross Advertising in November, 2010, as a trainee in the Accounts Department. Cur-
                   rently, I’m an Account Representative handling three of our most promising brands:
                   LiteWait vacuum cleaners, Nebraska Furniture Mart, and Chimney Rock Art Gallery.

                    My bachelor’s degree in design with a major in community and regional planning not
                    only familiarized me with demands of buildings and landscapes in our 21st century
                    living but also acquainted me with concepts of media and design. | joined Albatross
                    because | wanted to see if my education has equipped me to inform, persuade, and
                    help customers with regard to products and brands.

                    During my nearly two-year tenure at Albatross as Account Representative, | have
                    created and given insightful presentations to clients. As a result of my performance,
                    the agency has entrusted me with three of its most promising accounts, the ones
                    that | mention above.

                    | would be delighted at an opportunity for a personal interview to further make my
                    case for the job. You can contact me at my e-mail address mentioned above.

                    Sincerely,

                    Michelle Chang



 13.20    Reviewing a Cover Letter

 In the cover letter in Figure 13.4, Jeff Moeller is respond-   | Games. Using the ad, evaluate Jeff’s letter to see how
 ing to the following job advertisement from Telltale             well he shows he is qualified for the job.

                    Game Designer

                    Telltale is searching for game designers to work on our growing library of unique
                    episodic games. The game designer will be responsible for generation of detailed
                    concepts covering all aspects of gameplay and story, as well as for prototyping,
                    implementation and polish. Creative writing skills are a plus.

                     m   Responsibilities
                         m= Work with lead designer to conceive fresh, innovative storytelling games,
                             consistent with company game philosophy and vision
                                        Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                               Chapter 13   Writing Job Application Letters                        437


    =    Design and implement gameplay-related functionality including controls, dia-
         logs, puzzles, and mini-games using Lua
    m= Implement front end and menu systems, NPC interactions and various other
         scripted events
    = Implement character behaviors in various game scenarios according to story
         specifications and gameplay needs
    m= Test and refine gameplay features throughout the cevecoment cycle of the
         project
=   Essential Skills and Experience
    = Demonstrated ability to work with artists and other designers
    = Good communication and interpersonal skills
    = Proven experience and proficiency with high level scripting languages (exam-
         ples: JavaScript, Lua, Python, Perl)
    = Demonstrated ability to write clear, maintainable code
=    Preferred Skills and Experience
    m Game industry experience in a design or programming position
    m Experience with Lua
    m Experience with Visual Studio and Source Safe
    m Creative writing skills
         B.S. in Computer Science, Literature or Creative Writing
Principals only. Sorry, no unsolicited agencies, please!
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




CHAPTER                                          |3;




Analyzing Information
and Writing Reports

Chapter Outline
Using Your Time Efficiently                         3. Introduce Sources and Visuals.
                                                    4. Use Forecasting, Transitions, Topic
Analyzing Data and Information for                     Sentences, and Headings.
Reports
  ™ Evaluating the Source of the Data
                                                  Writing Formal Reports
                                                    ®   Title Page
  ® Analyzing Numbers
                                                        Letter or Memo of Transmittal
  Leary r4lare mu
               celness
                                                        Table of Contents
  @ Analyzing Patterns
                                                        List of Illustrations
  ® Checking Your Logic
                                                        Executive Summary
Choosing Information for Reports                        ifahecoyel¥(aucolal
Organizing Information in Reports                       Background or History
  |iast-\1eml -14e-l dar colm Olgel-lalr4lare]          Body
     Naiceldtarel aieya)                                eroyaraleiiielare-laremaiciaelaneaiarecchdlelas
  ® Specific Varieties of Reports
                                                  Summary of Key Points
Presenting Information Effectively in
Reports
   1. Use Clear, Engaging Writing.
   2. Keep Repetition to a Minimum.
                                                                                  Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




‘
 j   NEWSWORTHY                          COMMUNICATION


     Reporting on Life




            ach year, most publicly held companies pro- he produces as a printed brochure and sells on his
            duce annual reports. Because the reports can website.
            affect stock prices and credit ratings, compa-    Felton’s creative approach to cataloging his life in
     nies take great care to produce detailed, attractive, an annual report has caught the attention of others.
     and persuasive reports that fit within government     A 2010 New York Times profile of him reported that
     guidelines.                                           other people have begun similar personal data col-
        Nicholas Felton, a graphic —-—-——               $<           ————          lections. In fact, Felton got so
      designer in New York City,                       “Like Nicholas Felton, companies then                            many requests that he started
                                                                                 a website to help people track
      has taken the idea of an compile the data into charts, graphs,
                                                                                 their movements and record
      annual report one step farther. nq text that will help their readers       their personal data.
     Each year since 2005, he has
                                       understand and interpret the data.”           Companies       gather     data
      produced a personal annual
      report, filled with the minute                                             for  months    or  even   years   to
      details of his life—encounters with other individu-  produce reports. They analyze    the  data,  looking   for
      als, places he traveled, restaurants and shops he    patterns that will shape the narratives of their final
      visited, and so on. With custom-desig   ned   charts documents. And, like Nicholas Felton, companies then
      and graphs, Felton tells his own story of the pre-                                compile the data into charts, graphs, and text that will
      vious year in “The Feltron Annual Report,” which                                  help their readers understand and interpret the data.
                                                                                                                  One Man’s Life,” Bits (blog), New York Times,
      Sources: “Feltron,” Nicholas Felton, accessed June 16, 2011, http:// feltron.com/; and “An Annual Report on
      February 9, 2010, http:/ /bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/02/09/ an-annual-report-on-one-mans-life/.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




554                    Part5   Proposals and Reports


                       Learning Objectives
                       After studying this chapter, you will know

                                     Ways to analyze data, information, and logic.

                                      How to choose information for reports.

                                      Different ways to organize reports.

                                      How to present information effectively in reports.

                                      How to prepare the different components of formal reports.


                       Careful analysis, smooth writing, and effective document design work
                       together to make effective reports, whether you're writing a 2’2-page memo
                       report or a 250-page formal report complete with all the report components.
                          Chapter 15 covered the first two steps in writing a report:
                       1. Define the problem.
                       2. Gather the necessary data and information.
                       This chapter covers the last three steps:
                       3. Analyze the data and information.
                       4. Organize the information.
                       5. Write the report.

                       USING YOUR TIME EFFICIENTLY
                       To use your time efficiently, think about the parts of the report before you begin
                       writing. Much of the introduction can come from your proposal (see Chapter 17),
                       with only minor revisions. You can write six sections even before you've finished
                       your research: Purpose, Scope, Assumptions, Methods, Criteria, and Definitions.
                       Mock up tables and figures early using the guidelines in Chapter 16.
                           The background reading for your proposal can form the first draft of your
                       list of references. Save a copy of your questionnaire or interview questions to
                       use as an appendix. You can print appendixes before the final report is ready if
                       you number their pages separately. Appendix A pages would be A-1, A-2, and
                       so forth; Appendix B pages would be B-1, B-2, and so forth.
                           You can write the title page and the transmittal as soon as you know what
                       your recommendation will be.
                           After you’ve analyzed your data, write the body, the conclusions and rec-
                       ommendations, and the executive summary. Prepare a draft of the table of
                       contents and the list of illustrations.
                           When you write a long report, list all the sections (headings) that your report
                       will have. Mark those that are most important to your reader and your logic,
                       and spend most of your time.on them. Write the important sections early. That
                       way, you won't spend all your time on Background or History of the Problem.
                       Instead, you'll get to the heart of your report.

                        ANALYZING DATA AND INFORMATION
                        FOR REPORTS
                        Good reports begin with good data. Analyzing the data you have gathered is
                        essential to produce the tight logic needed for a good report. Analyze your data
                        with healthy skepticism. Check to see that they correspond with expectations
                                                        Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                   Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                          555


                                                                                                       Changing Standards
or other existing data. If they don’t, check for well-supported explanations of
the difference.                                                                 ve                     Under the No Child
   Be suspicious of all data, even from reputable sources. Ask yourself “How     <=                    Left Behind law, every
do they know?” or “What could prevent that data from being right?”                                     child     in   the      United
                                                                                            States   must      become       proficient
                                                                                            in reading and math by 2014.
 =   If you read in the paper that 300,000 people attended a demonstration                  Schools that fail to show con-
     at the National Mall in Washington, D.C., ask yourself how they know.                  sistent improvement risk losing
     Unless they were able to get a photo from a satellite, they are estimat-               funding from both state and fed-
     ing, and such estimates have been known to vary by 100,000 or more,                    eral education programs.
     depending on whether the estimator wants a larger or smaller crowd.                      Some states, according to
                                                                                            research by the U.S. Depart-
 =   Want to know how many centenarians live in the United States? Surely
                                                                                            ment of Education, have been
     the Census Bureau knows? Well, not exactly. An accurate count is
                                                                                            meeting the goals of NCLB in a
     obscured by lack of birth records, low literacy levels, cognitive disabili-            unique way: by changing what
     ties, and the human desire to hit a milestone number.                                  it means to be proficient. The
 m Did you read in a job-hunt article that U.S. workers average seven career                NCLB law requires states to set
   changes during their working years? That number is a myth. It has been                   standards and measure achieve-
   attributed to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics so many times that the                 ment. As the 2014 goal deadline
   bureau now posts a disclaimer on its website. The bureau does not estimate               approaches, however, states are
   lifetime career changes for a simple reason: no consensus exists for the                 changing those standards to
                                                                                             make sure their schools meet the
   definition of a career change. Is a promotion a career change? Is a layoff, a
                                                                                             requirements of the law.
   temporary subsistence job, and a return to work 0, 1, or 2 career changes?                  Between 2005 and 2007, fif-
 = Have you heard that Thanksgiving is the busiest travel day of the year?                  teen states lowered the stan-
   Actually, no day in November has made the top 35 busiest airline days                    dards    for    fourth    and       eighth
   for years, according to the U.S. Department of Transportation (busiest                   graders on at least one subject
   days occur in the summer, when school is out). Even for those traveling                  test. Eight other states raised
     by car, July 4, Labor Day, and Christmas are busier holidays.’                         their standards. The result? Pro-
                                                                                            ficient means something different
 =   Sometimes the discrepancies are not fun facts. Some states are meeting                 in every state. According to these
     No Child Left Behind federal mandates for continued funding yy lower-                  different standards, a proficient
     ing grade-level proficiency standards (see sidebar on this page).                      math student in Massachusetts
                                                                                            would be five or six years more
   Spreadsheets can be particularly troublesome. Cell results derived by for-               advanced than a student in the
mulas can be subtly, or grossly, wrong by incorrectly defining ranges, for                  same grade in Tennessee.
example. It is easy to generate results that are impossible, such as sums that                 Do you think it is ethical for

exceed known totals. Always have an estimate of the result of a calculation.
                                                                                            states to lower their standards for
                                                                                             proficiency? Would your opinion
Using spreadsheets, you can easily be wrong by a factor of 10, 100, or even                 change if the states were doing
1,000. Studies have found up to 80% of spreadsheets have errors, such as mis-               this so they could continue to
placed decimal points, transposed digits, and wrong signs. Some of these                     receive money badly needed for
errors are enormous. Fidelity’s Magellan fund’s dividend estimate spread-                    educating children? Is_ raising
sheet was $2.6 billion off when a sign was wrongly transposed from minus to                  standards fair?
plus. Fannie Mae, the financer of home mortgages, once discovered a $1.136
billion error in total shareholder equity, again from a spreadsheet mistake.°
                                                                                             Adapted from John Hechinger, “Some
                                                                                             States Drop Testing Bar,” Wall Street
   Try to keep ballpark figures, estimates of what the numbers should be, in                 Journal, October 30, 2009, A3.
mind as you look at numerical data. Question surprises before accepting them.
   Analyzing data can be hard even for experts. Numerous studies exist in
scholarly journals challenging the data-based conclusions of earlier articles.
One example is the fate of unmarried, college-educated women over 30. A
famous Newsweek cover story, “Too Late for Prince Charming?” reported the
Yale and Harvard study that suggested such women had only a 20% chance of
finding husbands, and only a 2.6% chance by the time they reached 40. Twenty
years later an economist at the University of Washington examined 30 years
of census data. Her figures for the decade of the original study showed that
women aged 40-44 with advanced degrees were only 25% less likely to be
married than comparably aged women with just high school diplomas. By
2000, those women with postcollege education were slightly more likely to be
married than those who had finished only high school.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




556                                        Part5   Proposals and Reports


             Measuring                     Evaluating the Source of the Data
             Innovation
                                           When evaluating the source of your data, question the authors, objectivity,
            It is commonly accepted
                                           completeness, and currency of the source.
            wisdom that one mea-
sure of a company's innovation is
                                              Identify the authors. Which people or organization provided the data? What
the number of patents it com-              credentials do they have? If you want national figures on wages and unem-
mands. In recent years, however,           ployment, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics would be a good source. But if
research has shown that compa-             you want the figures for your local town, your local Chamber of Commerce
 nies increasingly use patents as a        might be a more credible source. Use the strategies outlined in Chapter 15 to
 defensive strategy rather than a          evaluate web sources.
 strategy for innovation.                      Assess the objectivity of the source. Does the source give evidence to
    A Boston University study found        support claims? Is the surrounding prose professional and unbiased? If
 that software companies with
                                           the subject supports multiple viewpoints, are other opinions referenced or
                                           explained? When the source has a vested interest in the results, scrutinize
 more patents actually reduced
 their research and development
 expenditure vis-a-vis sales. Addi-
                                           the data with special care. To analyze a company’s financial prospects, use
 tionally, with companies vying for        independent information as well as the company’s annual report and press
 patents for the smallest addi-            releases.
 tion to product features, patents             Drug and medical device companies, and the researchers funded by them,
 may be a dubious measure of               keep appearing in the news with reports of undue influence. Duke University
 innovation.                               researchers checked 746 studies of heart stents published in one year in medical
    Recent studies on patents also         journals. They found that 83% of the papers did not disclose whether authors
 show a growing trend of acquir-           were paid consultants for companies, even though many journals require
 ing patents on design or form of          that information. Even worse, 72% of the papers did not say who funded the
  products rather than their techni-
                                            research.° A study in the prestigious New England Journal ofMedicine noted that
                                           positive studies of antidepressant trials got published and negative ones did
 cal aspects. Companies such as
  Samsung Electronics and Nike
  have earned a name for them-
                                           not: “According to the published literature, it appeared that 94% of the trials
  selves for innovation by acquir-          conducted were positive. By contrast, the FDA analysis showed that 51% were
  ing patents based on product             positive.”°
  design.                                      If your report is based upon secondary data from library and online
     Compared to patents them-             research, look at the sample, the sample size, and the exact wording of ques-
  selves, patent citations, or the         tions to see what the data actually measure. (See Chapter 15 for more infor-
  references to a company’s patent         mation on sampling and surveying.) Does the sample have a built-in bias? A
  by patents of other companies,           survey of city library users may uncover information about users, but it may
  may be a better metric of inno-          not find what keeps other people away from the library.
  vation. A high number of patent
                                              Try to assess the completeness of the data. What are they based on? Two
                                           reputable sources can give different figures because they take their data from
  citations may show that the com-
  pany’s patent truly represents
   innovation and may be licensed
                                           different places. Suppose you wanted to know employment figures. The
  for a fee or royalties. Companies        Labor Department’s monthly estimate of nonfarm payroll jobs is the most
  such as Procter & Gamble have            popular, but some economists like Automatic Data Processing’s monthly
   adopted this strategy.                  estimate, which is based on the roughly 20 million paychecks it processes
                                           for clients. Both survey approximately 400,000 workplaces, but the Labor
  Adapted from Jena McGregor, “Are Pat-
  ents the Measure of Innovation?” Busi-
                                           Department selects employers to mirror the U.S. economy, while ADP’s sam-
  nessWeek, May 4, 2007, http:/Awww        ple is skewed, with too many construction firms and too few of the largest
  .businessweek.convinnovate/content/      employers. On the other hand, the government has trouble counting jobs at
  may2007/id20070504_323562.htm.
                                           businesses that are opening and closing, and some employers do not return
                                           the survey. (Both Olgarizatlons do attempt to adjust their numbers to com-
                                           pensate accurately.)
                                               Also check the currency of the data. Population figures should be from the
                                            2010 census, not the 2000 one. Technology figures in particular need to be cur-
                                            rent. Do remember, however, that some large data sets are one to two years
                                            behind in being analyzed. Such is the case for some government figures, also.
                                            If you are doing a report in 2012 that requires national education data from the
                                            Department of Education, for instance, 2011 data may not even be fully col-
                                            lected. And even the 2010 data may not be fully analyzed, so indeed the 2009
                                            data may be the most current available.
                                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                 Chapter 18     Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                                557


                                                                                                                                   -Getting the Data
                                                                                                                                    Right

                                                                                                                                    A 2006 report by
                                                                                                                                    Johns Hopkins Uni-
                                                                                                                     versity    claimed      that   655,000
                                                                                                                     lragis had died in the war in Iraq,
                                                                                                                     a figure that diverged wildly from
                                                                                                                     other estimates—sometimes more
                                                                                                                     than 1,000%. The Hopkins figure
                                                                                                                     is 500% more than that of the
                                                                                                                     United Nations. Such a difference
                                                                                                                     from other reports calls into ques-
                                                                                                                     tion the accuracy of the Hopkins
                                                                                                                     report.
                                                                                                                        To understand why the figure
                                                                                                                      is so much higher than other
                                                                                                                     research reports, it is important to
                                                                                                                     consider how the data were gath-
                                                                                                                     ered. The Hopkins researchers
                                                                                                                     used cluster sampling for inter-
                                                                                                                     views, a methodology that makes
                                                                                                                     sense given the country’s war-
                                                                                                                     zone      status.    Researchers   ran-
Sharp uses what it calls “academic marketing” to sell air purifiers in Japan. Ads in                                 domly      selected     neighborhoods
Japanese newspapers and magazines provide data, diagrams, and charts in support                                      and then conducted             door-to-
of Sharp’s plasmacluster technology.                                                                                 door interviews with “clusters”
Source: Daisuke Wakabayashi, “Using ‘Academic Marketing’ to Sell Air Purifiers,” Wall Street Journal, December 26,   of individuals from within those
2008, B4.                                                                                                            neighborhoods. Such a_tech-
                                                                                                                     nique saves time and money and
                                                                                                                     is common in research within
                                                                                                                     developing countries.
Analyzing Numbers                                                                                                       But the key to this kind of tech-
Many reports analyze numbers—either numbers from databases and sources                                               nique is to use enough cluster
                                                                                                                     points. A lack of cluster points
or numbers from a survey you have conducted. The numerical information,
                                                                                                                     can mean that the population
properly analyzed, can make a clear case in support of a recommendation.                                             sampled isn’t representative of
   Recognize that even authorities can differ on the numbers they offer, or on                                       the population in Iraq. The Hop-
the interpretations of the same data sets. Researchers from the United Nations                                       kins researchers did not use
and Johns Hopkins University differed on their estimates of Iraqi deaths in the                                      enough cluster points. In addi-
war by 500% (see sidebar on this page).® The cover story of the January 4, 2008,                                     tion, the Hopkins researchers
National Journal was an explanation of how the two estimates could vary so                                           didn't gather demographic data
wildly (research design and execution flaws; sampling error; lack of transpar-                                       from their participants for com-
ency with the data).” You will be best able to judge the quality of data if you                                       parison to census data. Doing so
know how it was collected.                                                                                           would have added to the believ-
   In their books, The Tipping Point and Freakonomics, Malcolm Gladwell and                                           ability of their results.

Steven D. Levitt and Stephen J. Dubner reach different conclusions about the                                            Getting the data right is impor-
                                                                                                                      tant because numbers can have
data on dropping crime rates for New York City. Gladwell attributes the drop                                          a significant impact on decisions
to the crackdown by the new police chief on even minor crimes such as graffiti                                        and policies. In terms of casual-
and public drunkenness. Levitt and Dubner first explain why the cause was                                             ties, the decisions made based
not a crackdown on crime (the years don’t match well; other cities also expe-                                         on the numbers reported have an
rienced the drop) and attribute it to the legalization of abortion (at the time of                                    impact on millions of lragis and
the crime drop the first wave of children born after Roe v. Wade was hitting                                          Americans.
late teen years and thus prime crime time; that group was short on the cat-
egory most likely to become criminal: unwanted children). They also provide
                                                                                                                      Adapted from Stephen E. Moore,
                                                                                                                      “655,000 War Dead?” Wall Street
corroborating evidence from other countries.’                                                                         Journal, October 18, 2006, A20.
   When you have multiple numbers for salaries or other items, an early anal-
ysis step is to figure the average (or mean), the median, and the range. The
average or mean is calculated by adding up all the figures and dividing by
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




558                                     Part5   Proposals and Reports


            Sun and Statistics          the number of samples. The mode is the number that occurs most often. The
Pad         Recent research sug-        median is the number that is exactly in the middle in a ranked list of observa-
            gests that patients with    tions. When you have an even number, the median will be the average of the
   =         low levels of vitamin D,   two numbers in the center of the list. The range is the difference between the
 which can be gained from mod-          high and low figures for that variable.
 erate exposure to the sun, have           Averages are particularly susceptible to a single extreme figure. In 2007,
 higher risks of cancer, heart dis-     three different surveys reported the average cost of a wedding at nearly
 ease, and autoimmune disorders.        $30,000. Many articles picked up that figure because weddings are big busi-
   The Indoor Tanning Association
                                        ness. However, the median cost in those three surveys was only about $15,000.
                                        And even that is probably on the high side, since the samples were conve-
 quickly jumped at this new find-
 ing. They used their interpretation
 of the statistics about low vitamin
                                        nience samples for a big wedding website, a bride magazine, and a maker of
 D levels as a way to promote           wedding invitations, and thus probably did not include smaller, less elaborate
 indoor tanning, suggesting that        weddings.”
 UV rays can prevent cancer.                Often it’s useful to simplify numerical data: rounding it off, combining
   The medical community was            similar elements. Then you can see that one number is, for instance, about
 outraged at the ITAs twisted           2% times another. Graphing it can also help you see patterns in your data.
 approach to the statistics. Doc-       (See Chapter 16 for a full discussion of tables and graphs as a way of ana-
 tor Lichtenfeld of the American        lyzing and presenting numerical data.) Look at the raw data as well as at
 Cancer Society suggested that          percentages. For example, a 50% increase in shoplifting incidents sounds
 UV ray promotion was “like rec-
                                        alarming. An increase from two to three shoplifting incidents sounds less so
 ommending smoking to reduce
                                        but could be the same data, just stated differently.
 stress.” The ITA advertisements
 failed to suggest there were
 any downsides to tanning, such         Analyzing Words
 as the link between prolonged
 exposure to UV rays and mela-          Be sure you are clear about definitions on which data are based. For instance,
 noma. They also omitted that           China and the United States are jockeying for first place in number of Internet
 the tanner the skin, the longer it     users. Different sources give different results, and one reason is that they are
 takes to absorb vitamin D.             defining “Internet user” in different ways: Is a user anyone who has access to
    How ethical is the ITAs use of      the Internet at home, school, or work? What about a four-year-old child who
  research statistics? Would you be     has access to the Internet through her family but does not use it? Is anyone
  more likely to tan indoors if you     who has used the Internet only once in the past six months a user?!”
 saw one of their advertisements?          State accurately what your data show. For example, suppose that you've
 Adapted from Pat Wingert, “Teens,      asked people who use computers if they could be as productive without them
 Tans, and Truth,” Newsweek, May 19,    and the overwhelming majority say no. This finding shows that people believe
 2008, 42-43.                           that computers make them more productive, but it does not prove that they in
                                        fact are more productive.
                                           Also try to measure words against numbers. A study of annual reports in
                                        the United Kingdom found a large increase (375%) in narrative information
                                        and noted that accounting narratives were being used to manage impressions
                                        of annual performance.'? Numbers require interpretation and context for easy
                                        comprehension.

                                         Analyzing Patterns
                                         Patterns can help you draw meaning from your data. If you have library
                                         sources, on which points do experts agree? Which disagreements can be
                                         explained by early theories or numbers that have now changed? Which dis-
                                         agreements are the result of different interpretations of the same data? Which
                                         are the result of having different values and criteria? In your interviews and
                                         surveys, what patterns do you see?

                                           =    Have things changed over time?
                                           =    Does geography account for differences?
                                           =    Dodemographics such as gender, age, or income account for differences?
                                                           Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                       Chapter18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                       559




                                                                                               rd
                                                                                                          Charity Data
       What similarities do you see?                                                                      Many people believe
       What differences do you see?                                                                       they “know”      “facts”
       What confirms your hunches?                                                                        and figures that are not
                                                                                               so. When you encounter these
       What surprises you?
                                                                                               false beliefs, you need to be
                                                                                               sure you provide reliable data to
Many descriptions of sales trends are descriptions of patterns derived from
                                                                                               counteract them. One area sub-
data.                                                                                          ject to common misperceptions
                                                                                               is charity donations. Below are
Checking Your Logic                                                                            some common myths paired with
                                                                                               realities.
Check that your data actually measure what you want them to. A common
belief is that satisfied customers will be repeat customers. But a Harvard Busi-               Myth: Most charitable giving
ness Review study found little relationship between the two groups; customers                  goes to help the needy. Reality:
who said on surveys they were satisfied did not necessarily make repeat pur-                   Less than one-third of individu-
                                                                                               ally donated money to nonprofits
chases. Instead, the best predictor of repeat purchases was that the customer
                                                                                               goes to the economically disad-
would recommend the company to others."                                                        vantaged. And only 8% provides
   Another common logic error is confusing causation with correlation. Causa-                  basic needs like food and shelter.
tion means that one thing causes or produces another. Correlation means that
                                                                                               Myth: The wealthy look after
two things happening at the same time are positively or negatively related.
                                                                                               those in need. Reality: Only about
One might cause the other, but both might be caused by a third. For instance,                  a quarter of their donations go to
consider a study that shows pulling all-nighters hurts grades: students who                    the poor, and only 4% to basic
pull all-nighters get lower grades than those who do not pull all-nighters. But                needs.
maybe it is not the all-nighter causing the poor grades; maybe students who
                                                                                               Myth: Religious donations go to
need all-nighters are weaker students to begin with.                                           those in need. Reality: Less than
      Correlation and causation are easy to confuse, but the difference is impor-              one-fifth of money donated goes
tant. The Census Bureau publishes figures showing that greater education lev-                  to the poor.
els are associated with greater incomes. A widely held assumption is that more                 Myth: Americans give generously
education causes greater earnings. But might people from richer backgrounds                    to international causes. Reality:
seek more education? Or might some third factor, such as intelligence, lead to                 Only 8% of US individual dona-
both greater education and higher income?’”                                                    tions support any international
   Some spurious correlations are amusing. The Wall Street Journal reported                    cause whatsoever.
with tongue in cheek the Tiger Woods phenomenon. During the 11 years of
1997-2008, the April bond market performed positively when Woods won the
                                                                                               Adapted from Sheryl Sandberg [board
                                                                                               member of Google.org, Google's phil-
Masters golf tournament, and negatively when he did not.'®°                                    anthropic arm], “The Charity Gap,”
   Consciously search for at least three possible causes for each phenome-                     Wall Street Journal, April 4, 2007, A15.

non you've observed and at least three possible solutions for each problem.
The more possibilities you brainstorm, the more likely you are to find good
options. In your report, discuss in detail only the possibilities that will occur to
readers and that you think are the real reasons and the best solutions.
   When you have identified causes of the problem or the best solutions, check
these ideas against reality. Can you find support in references or in numbers?
Can you answer claims of people who interpret the data in other ways?
   Make the nature of your evidence clear to your reader. Do you have obser-
vations that you yourself have made? Or do you have inferences based on
observations or data collected by others? Old data may not be good guides to
future action.
   If you can’t prove the claim you originally hoped to make, modify your
conclusions to fit your data. Even when your market test is a failure or your
experiment disproves your hypothesis, you can still write a useful report.
  =     Identify changes that might yield a different result. For example, selling
        the product at a lower price might enable the company to sell enough
        units.
  =     Divide the discussion to show what part of the test succeeded.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




560                                            Part5    Proposals and Reports


              Movie Rankings

       _      __In late 2009, James
      . 7a    Cameron's       Avatar
             took the worldwide
 box office by storm. It set records
 in the United States and overseas
 to become the top-grossing movie
 of all time, with over $2.7 billion in
 ticket sales. That huge number,
 however, reflects higher _ticket
 prices and charges for 3-D glasses
 that distort the movie's place in
 history.
   For many years, movie stu-
 dios have focused on box office
 grosses as evidence of success.
 But the ever-increasing grosses               As employees become buried in paperwork, it becomes even more important to select
 do not take into account inflation,           carefully and interpret clearly the information to be included in reports.
 or rising population figures. Some
 have tried to even the playing field
 by estimating the number of tick-               =     Discuss circumstances that may have affected the results.
 ets sold or adjusting ticket prices             =     Summarize your negative findings in progress reports to let readers
 for inflation. With those revised
                                                       down gradually and to give them a chance to modify the research design.
  numbers, Avatar is no longer the
 top all-time grossing movie. In                 =     Remember that negative results aren’t always disappointing to the audi-
 fact, it comes in at number 14.                       ence. For example, the people who commissioned a feasibility report
 The top-grossing        movie    of all               may be relieved to have an impartial outsider confirm their suspicions
 time remains 1989's best picture,                     that a project isn’t feasible.
 Gone with the Wind. But even
 box office numbers adjusted for                   A common myth associated with numbers is that numbers are more objec-
 inflation don’t tell a completely              tive than words: “numbers don’t lie.” But as the above examples show, num-
  accurate story, because popular
                                                bers can be subject to widely varying interpretation.
  older movies like Gone with the
  Wind were released in theaters
  every few years until the advent              CHOOSING INFORMATION FOR REPORTS
                                                Don’t put information in reports just because you have it or just because it took
  of home video.
    Like other comparative lists,
  the all-time worldwide box office             you a long time to find it. Instead, choose the information that your reader
  rankings depend on how the                    needs to make a decision. NASA received widespread criticism over the way
  numbers are counted.                          it released results from an $11.3 million federal air safety study. NASA pub-
                                                lished 16,208 pages of findings with no guide to understanding them. Crit-
  Adapted    from Carl Bialik, “What
  Takes for a Movie to Be No. 1,” Wall
                                          It
                                                ics maintain the lapse was deliberate because the data contained hundreds of
  Street Journal, January 30-31, 2010,          cases of pilot error.'7
  A2: and “All Time Box Office Adjusted            If you know your readers well, you may already know their priorities. For
  for Ticket Price Inflation,” Box Office
  Mojo, accessed June 16, 2011,
                                                example, the supervisor of a call center knows that management will be look-
  http://www. boxofficemojo.com/                ing for certain kinds of performance data including costs, workload handled,
  alltime/adjusted.htm.                         and customer satisfaction. To write regular reports, the supervisor could set up
                                                a format in which it is easy to see how well the center is doing in each of these
                                                areas. Using the same format month after month simplifies the reader’s task.
                                                   If you don’t know your readers, you may be able to get a sense of what is
                                                important by showing them a tentative table of contents (a list of your headings)
                                                and asking, “Have I included everything?” When you cannot contact an exter-
                                                nal audience, show your draft to colleagues and superiors in your organization.
                                                    How much information you need to include depends on whether your
                                                audience is likely to be supportive, neutral, or skeptical. If your audience is
                                                likely to be pleased with your research, you can present your findings directly.
                                                If your audience will not be pleased, you will need to explain your thinking in
                                                a persuasive way and provide substantial evidence.
                                                          Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                     Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                     561


   You must also decide whether to put information in the body of the report                               Tell Them a Story
or in appendixes. Put material in the body of the report if it is crucial to your                          To persuade people,
proof, if your most significant readers will want to see it there, or if it is short.             ==       tell them a story or
(Something less than half a page won’t interrupt the reader.) Frequently deci-                             anecdote that proves
sion makers want your analysis of the data in the report body rather than the                 your point.
actual data itself. Supporting data that will be examined later by specialists                  Experiments show that people
such as accountants, lawyers, and engineers are generally put in an appendix.                 are more likely to believe a point
   Anything that a careful reader will want but that is not crucial to your proof             and more likely to be committed
                                                                                              to it when points were made
can go in an appendix. Appendixes can include
                                                                                              by examples, stories, and case
                                                                                              studies. Stories alone were more
     A copy of a survey questionnaire or interview questions.                                 effective than a combination of
     A tally of responses to each question in a survey.                                       stories and statistics; the com-
                                                                                              bination was more effective than
     A copy of responses to open-ended questions in a survey.
                                                                                              statistics alone. In another exper-
     A transcript of an interview.                                                            iment, attitude changes lasted
     Complex tables and visuals.                                                              longer when the audience had
     Technical data.                                                                          read stories than when they had
                                                                                              only read numbers. Research
     Previous reports on the same subject.                                                    suggests that stories are more
                                                                                              persuasive     because   people
                                                                                              remember them.
ORGANIZING INFORMATION IN REPORTS                                                               In many cases, you'll need to
                                                                                              provide statistics or numbers to
Most sets of data can be organized in several logical ways. Choose the way that               convince the careful reader that
makes your information easiest for the audience to understand and use. If you                 your anecdote is a representative
were compiling a directory of all the employees at your plant, for example,                   example. But give the story first.
alphabetizing by last name would be far more useful than listing people by                    It’s more persuasive.
height, social security number, or length of service with the company, although               Adapted from Dean C. Kazoleas, “A
those organizing principles might make sense in lists for other purposes.                     Comparison of the Persuasive Effec-
   The following three guidelines will help you choose the arrangement that                   tiveness of Qualitative versus Quan-
                                                                                              titative Evidence,”    Communication
will be the most useful for your audience:                                                    Quarterly 41, no. 1 (Winter 1993):
1. Process your information before you present it to your audience. The                       40-50; and Joanne Martin and Melanie
                                                                                              E. Powers, “Truth of Corporate Propa-
    order in which you became aware of information usually is not the best                    ganda,” in Organizational Symbolism,
   order to present it to your audience.                                                      ed. Louis R. Pondy, et al. (Greenwich,
                                                                                              CT: JAI Press, 1983), 97-107.
2. When you have lots of information, group it into three to seven catego-
   ries. The average person’s short-term memory can hold only seven chunks,
   though the chunks can be of any size.'* By grouping your information into
   seven categories (or fewer), you make your report easier to comprehend.
3. Work with the audience’s expectations, not against them. Introduce
   ideas in the overview in the order in which you will discuss them.

 Basic Patterns for Organizing Information
Organize information in a way that will work best for your audience. Here are
basic patterns for organizing information that are particularly useful in reports:

     Comparison/contrast.
     Problem-solution.
     Elimination of alternatives.
     SWOT analysis.
     General to particular or particular to general.
     Geographic or spatial.
     Functional.
     Chronological.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




562                                        Part5     Proposals and Reports


            A Plan to Fail                       Any of these patterns can be used for a whole report or for only part of it.
          In the days follow-
                                           Comparison/contrast          Many reports use comparison/contrast sections
  =       ing the tragic oil spill
          in the Gulf of Mexico,           within  a larger report  pattern.  Comparison/contrast can also be the purpose
                                                                                                                           You
 BP assured the U.S. government            of the whole report. Recommendation studies usually use this pattern.
                                           can focus either on   the  alternativ es you are evaluatin g or on the criteria you
 and conservation experts that it
 was acting in accordance with             use. See Figure 18.1 for ways to organize these two patterns in a report.
 its 582-page emergency spill                 Focus on the alternatives when
 response plan. As the details of
 the plan came to light, however,
                                                   One alternative is clearly superior.
 they revealed deep problems
 with the company’s planning.                      The criteria are hard to separate.
    For example, the plan, written                 The audience will intuitively grasp the alternative as a whole rather than
 in 2009, lists Professor Peter Lutz               as the sum of its parts.
 as a wildlife expert. Unfortunately,
 the professor died in 2005. Addi-
 tionally, the plan gives detailed               Focus on the criteria when
 instructions on treating sea crea-
 tures affected by spills, including
 walruses, sea otters, sea lions,            =      The superiority of one alternative to another depends on the relative
 and seals—none of which live in                    weight assigned to various criteria. Perhaps Alternative A is best if we
 the Gulf of Mexico.                                are most concerned about Criterion 1, cost, but worst if we are most con-
    According to an AP study, the                   cerned about Criterion 2, proximity to target market.
  response plan did not address              m      The criteria are easy to separate.
                                                    The audience wants to compare and contrast the options independently
  obvious problems and contained
  serious errors and omissions.
                                             =
  Consequently, when the crude oil
                                                    of your recommendation.
  began to gush into the gulf, BP’s
  employees were left scrambling
  for solutions without guidance or
  resources.
                                            Figure 18.1             Two Ways to Organize a Comparison/Contrast Report
 Adapted from Justin Pritchard, “Spill
  Response Plan Was Severely Flawed,”        Focus on alternatives
 Des Moines Register, June 10, 2010, 1A.
                                             Alternative A                                Opening a New Store on Campus
                                                Criterion 1                                 Cost of Renting Space
                                                   Criterion 2                              Proximity to Target Market
                                                   Criterion 3                              Competition from Similar Stores
                                              Alternative B                               Opening a New Store in the Suburban Mall
                                                   Criterion 1                              Cost of Renting Space
                                                   Criterion 2                              Proximity to Target Market
                                                   Criterion 3                              Competition from Similar Stores

                                              Focus on criteria

                                              Criterion 1                                 Cost of Renting Space for the New Store
                                                   Alternative A                            Cost of Campus Locations

                                                   Alternative B                            Cost of Locations in the Suburban Mall
                                                 Criterion 2                              Proximity to Target Market
                                                   Alternative A                            Proximity on Campus
                                                   Alternative B                            Proximity in the Suburban Mall

                                                 Criterion 3                              Competition from Similar Stores
                                                   Alternative A                            Competing Stores on Campus
                                                   Alternative B                            Competing Stores in the Suburban Mall
                                                    LL LL
                                                       a  LLL LLL LLL
                                                                  l   LLL LLL
                                             ste
                                            =xesvee
                                                                 Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                            Chapter18    Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                    563


   A variation of the comparison/contrast pattern is the pro-and-con pattern.                                   Cupid by the
In this pattern, under each specific heading, give the arguments for and against                                Numbers

that alternative. A report recommending new plantings for a university quad-                                       Online dating sites
rangle uses the pro-and-con pattern:                                                                               collect mountains of
                                                                                                     data about their users—interests,
        Advantages of Monocropping                                                                   hobbies,      demographics,     and
                                                                                                     characteristics—all of which are
          High Productivity
                                                                                                     used to match users with poten-
          Visual Symmetry
                                                                                                     tial partners. One site, however, is
        Disadvantages of Monocropping                                                                using all of that data to do more.
          Danger of Pest Exploitation                                                                   OkCupid, founded        by four
          Visual Monotony                                                                            Harvard-educated =mathemati-
                                                                                                     cians, maintains a blog called
This pattern is least effective when you want to de-emphasize the disadvan-                          OkTrends, which mines user data
tages of a proposed solution, for it does not permit you to bury the disadvan-                       to note interesting, amusing, and
tages between neutral or positive material.                                                          controversial trends. By running
                                                                                                     computer calculations and com-
Problem-solution        Identify the problem; explain its background or history;                     parisons, the blog has compiled
discuss its extent and seriousness; identify its causes. Discuss the factors                         features like “Rape Fantasies and
(criteria) that affect the decision. Analyze the advantages and disadvantages                         Hygiene by State,” and “How
of possible solutions. Conclusions and recommendation can go either first or                         Your Race Affects the Messages
last, depending on the preferences of your audience. This pattern works well                         You Get.”
                                                                                                        While some of the data pre-
when the audience is neutral.
                                                                                                     sented on OkTrends is useful
   A report recommending ways to eliminate solidification of a granular                              to OkCupid’s users (like how
bleach during production uses the problem-solution pattern:                                           to pose for a profile picture and
                                                                                                      what greetings to use), much
~ Recommended Reformulation for Vibe Bleach                                                           of it is posted simply to show
Problems in Maintaining Vibe’s Granular Structure                                                     trends and interesting facts (like
    :    -Solidification during Storage and Transportation                                            iPhone users have more sex
         Customer Complaints about “Blocks” of Vibe in Boxes                                          than other smartphone users). It
Why Vibe Bleach “Cakes”                                                                               also serves to drive traffic to the
_         Vibe’s Formula                                                                              OkCupid site—visits have dou-
                                                                                                      bled since the OkTrends blog was
_         The Manufacturing Process
                                                                                                      introduced.
The Chemical Process of Solidification
_ Modifications Needed to Keep Vibe Flowing Freely                                                   Adapted from Jason Del Ray, “In Love
                                                                                                     with Numbers: Getting the Most Out
                                                                                                     of Your Data,” /nc., October 2010,
Elimination of alternatives After discussing the problem and its causes,                             105-6.

discuss the impractical solutions first, showing why they will not work. End
with the most practical solution. This pattern works well when the solutions
the audience is likely to favor will not work, while the solution you recommend
is likely to be perceived as expensive, intrusive, or radical.
   A report on toy commercials, “The Effect of TV Ads on Children,” elimi-
nates alternatives:

        Alternative Solutions to Problems in TV Toy Ads
           Leave Ads Unchanged
           Mandate School Units on Advertising
           Ask the Industry to Regulate Itself
           Give FCC Authority to Regulate TV Ads Directed at Children


SWOT Analysis                 ASWOT analysis is frequently used to evaluate a proposed
project,        expansion,      or   new   venture.     The   analysis   discusses     Strengths,
Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats of the proposed action. Strengths
and weaknesses are usually factors within the organization; opportunities and
threats are usually factors external to the organization.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




564                                      Part5   Proposals and Reports


              Annual Reports                A report recommending an in-house training department uses             a SWOT
           Report Watch posts            analysis to support its recommendation:
           annual lists of the
           best annual reports.             Advantages of In-House Training
They also post tips for creating            Disadvantages of In-House Training
good annual reports:                        Competitor Training Businesses
      Start with an eye-catching,           Opportunities for Training Expansion
      interest-grabbing cover.
      Live up to the cover’s promise     This report switches the order of threats (Competitor Training Businesses) and
      in the body of the report.         opportunities to end with positive information.
      Don’t overemphasize or
      underplay important points         General to particular or particular to general General to particular
      Offer a longer-term, strategic     starts with the problem as it affects the organization or as it manifests itself
      view of the future in addition     in general and then moves to a discussion of the parts of the problem and
      to information about the past      solutions to each of these parts. Particular to general starts with the problem
      year.                              as the audience defines it and moves to larger issues of which the problem
      Use clear headings and bul-        is a part. Both are good patterns when you need to redefine the audience’s
      lets to help readers who skim.     perception of the problem to solve it effectively.
      Use a clear, readable style.          The directors of a student volunteer organization, VIP, have defined their
      Make all visuals striking,         problem as “not enough volunteers.” After studying the subject, the writer
      relevant, and creative.            is convinced that problems in training, supervision, and campus awareness
 Adapted from Report Watch, “Report
                                         are responsible for both a high dropout rate and a low recruitment rate. The
 Essentials,” Report watch, accessed     general-to-particular pattern helps the audience see the problem in a new way:
 June 16, 2011, http://www.reportwatch
 .net/reportessentials/.
                                             Why VIP Needs More Volunteers
                                             Why Some VIP Volunteers Drop Out
                                               Inadequate Training
                                               Inadequate Supervision
                                               Feeling That VIP Requires Too Much Time
                                               Feeling That the Work Is Too Emotionally Demanding
                                             Why Some Students Do Not Volunteer
                                               Feeling That VIP Requires Too Much Time
                                               Feeling That the Work Is Too Emotionally Demanding
                                               Preference for Volunteering with Another Organization
                                               Lack of Knowledge about VIP Opportunities
                                             How VIP Volunteers Are Currently Trained and Supervised
                                             Time Demands on VIP Volunteers
                                             Emotional Demands on VIP Volunteers
                                             Ways to Increase Volunteer Commitment and Motivation
                                               Improving Training and Supervision
                                               Improving the Flexibility of Volunteers’ Hours
                                               Providing Emotional Support to Volunteers
                                               Providing More Information about Community Needs and VIP Services



                                          Geographic or spatial In a geographic or spatial pattern, you discuss
                                          problems and solutions by units according to their physical arrangement.
                                          Move from office to office, building to building, factory to factory, state to
                                          state, region to region, etc.
                                              A sales report uses a geographic pattern of organization:

                                             Sales Have Risen in the European Community
                                             Sales Are Flat in Eastern Europe
                                             Sales Have Fallen Sharply in the Middle East
                                                               Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                          Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                          565



    Sales Are Off to a Strong Start in Africa
    Sales Have Risen Slightly in Asia
    Sales Have Fallen Slightly in South America
    Sales Are Steady in North America



Functional             In functional patterns, discuss the problems and solutions of
each functional unit. For example, a small business might organize a report to
its venture capitalists by the categories of research, production, and marketing.
A government report might divide data into the different functions an agency
performed, taking each in turn:

    ‘Major Accomplishments FY 12
~         Regulation
           Education
         _ Research
        _ International coordination


Chronological             A chronological report records events in the order in which
they happened or are planned to happen. Many progress reports are organized
chronologically:

Work Completed in October
_ Work Planned for November

If you choose this pattern, be sure you do not let the chronology obscure sig-
nificant points or trends.

Specific Varieties of Reports
Informative, recommendation, and justification reports will be more success-
ful when you work with the audience’s expectations for that kind of report.

informative and closure reports Informative and closure reports
summarize completed work or research that does not result in action or
recommendation.
        Informative reports often include the following elements:

 =        Introductory paragraph summarizing the problems or successes of the
          project.
 =        Purpose and scope section(s) giving the purpose of the report and indi-
          cating what aspects of the topic it covers.
    =     Chronological account of how the problem was discovered, what was
          done, and what the results were.
    =     Concluding paragraph with suggestions for later action. In a recommen-
          dation report, the recommendations would be based on proof. In con-
          trast, the suggestions in a closure or informative report are not proved in
          detail.

   Figure 18.2 presents this kind of informative closure report.
   Closure reports also allow a firm to document the alternatives it has consid-
ered before choosing a final design.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




566                                          Part5      Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.2               An Informative Memo Report Describing How a Company Solved a Problem



                    March 14, 2012


                    To:       Donna S. Kienzler
                                                                                           ts use
                                                            Z         Informal ghort repor
                                                                                       format.
                                                           ok           letter or memo
                               pid       le eel
                    eae
         First      Subject: Recycling at Bike Nashbar
      paragraph
      gummarizes
          main      Two months ago, Bike Nashbar began recycling its corrugated cardboard boxes. The program
         point®.    was easy to implement and actually saves the company a little money compared to our previous
                    garbage pickup.
       Purpose
                    In this report, I will explain how and why Bike Nashbar’s program was initiated, how the
      and scope
                    program works and what it costs, and why other businesses should consider similar programs.
       of report.
                                                     Bold headings.
                    The Problem of Too Many Boxes and Not Enough Space in Bike Nashbar

                    Every week, Bike Nashbar receives about 40 large cardboard boxes containing bicycles and other
                    merchandise. As many boxes as possible would be stuffed into the trash bin behind the building,
       Cause of     Which also had to accommodate all the other solid waste the shop produces. Boxes that didn’t fit
        problem.    in the trash bin ended up lying around the shop, blocking doorways, and taking up space needed
                    for customers' bikes. The trash bin was emptied only once a week, and by that time, even more
                    boxes would have arrived.
                          Triple space before
                                  heading.
                    The Importance of Recycling Cardboard Rather than Throwing It Away
                                              Double space after heading.
                    Arranging for more trash bins or more frequent pickups would have solved the immediate
                    problem at Bike Nashbar but would have done nothing to solve the problem created by throwing
                    away so much trash in the first place.
                                              Double space between paragraphs within heading.
                     According to David Crogen, sales representative for Waste Management, Inc., 75% of all solid
                     waste in Columbus goes to landfills. The amount of trash the city collects has increased 150% in
        Further
         :           the last five years. Columbus‘s landfill is almost full. In an effort to encourage people and
      phase Re:businesses to recycle, the cost of dumping trash in the landfill is doubling from $4.90 a cubic yard
       Che     saath to $9.90 a cubic yard next week. Next January, the price will increase again, to $12.95 a cubic
                     yard. Crogen believes that the amount of trash can be reduced by cooperation between the
                     landfill and the power plant and by recycling.

                                                                                                            ter of
                                                                                        Capitalize firot let
                                                                                        heading.
                                                                  rdboard =major word?"
                     How Bike Nash       bar Started Recycling Ca
                    Waste Management, Inc., is the country’s largest waste processor. After reading an article about
        rennet      how committed Waste Management, Inc., is to waste reduction and recycling, I decided to see
        Soluvi"-    nether Waste Management could recycle our boxes. Corrugated cardboard (which is what Bike
                     Nashbar’s boxes are made of) is almost 100% recyclable, so we seemed to be a good candidate for
                     recycling.
                                                                  Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                             Chapter18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                 567


Figure 18.2                An Informative Memo Report Describing How a Company Solved a Problem
                           (Continued)




                   Donna S. Kienzler   Reader's name,
                   March 14,2012       44%
                   Page 2              page number.

                   To get the service started, I met with a friendly sales rep, David Crogen, that same afternoon
                   to discuss the service.

                   Waste Management, Inc., took care of all the details. Two days later, Bike Nashbar was recycling
                   its cardboard.
                                                                                          der what to
                                                                   Talking heads tell rea
                                                     Costs               expect in each section.
                   How the Service Works and What It

              Waste Management took away our existing 8-cubic-yard garbage bin and replaced it with two
   Details of 4-yard bins. One of these bins is white and has “cardboard only” printed on the outside; the other
    solution.      is brown and is for all other solid waste.   The bins are emptied once a week, with the cardboard
                   going to the recycling plant and the solid waste going to the landfill or power plant.

                   Since Bike Nashbar was already paying more than $60 a week for garbage pickup, our basic cost
                   stayed the same. (Waste Management can absorb the extra overhead only if the current charge is
    Double         2 least $60 a week.) The cost is divided 80/20 between the two bins: 80% of the cost pays for
     space         the bin that goes to the landfill and power plant; 20% covers the cardboard pickup. Bike Nashbar
    between        actually receives $5.00 for each ton of cardboard it recycles.
   paragraphs
                   Each employee at Bike Nashbar is responsible for putting all the boxes he or she opens in the
                   recycling bin. Employees must follow these rules:

                       ¢    The cardboard must have the word “corrugated” printed on it, along with the universal
                            recycling symbol.                 ee


                                                                  wae
      Indented
        lists               The boxes must be broken down to their flattest form. If they aren’t, they won’t all fit in
                                                                                               it could pick up solid
       provide              the bin and Waste Management would be picking up air when
        visual              cardboard. The more boxes that are picked up, the more money that will be made.
        variety.
                            No other waste except corrugated cardboard can be put in the recycling bin. Other materials
                            could break the recycling machinery or contaminate the new cardboard.

                            The recycling bin is to be kept locked with a padlock provided by Waste Management so
                            that vagrants don’t steal the cardboard and lose money for Waste Management and Bike
                            Nashbar.




                                                                                                                          (Continued)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




568                                     Part5   Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.2              An Informative Memo Report Describing How a Company Solved a Problem
                         (Concluded)




                    Donna S. Kienzler
                    March 14, 2012
                    Page 3



      Dis-       Minor Problems with Running the Recycling Program
      advantages
      of         The only problems we’ve encountered have been minor ones of violating the rules. Sometimes
                                                                                        of cardboard gets picked up.
       solution. employees at the shop forget to flatten boxes, and air instead
                 Sometimes people forget to lock the recycling bin. When the bin is left unlocked, people do steal
                 the cardboard, and plastic cups and other solid waste get dumped in the cardboard bin. I’ veposted
                 signs where the key to the bin hangs, reminding employees to empty and fold boxes and relock
                 the bin after putting cardboard in it. I hope this will turn things around and these problems will be
                    solved.


                 Advantages of the Recycling Program
      Advantages
      of         The program is a great success. Now when boxes arrive, they are unloaded, broken down, and
                                                                                                               are
      solution. disposed of quickly. It is a great relief to get the boxes out of our way, and knowing that we
                 making a contribution to saving our environment builds pride in ourselves and Bike Nashbar.

                    Our company depends on a clean, safe environment for people to ride their bikes in. Now we
                    have become part of the solution. By choosing to recycle and reduce the amount of solid waste
                    our company generates, we can save money while gaining a reputation as a socially responsible
                    business.


                    Why Other Companies Should Adopt Similar Programs

                    Businesses and institutions in Franklin County currently recycle less than 4% of the solid waste
      Argues        they produce. David Crogen tells me he has over 8,000 clients in Columbus alone, and he
      that her      acquires new ones every day. Many of these businesses can recycle a large portion of their solid
                                                                                    they may even get a little money
      company's     waste at no additional cost. Depending on what they recycle,
      experience     back.
      is relevant
       to other The environmental and economic benefits of recycling as part of a comprehensive waste
                                                                                                      can use the
      companies. reduction program are numerous. Recycling helps preserve our environment. We
                 same materials over and over again, saving natural resources such as trees, fuel, and metals and
                 decreasing the amount of solid waste in landfills. By conserving natural resources, recycling
                 helps the U.S. become less dependent on imported raw materials. Crogen predicts that Columbus
                 will be on a 100% recycling system by the year 2020. I strongly hope that his prediction will
                     come     true.




                                         Recommendation reports Recommendation reports evaluate two or more
                                         alternatives and recommend one of them. (Doing nothing or delaying action
                                         can be one of the alternatives.)
                                             Recommendation reports normally open by explaining the decision to be
                                          made, listing the alternatives, and explaining the criteria. In the body of the
                                          report, each alternative will be evaluated according to the criteria using one of
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                    Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                       569


the two comparison/contrast patterns. Discussing each alternative separately                                The Importance of
                                                                                                            Annual Reports
is better when one alternative is clearly superior, when the criteria interact, or
when each alternative is indivisible. If the choice depends on the weight given                         A survey, conducted
to each criterion, you may want to discuss each alternative under each criterion.                       ~
                                                                                                        by WithumSmith     &
   Whether your recommendation should come at the beginning or the end                       Brown and MGT Design Inc.,
of the report depends on your audience and the culture of your organization.                 found that the annual report is
                                                                                             the most important publication
Most audiences want the “bottom line” up front. However, if the audience will
                                                                                             that a company         produces.      To
find your recommendation hard to accept, you may want to delay your recom-
                                                                                             understand the value of annual
mendation until the end of the report when you have given all your evidence.                 reports, the survey asked indi-
                                                                                             vidual investors, portfolio manag-
Justification   reports   Justification reports justify a purchase, investment,
                                                                                             ers, and securities analysts (the
hiring, or change in policy. If your organization has a standard format for
                                                                                             primary audiences for annual
justification reports, follow that format. If you can choose your headings                   reports) about the ways that they
and organization, use this pattern when your proposal will be easy for your                  read and use the reports to make
audience to accept:                                                                          decisions.
                                                                                               Here are some of their findings:
1. Indicate what you’re asking for and why it’s needed. Since the audience
   has not asked for the report, you must link your request to the organiza-                 =     75% said the annual report
                                                                                                   is the most important pub-
   tion’s goals.
                                                                                                   lication that a company
2. Briefly give the background of the problem or need.                                             produces.
3. Explain each of the possible solutions. For each, give the cost and the                   B     79% said the annual report is
   advantages and disadvantages.                                                                   an important tool for invest-
4. Summarize the action needed to implement your recommendation.           If                      ment decisions.
    several people will be involved, indicate who will do what and how long                  =     66% prefer photos and/or
   each step will take.                                                                            illustrations in annual reports.

5. Ask for the action you want.                                                              =     90% said that important
                                                                                                   concerns facing the industry,
   If the reader will be reluctant to grant your request, use this variation of the                such as environment issues
problem-solving pattern described in Chapter 11:                                                   and corporate governance,
                                                                                                   should be addressed in the
1. Describe the organizational problem (which your request will solve).                            report.
    Use specific examples to prove the seriousness of the problem.                           =     81% prefer a print version
2. Show why easier or less expensive solutions will not solve the problem.                         over electronic versions.
= Present your solution impersonally.                                                              Respondents said the print
                                                                                                   documents were easier to
4. Show that the disadvantages of your solution are outweighed by the
                                                                                                   read, highlight, annotate, and
   advantages.                                                                                     file.
5. Summarize the action needed to implement your recommendation.          If
                                                                                             Taken together, these findings
   several people will be involved, indicate who will do what and how long                   suggest that the annual report is
   each step will take.                                                                      an important communication for
6. Ask for the action you want.                                                              organizations and well worth the
                                                                                             time spent creating it.
How much detail you need to give in a justification report depends on the
corporate culture and on your audience’s knowledge of and attitude toward                    Adapted from Kirk Holderbaum, “Sur-

your recommendation. Many organizations expect justification reports to be
                                                                                             vey Reveals Importance of Corporate
                                                                                             Annual Reports,” Commerce & Industry
short—only one or two pages. Other organizations may expect longer reports                   Association of New Jersey, accessed
with much more detailed budgets and a full discussion of the problem and                     May 29, 2011, 66, http://www.withum
                                                                                             .com/fileSave/Commerce_Kirk_0207
each possible solution.                                                                          po.

PRESENTING INFORMATION EFFECTIVELY
IN REPORTS
The advice about style in Chapter 5 also applies to reports, with three exceptions:
1. Use a fairly formal style, without contractions or slang.
2. Avoid the word you. Ina document with multiple audiences, it will not
   be clear who you is. Instead, use the company’s name.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




570                                       Part5     Proposals and Reports


           Who Did What?                  3. Include in the report all the definitions and documents needed to
fo         The passive verbs and             understand the recommendations.        The multiple audiences for reports
           impersonal construc-              include readers who may consult the document months or years from
  == tions in U.S. reports of                now; they will not share your special knowledge. Explain acronyms and
coal mine disasters (“coal dust              abbreviations the first time they appear. Explain as much of the history
was permitted to accumulate”                 or background of the problem as necessary. Add as appendixes previous
and “an accident occurred”) sug-             documents on which you are building.
gest that accidents are inevitable.
Who permitted the coal dust to               The following points apply to any kind of writing, but they are particularly
accumulate? What could have               important in reports:
been done to prevent the accu-
                                          1.   Use clear, engaging writing.
mulation? Mine disaster reports
contain sentences like the fol-           2.   Keep repetition to a minimum.
lowing: “The . . . fatality occurred      3.   Introduce sources and visuals.
when the victim proceeded into
                                          4    Use forecasting, transitions, topic sentences, and headings to make your
an area. . . before the roof was
                                               organization clear to your reader.
supported.” Why did the man
 who was killed go into the area?         Let’s look at each of these principles as they apply to reports.
 Had a supervisor checked to see
 that the roof was supported?
 Who ordered what?                         1. Use Clear, Engaging Writing.
   British reports of mine disas-
 ters, in contrast, focus on people       Most people want to be able to read a report quickly while still absorbing its
 and what they did to limit the           important points. You can help them do this by using accurate diction. Not-
 damage from the disaster. Per-           quite-right word choices are particularly damaging in reports, which may be
 haps as a result, British mines          skimmed by readers who know little about the subject. Occasionally you can
 have a much lower incidence              simply substitute a word:
 of disasters than do U.S. coal
                                               Incorrect:       With   these   recommendations,   we   can   overcome   the solutions to our
 mines.
                                                                problem.
 Adapted from Beverly A. Sauer,
 “Sense and Sensibility in Technical           Correct:         With these recommendations, we can overcome our problem.
 Documentation: How Feminist Inter-
                                               Also correct:    With these recommendations, we can solve our problem.
 pretation Strategies Can Save Lives in

                                           Sometimes you'll need to completely recast the sentence.
 the Nation’s Mines,” Journal of Busi-
 ness and Technical Communication 7

                                                                 The first problem with the incentive program is that middle managers do
 (January 1993): 63-83.
                                               Incorrect:
                                                                 not use good interpersonal skills in implementing it. For example, the hotel
                                                                 chef openly ridicules the program. As a result, the kitchen staff fear being
                                                                 mocked if they participate in the program.
                                               Better:           The first problem with the incentive program is that some middle managers
                                                                 undercut it. For example, the hotel chef openly ridicules the program. As
                                                                 a result, the kitchen staff fear being mocked if they participate in the
                                                                 program.

                                              A strong writing style is especially important when you are preparing a
                                           report that relies on a wealth of statistics. Most people have difficulty absorb-
                                           ing number after number. To help your audiences, use text to highlight the
                                           message you want the statistics to convey. Examples and action-oriented
                                           details keep the audience engaged.
                                              Warren Buffett says this about clear, engaging writing in annual reports,
                                           which can certainly present a wealth of statistics:
                                                  I really have a mental picture of my sisters in mind and it’s Dear Doris and Birdie.
                                                  And I envision them as people who have a very significant part of their net worth
                                                  in the company, who are bright but who have been away for a year and who are not
                                                  business specialists.
                                                  And once a year I tell them what's going on. . . . I think that should be the mental
                                                  approach."
                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                     Chapter18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                        571



                                                                              x
                                                                                             ae
                                                                                                          Legal Liability and
2. Keep Repetition to a Minimum.                                                                          Report Drafts
Some repetition in reports is legitimate. The conclusion restates points made                            During     —_civil__litiga-
in the body of the report; the recommendations appear in the transmittal, the                            tion (such as a _ tort
abstract or executive summary, and in the recommendations sections of the                     case charging that a product
report. However, repetitive references to earlier material (“As we have already               has injured a user), rough drafts
seen”) may indicate that the document needs to be reorganized. Read the doc-                  may be important to establish
ument through at a single sitting to make sure that any repetition serves a                   the state of mind and intent of a
                                                                                              document's drafters.
useful purpose.
                                                                                                To protect the company, one
                                                                                              lawyer recommends labeling all
                                                                                              but the final draft “Preliminary
3. Introduce Sources and Visuals.
                                                                                              Draft: Subject to Change.” That
The first time you cite an author’s work, use his or her full name as it appears              way, if there’s ever a lawsuit, the
on the work: “Thomas L. Friedman points out. . . .” In subsequent citations, use              company will be able to argue
only the last name: “Friedman shows... .” Use active rather than passive verbs.               that only the final report, not
   The verb you use indicates your attitude toward the source. Says and writes                the drafts, should be used as
                                                                                              evidence.
are neutral. Points out, shows, suggests, discovers, and notes suggest that you
agree with the source. Words such as claims, argues, contends, believes, and                  Adapted from Elizabeth McCord, “‘But
alleges distance you from the source. At a minimum, they suggest that you                     What You Really Meant Was . . . Mul-
                                                                                              tiple Drafts and Legal Liability,” paper
know that not everyone agrees with the source; they are also appropriate to                   presented at the Association for Busi-
report the views of someone with whom you disagree.                                           ness Communication Midwest Regional
   The report text should refer to all visuals:                                               Conference, Akron, OH, April 3-5,
                                                                                              1991.
  As Table 1 shows,...
  See Figure 4.


4. Use Forecasting, Transitions, Topic Sentences,
and Headings.
Forecasts are overviews that tell the audience what you will discuss in a sec-
tion or in the entire report. Make your forecast easy to read by telling the audi-
ence how many points there are and using bullets or numbers (either words or
figures). In the following example, the first sentence in the revised paragraph
tells the reader to look for four points; the numbers separate the four points
clearly. This overview paragraph also makes a contract with readers, who now
expect to read about tax benefits first and employee benefits last.
   Paragraph without numbers:         Employee stock ownership programs (ESOPs) have
                                      several advantages. They provide tax benefits for
                                      the company. ESOPs also create tax benefits for
                                      employees and for lenders. They provide a defense
                                      against takeovers. In some organizations, produc-
                                      tivity increases because workers now have a finan-
                                      cial stake in the company’s profits. ESOPs are an
                                      attractive employee benefit and help the company
                                      hire and retain good employees.
   Revised paragraph with numbers:    Employee stock ownership programs (ESOPs) pro-
                                      vide four benefits. First, ESOPs provide tax benefits
                                      for the company, its employees, and lenders to the
                                      plan. Second, ESOPs help create a defense against
                                      takeovers. Third, ESOPs may increase productivity
                                      by giving workers a financial stake in the company’s
                                      profits. Fourth, as an attractive employee benefit,
                                      ESOPs help the company hire and retain good
                                       employees.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




572                    Part5     Proposals and Reports


                          Transitions are words, phrases, or sentences that tell audiences whether the
                       discussion is continuing on the same point or shifting points.
                          There are economic advantages, too.
                          (Tells audience that we are still discussing advantages but that we have
                          now moved to economic advantages.)
                          An alternative to this plan is. .
                          (Tells audience that a second option follows.)
                          The second factor...
                          (Tells audience that the discussion of the first factor is finished.)
                         These advantages, however, are found only in A, not in B or C.
                         (Prepares audience for a shift from A to B and C.)
                         A topic sentence introduces or summarizes the main idea of a paragraph.
                       Audiences who skim reports can follow your ideas more easily if each para-
                       graph begins with a topic sentence.
                           Hard to read (no topic sentence):      Another main use of ice is to keep the fish fresh.
                                                                  Each of the seven kinds of fish served at the res-
                                                                  taurant requires one gallon twice a day, for a total
                                                                  of 14 gallons. An additional 6 gallons a day are
                                                                  required for the salad bar.
                           Better (begins with topic sentence):   Twenty gallons of ice a day are needed to keep food
                                                                  fresh. Of this, the biggest portion (14 gallons) is used
                                                                  to keep the fish fresh. Each of the seven kinds of fish
                                                                  served at the restaurant requires one gallon twice a
                                                                  day. An additional 6 gallons a day are required for the
                                                                  salad bar.

                           Headings (see Chapter 6) are single words, short phrases, or complete sen-
                        tences that indicate the topic in each section. A heading must cover all of the
                        material under it until the next heading. For example, Cost of Tuition cannot
                        include the cost of books or of room and board; College Costs could include all
                        costs. You can have just one paragraph under a heading or several pages. If
                        you do have several pages between headings you may want to consider using
                        subheadings. Use subheadings only when you have two or more divisions
                        within a main heading.
                           Topic headings focus on the structure of the report. As you can see from the
                        following example, topic headings are vague and give little information.

                               Recommendation
                               Problem
                                 Situation 1
                             Situation 2
                           Causes of the Problem
                             Background
                             Cause 1
                             Cause 2
                          Recommended Solution


                            Talking heads, in contrast, tell the audience what to expect. Talking heads,
                         like those in the examples in this chapter, provide a specific overview of each
                         section and of the entire report.
                                                              Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter18    Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                           573



  Recommended Reformulation for Vibe Bleach
 Problems in Maintaining Vibe’s Granular Structure
   Solidification during Storage and Transportation
   Customer Complaints about “Blocks” of Vibe in Boxes
 Why Vibe Bleach “Cakes”
    Vibe’s Formula
    The Manufacturing Process
    The Chemical Process of Solidification
  Modifications Needed to Keep Vibe Flowing Freely

   Headings must be parallel (see Chapter 5); that is, they must use the same
grammatical structure. Subheads must be parallel to each other but do not
necessarily have to be parallel to subheads under other headings.
     Not parallel:   Are Students Aware of VIP?
                       Current Awareness among Undergraduate Students
                       Graduate Students
                     Ways to Increase Volunteer Commitment and Motivation
                       We Must Improve Training and Supervision
                       Can We Make Volunteers’ Hours More Flexible?
                       Providing Emotional Support to Volunteers
                       Provide More Information about Community Needs and VIP Services
     Parallel:       Campus Awareness of VIP
                       Current Awareness among Undergraduate Students
                       Current Awareness among Graduate Students
                     Ways to Increase Volunteer Commitment and Motivation
                       Improving Training and Supervision
                       Improving the Flexibility of Volunteers’ Hours
                       Providing Emotional Support to Volunteers
                       Providing More Information about Community Needs and VIP Services

   In a complicated report, you may need up to three levels of headings.
Figure 18.3 illustrates one way to set up headings. Follow these standard
conventions for headings:

 = Although the figure shows only one example of each level of headings,
   in an actual report you would use a subheading only when you had at
   least two subsections under the next higher heading.
 = Avoid having a subhead come immediately after a heading. Instead,
   some text should follow the main heading before the subheading. (If
   you have nothing else to say, give an overview of the division.)
 = Avoid having a heading or subheading all by itself at the bottom of
   the page. Instead, have at least one line (preferably two) of type. If
   there isn’t room for a line of type under it, put the heading on the next
   page.
 = Don’t use a heading as the antecedent for a pronoun. Instead, repeat the
   noun.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




574                                   Part5    Proposals and Reports



Figure 18.3            Setting Up Headings ina Single-Spaced Document

                    Center the title;
                     use bold and
                     a bigger font.           Typing Titles and Headings for Reports                        /4-pojni type.

                                                                                                                        the report.
                 For the title of a report, use a bold font two point sizes bigger than the largest size in the body of
                                                                                                                               the
                 You may want to use an even bigger size or a different font to create an attractive title page. Capitalize
                 first word and all major words of the title.
                              Heading for main                 i Two empty spaces (triple space)
                                    ae                   Typing Headings for Reports /2-point type.
                                                                    One empty space (double space)
      12-point   Center main headings, capitalize the first and all major words, and use bold. In single-spaced text, leave
        type   two empty spaces before main headings and one after. Also leave an extra space between paragraphs. You
      for body may  also want to use main headings that are one point size bigger than the body text.
         text
                 This example provides just one example of each level of heading. However, in a real document, use headings
                 only when you have at least two of them in the document. In a report, you'll have several.
                     Two empty spaces (triple space)
                 Typing Subheadings Bo/d; /eft margin
                 - One empty space                    :                   ;                  :          :
                 Most reports usé subheadings under some main headings. Use subheadings only if you have at least two
                 of them under a given heading. It is OK to use subheadings in some sections and not in others. Normally
                 you’ll have several paragraphs under a subheading, but it’s OK to have just one paragraph under some
                 subheadings.
      12-point   Subheadings in a report use the same format as headings in letters and memos. Bold subheadings and set
        type     them at the left margin. Capitalize the first word and major words. Leave two empty spaces before the
                 subheading and one empty space after it, before the first paragraph under the subheading. Use the same
                 size font as the body paragraphs.
      Period                 One empty space (normal paragraph spacing)
      after       Typing Further Subdivisions. For a very long report, you may need further subdivisions under a
                  subheading. Bold the further subdivision, capitalizing the first word and major words, and end the phrase
      heading
                  with a period. Begin the text on the same line. Use normal spacing between paragraphs. Further subdivide a
                  subheading only if you have at least two such subdivisions under a given subheading. It is OK to use
                  divisions under some subheadings and not under others.




                                        WRITING FORMAL REPORTS
                                        Formal reports are distinguished from informal letter and memo reports by
                                        their length and by their components. A full formal report may contain the fol-
                                        lowing components (see Figures 18.4 and 18.5):

                                              Cover
                                              Title Page
                                              Letter or Memo of Transmittal
                                              Table of Contents
                                              List of Illustrations
                                               Executive Summary
                                                                   Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                              Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                    575


Figure 18.4                  The Components in a Report Can Vary                                                    http://www
                                                                                                       (¢          -pewinternet.org/
Were formal                 <————_________________._                        Less formal
                                                                                                                   To see examples
Cover                                  Title Page                           Introduction                           of the ways in
Title Page                             Table of Contents                    Body                       which reports are written and
                                                ;                                                      disseminated, visit the Pew
Transmittal                            Executive Summary                    Conclusions                Internet & American Life Project
Table of Contents                      Body                                  Recommendations           ae     oe oe
     ;                  f                                                                                   The project produces reports
 List of Illustrations                   Introduction                                                  on the impact of the Internet on
 Executive Summary                       Body                                                          American lives, collecting and
                                                      é                                                analyzing data on real-world
 Body                                    Conclusions                                                   developments as they intersect
                                                                                                       with the virtual world. Following
         Introduction                    Recommendations
                                                                                                       data collection, the results are
         Body                                                                                          written into the reports and
         Conclusions                                                                                   posted as PDFs to the website.
                 ‘                                                                                :        Visit the Project’s web pages
   Recommendations                                                                                     to see examples of the ways in
 References/Works Cited                                                                                which reports are first presented
        :                                                                           ;                  and then rewritten by the press
 Appendixes                                                                                            for their audience and purpose.
         Questionnaires
         Interviews
         Computer Printouts
         Related Documents




 =        Report Body
          = Introduction (Orients the reader to the report. Usually has subhead-
             ings for Purpose and Scope; depending on the situation, may also
                have Limitations, Assumptions, Methods, Criteria, and Definitions.)
          =     Background or History of the Problem (Orients the reader to the topic
                of the report. Serves as a record for later readers of the report.)
          =     Body (Presents and interprets data in words and visuals. Analyzes
                causes of the problem and evaluates possible solutions. Specific head-
                ings will depend on the topic of the report.)
           =    Conclusions (Summarizes main points of report.)
           =    Recommendations (Recommends actions to solve the problem. May be
                combined with Conclusions; may be put at beginning of body rather
              than at the end.)
 =         Notes, References, or Works              Cited (Documents      sources       cited in the
           report.)
 =         Appendixes (Provides additional materials that the careful reader may
           want: transcripts of interviews, copies of questionnaires, tallies of all the
           questions, complex tables, computer printouts, previous reports.)

   As Figure 18.4 shows, not every formal report necessarily has all these
components. In addition, some organizations call for additional components
or arrange these components in a different order. As you read each section
below, you may want to turn to the corresponding pages of the long report in
Figure 18.5 to see how the component is set up and how it relates to the total
report.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




576                                      Part5   Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.5               A Formal Report



      .-i«
      iesthe title
                                   Slated for Success                                                                       ibe
                                                                                                              Use a large font ete
                                                                                                                for the main ©!
         page.




                        RAC Inc. Expanding to South Korea                                                        F          \ler
                                                                                                         Use a slightly sma
                                                                                                            font size for the
                                                                                                              subheading.




                                                                                       No punctuation.
                                                             Prepared for ~
                                                          Ms. Katie Nichols
                       Name of audience,                   CEO     of RAC       Inc.
                     job title, organization,
                        city, state, and         Grand    Rapids, Michigan, 49503
                            zip code.




                                                             Prepared by.~               punctuation

                                                                JASS LLC
                                                              Jordan Koole
                                                              Alex Kuczera
                           Name of writer(s),
                           organization, city,              Shannon Jones
                          state, and zip code.                              :
                                                              Sean Sterling
                                                         Allendale, Ml 49401




                                                            April 21, 2011             pate reporv'e
                                                                                           \easea.
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                               577


Figure 18.5      A Formal Report (Continued)




                 “     /                                                          This letter uses
              JASS LLC                                                              block format.
              1 Campus Drive
              Allendale, MI 49401

              April
                 21, 2011

              Ms. Katie Nichols, CEO
              RAC Inc.
              1253 W. Main Street
              Grand Rapids, M1 49504                      In paragraph 1, release the report.
                                                         Note when and by whom the report
                                                     was authorized. Note the report's purpose.
              Dear Ms. Nichols:

              In this document you will find the report that you requested in March. We have provided key
              information and made recommendations on a plan of action for the expansion of a RAC Inc. slate
              tablet manufacturing plant into South Korea.
              dation?
              Our analysis of expansion into South Korea covered several important areas that will help you
              decide whether or not RAC Inc. should expand and build a manufacturing plant in South Korea.
              To help us make our decision, we looked at the government, economy, culture, and most important
              the competition. South Korea is a technologically advanced country and its economy is on the rise.
              Our research has led us to recommend expansion into South Korea. We strongly believe that RAC
              Inc. can be profitable in the long run and become a successful business in South Korea.

          6 JASS LLC used several resources in forming our analysis. The Central Intelligence Agency’s World
            Factbook, the U.S. Department of State, World Business Culture, and Kwintessential were all helpful
            in answering our research questions.
                  Thank the audience for the opportunity to do the research.
               Thank you for choosing JASS to conduct the research into South Korea. If you have any further
               questions about the research or recommendation please contact us (616-331-1100, info@jass.com)
               and we will be happy to answer any questions referring to your possible expansion into South
               Korea at no charge. JASS would be happy to conduct any further research on this issue or any
               other projects that RAC Inc. is considering. We look forward to building on our relationship with
               you in the future.
                                                                                                     question?
                                    ‘                                              Offer to anewer
               Sincerely,                                                                             .
                                                                                    about the report
               Soudan keobe
               Jordan Koole
               JASS Team Member




                                                                                                                   (Continued)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




578                                             Part5        Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.5               A Formal Report (Continued)

                           Main headings are parallel, as are
                           subheadings within a section.


                                                                              Table of Contents




                    TmtrOduictiOn...2.c2s0s-ccecseeoneseceoesosesvsesesonssencsnenaccersusconsssacsencssceneesnssadensnsnsscosercacssnsssrsceemsenacencenasseces
                               Purpose and Scope
                               ZASSUMMPUlONS s.-s.2ccsseeensoseensneeesesees
                               INTER OS eee crea reat c teres es encasten snes seer couceecaniudeecacerencunsiects=asastweavscesoeen
                                Teirmitath   Ons eeeseceeceecceaceeece cee essen cee eas ees ane ees cence cesccshe vant suntents wieataasonvavenesxcusnatenscdessventers
                                Definitions


                    GOVERDIMEN eric cece. ces care eceecasecnassascosnceacesem cetanesceasseeencstactsantesecevnerssu-ssaes<tesnanevascnaasacuacsasernadscstt=
                           Government Control


                                 Free Trade
                                 Concerns about North Korea.




                                 Imports and Exports
                                                        eee cerca ceessce
                                 Dollars andi Gents ecccsee      esssrs   scactevescewee cores                                                                                                    ,


                    South Korean Culture sox seccecreccoese cae ene sc aces taste eee                   Sateen oe rae asses nsece cates pean          tener aceasta         6                     i
                                  Business: CU ltUre scceecaceseec ces earn area ae   SoS ee ocean ceca rae nee saa                                                         6
                                  Honor and Respect                                                                                                                         6
                                  150)14 (0)|EES                                                                                                                            7
                                             ODED                  OR gE           ae  I  RN Bet Se      Eee CT RTECS                                                       I

                     Market Possibilities and Competitors...........cccsscssessseseseserereeeesesescscssessenenesesesescscneneneneneeesenaneces                             7
                            Technology Use                                                                                                                                  I
                            Competition. .......sssecsessessessessesseeseencenecnecnecnesascaceseesecssssscsecsscnscaucaucanennscnscustaecunsarenesseas                     8
                            Inte gration..........sssccessssessescsessesesesseseesesesesncnccncncnesvensseessnsssenencncsnsasssenenecncnenscnensansnsescesees               9
                            SUMMALY........ccsceeseceseesesesnsscsssscsessenessesenecusnenececacstsesncscsnsecossnsnsseseeseneanenenucnsasensaesessessess                   oS       *
                                                                                                                                                                                     ine UP
                                                                                                                                                                                    aght margin   :
                                                                                                                                                                            9
                     Location, Location, Locatiom.........::ssssesssceseseseseseseneeesecseeesensessenenensessecsenersnenscnnesesenenenenenenences®
                                                                                                                                                                                    qustify):



                                                              List of Hlustrations =bottom of the page or on a separate
                                                                                              page if the report has many visuals.
                     Figure |                South Korea’s GDP Growth from 1911 to 2008.........:ccsssseccceseesetetsessseneeseseneess 4
      Figures and
      tables are     Figure 2                Comparison of GDP Growth Rats.......s.ssssssseesessessneeeneesseessssennecesssssnsennneenneesy                                 5
      numbered                                       .           ‘     ;          os                                                                                            8
      independently. Table |                  Comparison of Specifications for Existing Tablets...........:s:sssssssesrerseeereerereesees

                                                                                                   il
                                                                    Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                                Chapter18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                  579


Figure 18.5              A Formal Report (Continued)



                                                                                                    Many audiences read only the
                                                                   for      Success                  Executive Summary, not the
                                       Report     Slated
                                                                                                 report. Include enough information
                                        title                                                      to give audiences the key points
                                            RAC Inc. Expanding to South Korea                                    you make.

                      ommenaation                              Executive Summary
      eave with TEP         or these
                   To continue growth and remain competitive on a global scale, RAC Inc. should expand its business
                   operations into South Korea. The country is a technologically advanced nation and would provide
                   a strong base for future expansion. Slate tablet competitors of RAC Inc. in South Korea are doing
                   quite well. Since RAC Inc. can compete with them in the United States, we are confident that RAC
                   can remain on par with them in this foreign market.

                   The research we have done for this project indicates that this expansion will be profitable, primarily
                   because the South Korean economy is flourishing. The workforce in South Korea is large, and
                   finding talented employees to help set up and run the facility will be easy. In addition, the
                   regulations and business structure are similar to those in the United States and will provide an easy
                   transition into this foreign nation. The competition will be fierce; however, we believe that RAC
         t for     Inc. will be profitable because of its track record with the Notion Tab in the United States.
  u              ions.
      ommend       To ensure a successful expansion, JASS LLC recommends the following:

                   1. RAC Inc. should establish its headquarters and manufacturing plant in Busan.
                      e Purchase a building to have a place to begin manufacturing the Notion Tab.
                      ¢ Educate RAC employees about South Korean culture and business practices before
                           they begin working directly with South Koreans to avoid being disrespectful.
                         e Explore hiring South Koreans; the available workforce is large.
                         e Ensure that the Notion name is appropriate when translated into Korean. If not, change
                           the name to better market the product.
                         ¢ Market and sell the product in both Busan and Seoul.

                   2. After one year RAC should determine the acceptance and profitability of the
                      expansion.
                         ¢ Conduct a customer satisfaction survey with people who purchased the Notion Tab living
                           in Seoul and Busan to determine the acceptance of the product.
                         ¢ Compare and contrast first-year sales with a competitor’s similar product.

                   3. If the tablet is competitive and profitable, RAC Inc. should expand its product line
                      into all large cities in South Korea.
                         e To gain an edge on the competition, create a marketing plan that will offer the Notion
                           Tab at some discount in the new cities.
                         e Explore integrating other RAC Inc. products into South Korea. These products could
                           also be manufactured at the new manufacturing plant in Busan.
                                                                                                                             ary
                                    ummary                                                               Exé' Live UN
                                                                                                ing gethe° loaical
                                                                                                           8       ee ion(9)
                                                                                                                  mendav
                                                                                                    , phe reer    idence




                                                                                                                              (Continued)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




580                                      Part5   Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.5                A Formal Report (Continued)


          A running header is optional.
                                                                                                                      1
                     Slated for Success
                                                                 Introduction Center main headings.

                      To avoid getting left behind by competition in global expansion, RAC Inc. has contacted JASS LLC
                      to perform an analysis about expanding into South Korea. JASS has researched South Korea to
       “purp ose” and determine if RAC Inc. will be successful in expanding into this foreign market.
       “Gcope can

        be sep4"4""       Burpose and Scope
        gection>         RAC Inc. is a successful business in the United States and has had substantial growth over the last
        either '9        five years. With their competitors beginning to venture into foreign markets to gain more global
                                                                                                                                         ;
         long.           market share, RAC Inc. is looking to expand into the international market as well. The purpose Oe
                         our research is to decide whether or not RAC Inc. should expand its business into South Korea.          Give at a
            “6 COPe                              Tell what you discuss and how thoroughly you discuss each topic.                ee Vhs ka
      pics . pould This report will cover several topics about South Korea including their government, economy, you'll discuss
                                                                                         Our research will not include any         them.
      gecvion 9     ot   culture, technology market competition, and possible locations.
        avch no ms on-site research in South Korea. We are also not dealing directly with the South Korean people.
       in the repo                                        List any relevant topics you do not discuss.
                                           Assumptions cannot be proved. But if they are wrong, the report's recommendation
                         Assumptions
                         The recommendations that we make are based on the assumption that the relationship between                nay ae
                         North and South Korea will remain the same as of the first part of 2011. We are also assuming that         longer
                       the technological state of South Korea will remain constant and not suffer from a natural disaster   7 valid.
                       or an economic crash. In addition, we assume that the process of expansion into South Korea is the
                                                                                                                       we
      \f you collected same with RAC Inc. as it has been with other American companies. Another assumption that
      original data    are making is that RAC Inc. has a good name brand and is competitive in the United States with
      (surveys,        Apple, Samsung, LG and other electronic companies.
      interviews, and observations), tell how you chose your subjects, whatkind of sample you used, and          when you collected
                                       the information. This report does not use original data; it just provides a brief discussion
                         Methods        of Significant sources.
                         The information in our report comes from online sources and reference books. We found several
                         good sources, but the best information that we obtained came from The Central Intelligence
                         Agency’s World Factbook, the U.S. Department of State, World Business Culture, and
                         Kwintessential. These resources have given us much useful information on which we have based
                         our recommendation.
      These limitations are
      listed becausé     Limitations _ If your report has limitations, state them.
      the studentS       The information in the report was limited to what we retrieved from our sources. We were not able
      correctly          to travel to South Korea to conduct on-site research. JASS was also limited by the language barrier
      aooumed their      that exists between the United States and South Korea. Other limitations exist because we have not
      teacher would      been immersed in the Korean culture and have not gotten input from South Koreans on the
      want to know       expansion of companies into their country.                                         .
      them. Limitations such as these would never be listed in a real consulting report, since they would disqualify the firm.
                         Definitions
                         There are a few terms that we use throughout the report that we would like to explain beforehand.
       Define key terms The first term is slate tablet, an industry term, which from this point on is referred to as a tablet.
                                                                                                                          From
      your audience will Another term we would like to clarify is the city Busan. Some sources referred to it as Pusan.
       need to read       this point forward, we use only Busan. An abbreviation we use is GDP, which stands for gross
      your report.        domestic product. The South Korean and United States Free Trade Agreement signed in 2007 is
                          abbreviated as KORUS FTA, its official name in the United States government.
                                                                   Business and Administrative Communication,
                                                                                                          Tenth Edition




                                            Chapter18     Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                      581


Figure 18.5           A Formal Report (Continued)



                   Slated for Success

  This section     Criteria
  outlines the     JASS LLC has established criteria that need to be favorable before we give a positive
                   recommendation about South Korea. The criteria include the government, economy, culture, and
  criteria used
                   market competition. We have weighted our criteria by percentages:
  to make
  the overall                  © Government = 20%
  recommendation.              @ Economy = 20%
                               @ South Korean culture = 20%
                               © Market possibilities and competitors = 40%

                   We will examine each separately and give each criterion a favorable or not favorable
                   recommendation. Market competition is weighted the heaviest and must be favorable or somewhat
                   favorable for us to give a positive recommendation. Market competition can be given a favorable,
                   nonfavorable, or somewhat favorable recommendation based on various external factors in the
                   marketplace. We need a minimum of a 70% total to give a positive recommendation overall.
                                    Triple-space before major headings and double-space after them.
                                                             Government

 Begin most      South Korea is recognized as a republic government by the rest of the world. A republic government
 paragraphs with is a democracy where the people have supreme control over the government (South Korea: Political
                                                                                                                There is a
 topic sentences structure, 2009). This foundation makes it similar to the United States’ democracy.
                 national government as well as provincial-level governments (similar to state-level governments)
                 with different branches. Larger cities, like Seoul and Busan, have their own city government as well.
                 The government is considered multipartied and has multiple parties vying for positions (South
                 Korea: Political structure, 2009). The Republic of South Korea shares its power among three
                 branches of government, thus providing checks and balances inside the government. The three                      ico
                 branches of the government
                                        5     5
                                                are the presidential,
                                                         aes
                                                                      legislative, and judicial A (U.S. Department    | \9¥ eubtor er
                   of State, 2010). In this section, we will discuss government control, business                       in the ord
                   regulations, taxes, free trade, and concerns about North Korea.                                      in which
                                                                                                                             hey are

                                                                                                                         migcusse®
                   Government Control
                   The Grand National Party (GNP) controls the major policy-making branches of the government.
  Its OK to        President Lee Myung-Bak and Prime Minister Kim Hwang-Sik are both members of the GNP.
  have             Winning control of the National Assembly in April 2008 (South Korea: Political structure, 2009),
   subheadings     the GNP is considered the conservative party in South Korea and is similar to the Republican Party
   under some      in the United States. Their policies favor conservatism and are considered pro-business (Grand
                   National Party, 2011). RAC Inc. should not expect much interference from the government with
   headings and their business venture into South Korea, unless the GNP loses control of the government in the next
   not others.
                   election.
                                                       Use subheadings only when
                   Business Regulations             Y° have two or more sections.
                   South Korea ranks 16th on the ease of doing business index (World Bank Group, 201 1a). This index
                   measures the regulations that a government imposes on businesses and how easy it is to start and
                   run a business in a given country. Factors this index measures include the ease of starting a business,
                   doing taxes, and enforcing contracts. For comparison, the United States is ranked fifth on this list
                   (World Bank Group, 2011b). While there are more regulations on business in South Korea, they are
                   still near the top of the list. The relatively low rating on regulation can be due in part to the Grand
                   National Party controlling the government. There are a few general regulations that RAC Inc. should
                   know before going into South Korea. For more specific business regulations, RAC Inc. may need
                   to do further research before expanding.




                                                                                                                                (Continued)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




582                              Part5   Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.5       AFormal Report (Continued)


                                                                                                                  3
               Slated for Success
                                                                                                       Korea
               South Korea has been known for having long workweeks and long working days. South
                                                                                                     (Olson,
               leads the world in hours worked with an average of 2,357 hours per worker per year
               2008). However, the government has recently passed laws regulating the workweek. In 2003,
                                                                                                     within
               they shortened their workweek from six days down to the traditional five-day workweek
                                                                                                            a
               the public sector. They also shortened the workweek for the public sector down to 40 hours
                                                                                                    it has
               week (Kirk, 2001). The private sector, however, continues to work long hours because
                                                                                                                              Period goes
               not yet been regulated. But the government hinted at regulating the private sector in the
                                                                                                                through       outside aa
               future when the public sector law was passed (Kirk, 2001))Nonetheless, no legislation has come
                                                                                                                                         ;
                the National Assembly, and South Koreans continue to be the hardest-working people in the world.              parenthesis.

                The South Korean government has also been known to have strong import restrictions placed on
                companies (Central Intelligence Agency, 2011). As a result, companies have been forced to gather
                resources from South Korea instead of importing them. This approach helped South Korea grow its
                GDP and other economic health measures. It has also influenced the South Korean consumers’ view
                of foreign products.

                RAC Inc. may need to be concerned about these regulations when expanding to South Korea.
                In general, however, regulations on business in South Korea are similar to those of the United States
                                                                                                                    is
                because of the closeness in government structures. While the conservative Grand National Party
                in control of the major branches of the government, they are likely to shoot down any attempts at
                business regulations. The result is that future regulations on business in South Korea will remain low.


                Taxes
                The total tax rate in South Korea is lower than that of the United States. (The total tax rate measures
                all of the mandatory taxes that a company has to pay on their operations in a given country.) The
                                                                                                        Group,
                United States has a 46% tax rate, while South Korea has only a 29% tax rate (World Bank
                2011a, 2011b). This lower rate means that a company is able to keep more of their profits in South
                Korea than in the United States. Lower taxes are a positive factor for RAC Inc. to consider.


                Free Trade
                In June 2007, South Korea and the United States announced that they had drafted a free trade
                agreement with each other known as the KORUS FTA (Manyin, 2007). Even though it has been agreed
                upon since that date, neither nation’s legislature has ratified the agreement. Ratification stalled in 2007
                because of concerns by a Democratic-controlled congress in the United States and opposition lead by
                current President Barack Obama. In 2010, President Obama got both sides back together and drafted
                anew agreement that is pending the approval of both nations’ legislatures (AFP, 2010). The highlights
                of the agreement are an immediate reduction of tariffs and duty-free trade on 95% of all goods
                exchanged between the countries in three years. In 10 years, all tariffs will be eliminated between the
                two nations. There would be access between the two countries’ service sectors, allowing for faster
                 international deliveries between the two nations (Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, 2011).

                 The KORUS FTA will be a positive for potential companies expanding into the region by creating
                 a stable political and economic relationship between the United States and South Korea. KORUS
                 FTA will give companies an open door into the region and an ability to conduct business with little
                 to no interference between the governments. However, both nations’ legislatures need to ratify the
                 agreement before this trade agreement can make positive impacts for RAC Inc.


                 Concerns about North Korea
                 North and South Korea have been separated since 1945. These two countries were at war between
                 1950 and 1953. Since this conflict, there have been moments of tension, including some moments
                 in 2010. Currently there is no escalation of hostilities (U.S. Department of State, 2010): We are
                 assuming this state of conflict will not change in the near future. Improved relations would be ideal
                 for the region, the world, and RAC Inc.
                                                                         Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                             Chapter18        Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                     583


Figure 18.5          A Formal Report (Continued)


                  Slated for Success                                                                                      4
                                                                                                section to
                                This team provides a “summary” section at the end of each major
                  Summary                                                                            highlight important pointe.
                  JASS LLC believes that South Korea’s politics favor RAC Inc. expanding into the country. The
                  Grand National Party allows for a favorable government for all businesses. South Korea has low
                  regulations by the government, and they have lower taxes. The restrictions on importing and future
                  workweek regulations are factors that need to be researched more by RAC Inc. if they decide to
                  expand their operations. The KORUS FTA shows the stable relations between the United States and
                  South Korea. The situation with North Korea is as stable as can be at this time. These factors allow
                  JASS to give the government criterion a favorable rating.


                                                                    Economy            Headings must cover everything
                                                                                       under that heading until the next one.
                  South Korea’s economy is considered one of the largest in the world. According to the CIA’s World
                  Factbook, the country recently became part of the top 20 economies in the world. They are
                  considered a high-tech industrialized country (2011). Major industries in South Korea’s economy
                  include electronics, telecommunications, automobile production, chemicals, ship building, and the
                  steel industries. Natural resources from South Korea include coal, tungsten, graphite, molybdenum,
                  lead, and hydropower (U.S. Department of State, 2010). Not only is South Korea one of the largest
                  economies in the world, it is one of the fastest growing. Economic growth, along with the GDP,
                  imports and exports, and currency will be addressed in this section.


                  Economic Growth Capitalize all main words of headings and subheadings.
                  World War II and the Korean War ravished the country and its economic base, and the country has
                  had to rebuild its entire economy. Their GDP was among the poorest in the world in 1960. Since
                  then, South Korea has had record growth in economic measures such as GDP and GDP per capita
                  (South Korea’s GDP Growth, 2010). According to the CIA’s World Factbook ,“a system of close
 Refer to figure government and business ties, including directed credit and import restrictions, made this success
  in text.       possible. The government promoted the import of raw materials and technology at the expense
 Tell what point of consumer goods, and encouraged savings and investment over consumption” (2011).
  it makes. = aagen          ee how the economy of South Korea has grown over time using GDP as a measure.


                                4,000,000
                                  900,000
                                  800,000
                                  700,000
                                  600,000
                                  500,000 1
                                  400,000
                                  300,000 :
                                  200,000
                                  100,000
                                        0)Dict               Er Seer                             tae se
                                            1910   1920   19380   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                       Figure 1: South Korea’s GDP (PPP) Growth from
                                             1911 to 2008 (Source: South Korea’s GDP Growth, 2010)

                                ae ntly.
                         peer independe aee                                                             Cite source of data.
                         tables




                                                                                                                                   (Continued)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




584                                  Part5      Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.5       A Formal Report (Continued)



                Slated for Success


                                                                                                   crisis in the late
                Since the 1960s, the GDP has had only one dip, a result of the Asian Economic
                                                                                                                   ar
                1990s that affected most Asian countries. In 2004, South Korea became a part of the trillion-doll
                                making  them one  of the world’s top economies (Central Intelligence  Agency,  2011).
                economy club,
                                                                                              the future. These
                However the economy faces challenges in maintaining steady growth in
                                                                                                     on exports.
                challenges include an aging population, inflexible workforce, and an overdependence
                                                                                                          growth
                Right now, though, South Korea’s economy continues to grow. Their industrial production
                                                                                                        industry.
                rate was 12.1% in 2010, making them the 11th fastest-growing nation in the production
                                                                                                        (Central
                In 2010, their GDP grew by 6.8%, the 28th largest growth of GDP in the world
                Intelligence Agency, 2011). This growth makes South Korea a viable place of expansion.


                GDP and Other Important Economic Measures
                                                                                                           2011).
                The official GDP of South Korea was $1.467 trillion in 2010 (Central Intelligence Agency,
                     GDP    is the 13th highest in the world. GDP measures the total value of goods produced by a
                This
                                                                                                         GDP per
                country’s economy. Figure 2 shows a comparison of GDP growth rates for top countries.
                                                                                               measures the output
                capita in South Korea is $30,200, which is the 44th largest in the world. This
                of goods and services per person in the country. It is also an indicator of the average worker’s
                                                Average annual growth rates in real GDP per capita,
                                                            1995-2000 and 2000-2006




                                                                                                                                        Label both axes of
                                                                                                                                        graphs. See
                                                                                                                                        chapter 16
                                                                                                                                        for more information
                                                                                                        lope hat iene Bt -____..... |on creating data
                                                                                                                                        displays.




                                                 Nether-   Canada Swedan Australia United   United   France   Germany   Italy   Japan
                             South      Spain
                             Korea                lands                           Kingdom   States

                                         Figure 2: Comparison of GDP Growth Rate
                   Number figures                  (Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2008)
                   consecutively                                                                                Figure captions
                   throughout                                                                                   need to be

                   the report.                                                                                  descriptive.
                                                                                                                                          have a
                 salary in the country. South Korea only has 15% of their population living in poverty. They
                                                                                                  with an
                 labor force of 24.62 million which is the 25th largest labor force in the world,
                                                                                                              to be
                 unemployment rate of 3.3% (Central Intelligence Agency, 2011). These numbers need
                                                                                                                  n
                 considered when starting operations in South Korea. South Korea also has a service-drive
                                                                                                              labor
                 economy with 57.6% of the country’s GDP output in the service industry and 68.4% of the
                 force employed in the service industry (Central Intelligence Agency, 2011). All of these numbers
                                                                                                           healthy
                 and high world rankings of the economic measures show that South Korea has a stable and
                 economy where a business could prosper.
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                       Chapter18     Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                     585


Figure 18.5      A Formal Report (Continued)



              Slated for Success


              Imports and Exports
              The South Korean economy has grown exponentially because of the government’s policy on
              exporting products instead of importing them. As a result, South Korea has traditionally had more
              exports than imports. They are the world’s seventh largest exporter: $466.3 billion dollars’ worth
              of goods in 2010. The countries they export to are China, the United States, Japan, and Hong Kong
              (Central Intelligence Agency, 2011). Exporting has helped the South Korean economy grow into
              what it is today and has made it an important economy in the global marketplace.

              With the world becoming more globalized, South Korea now also imports a large amount of goods.
              South Korea is practically on an island because the only land border is with North Korea, which is
              not connected to the global marketplace. These factors have made it more important over time for
              South Korea to import products and relax the government’s stance on limiting imports. South Korea
              is the ninth largest importer in the world. The total dollar amount of imports was $417.9 billion in
              2010. Major import partners are China, Japan, the United States, Saudi Arabia, and Australia
              (Central Intelligence Agency, 2011).                                ,

              South Korea exports were $48.4 billion greater than its imports while trading with its partners
              throughout the world (Central Intelligence Agency, 2011). This balance has stayed positive helping
              the South Korean economy grow. This balance can also be taken as a sign that South Korea’s
              economy is healthy and has useful products and services for their people and consumers worldwide.


              Dollars and Cents
              South Korea’s currency is the won. Asian currencies are traditionally inflated compared to the
              United States dollar and other currencies around the world. The won is no exception. According to
              MSN Money, the exchange rate as of April 10, 2011, was 1090.513 won to 1 American dollar
              (KRWUS, 2011).


              Summary
              With all of these economic factors, JASS LLC believes that the economy is strong enough to support
              expansion. South Korea has been one of the world’s fastest-growing economic markets and has
              become a major player in today’s global economy. All measures and statistics of the economy lead
              JASS to give a favorable rating to the economy of South Korea.


                                                South Korean Culture

              For RAC Inc. to be successful in South Korea, they need to understand its people and culture. Unlike
              the United States with its numerous cultures, South Korea is primarily made up of South Koreans.
              Their family heritage and customs are extremely important to them, passing down through
              generations (Life, n.d.). South Korean society is a class system primarily based on economic status,
              but also partly based on education. Major status symbols are the size of one’s residence, whether it ;
              is a house or a condominium, having a chauffeur, and the style and quality of one’s clothesUtlines
              (Advameg, Inc., 2011).                                                                                 subsections
                                                                                                                     for this
              Not only is South Korean society based on a class system, but there is also a long tradition of malepart of report
              superiority, in public, though not private, situations. In this section, we will report findings about
              the business culture, honor and respect, and religion as it relates to RAC’s interests.




                                                                                                                        (Continued)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




586                               Part5     Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.5       A Formal Report (Continued)


                                                                                                                         TI
               Slated for Success


               Business Culture
                                                                                                        of, because of
               Division of labor by gender is something that RAC Inc. should be extremely aware
                                                                                                           head (boju)
               its impact on the workforce and social patterns. In public, men are the household
                                                                                               submissive. However
               making decisions for their wives and daughters, and women are expected to be
                                                                                                           ial, 2010).
               in private settings, husbands tend to leave the decision making to their wives (Kwintessent
                                                                                            the home and house
               Many South Koreans, however, believe that women’s work is to take care of
                                                                                            are paid only 63.4%
               work, even if they work outside the home. Women doing the same job as men
                                                                                             this as being sexist,
               of what their male counterparts earn (Advameg, Inc., 2011). RAC Inc. may see
               but for many South Koreans, it is an integral part of their culture.
                                                                                                              especially in small
               When hiring, many South Koreans rely on social connections for new employees,
                                                                                                                  in upper-level
               companies. Larger companies tend to hire headhunters for finding candidates
                             .   South  Korean  job advancement   reflects a strong tradition of seniority,  and  sometimes  will
               management
                                                                                                                  that need to be
               bypass qualified women for a man with higher seniority. New or empty job positions
                                                                                                            outside is brought in.
               filled will first be filled by the most senior of employees before someone from the
                                                                                                                    ),
               Only in more recent times is this tradition being challenged (World Business Culture,
                                                                                                     Use “nd.” for a source with no date.
                                                                                                                   in South
               In the United States, many important meeting and business deals happen in an office, whereas
                                                                                                                  as it is of
               Korea these happen in bars and restaurants. Entertainment is as much a part of their culture
                                                                                                                 accept the
               their business (Kwintessential, 2010). If RAC employees are invited for dinner, they should
                                                                                                                    thy and
               invitation. While out, many South Koreans are apt to decide if RAC employees are trustwor
                                                                                                                   ed taboo
               honorable, thus deciding if they will do business with them or not. Although it may be consider
                                                                                                           it with people
               to drink while doing business in America, the Koreans enjoy their alcohol and want to share
                                                                                                       s if they don’t but
               with whom they wish to do business. They will not look poorly on RAC employee
               joining South Koreans could help build goodwill (World Business Culture, n.d.).


                Honor and Respect
                                                                                           from their ancestors,
                Honor and respect work hand-in-hand with Korean culture. Their values stem
                                                                                                              where they
                elders, and belief in Confucianism (see Religion). These follow them into the workplace
                                                                                                                 family,
                value collective group harmony and respect for authority, as well as embracing the importance of
                                                                                                          come to South Korea,
                clan, and friendship (World Business Culture, n.d.). When American companies
                                                                                                           time, knowing
                the traditional values can cause tension between the two styles of management. Being on
                                                                                                            and thanking
                facts (especially technical details), having patience, presenting gifts with both hands,
                                                                                                                      al,
                Koreans with small gifts are things to keep in mind to be both honorable and respectful (Kwintessenti
                                                                                                                it is taboo
                2010). Something as small as a business card holds a great deal of honor to many Koreans;
                to either write on or fold them (World Business Culture, n.d.).
                                                                                                          as a unit.
                South Korean managers have a primary goal of encouraging their employees to work together
                                                                                                     Managers also
                They spend most of their day ensuring that the team has a good working relationship.
                                                                                                                              n.d.).
                take a holistic interest in their employees, including their personal lives (World Business Culture,
                This approach contrasts to how American companies may work.


                Religion
                                                                                                     , Buddhism,
                South Korea has a wide range of religious beliefs, including Shamanism, Confucianism
                                                                                                             existence of
                Christianity, and Islam. Shamanism has evolved from indigenous folk; they believe in the
                                   (such  as mountain, house,  and fire) and spirits of the dead, all of which  influence
                a myriad of gods
                people’s fortunes. Korean Buddhists believe that human suffering is caused mainly by desire; therefore,
                                                                                                               fulfillment
                they try to reach enlightenment by cultivating an attitude of detachment. Others try to seek
                                                                                                                       and
                by offering prayers to Kwanum, the Bodhisattva of Compassion. Within Christianity, Catholicism
                Protestantism have became the two most popular (Advameg, Inc., 2011).
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter 18     Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                           587


Figure 18.5      A Formal Report (Continued)



              Slated for Success


              Confucianism emphasizes propriety in the five sets of human relationships between sovereign and
              subject, father and son, husband and wife, senior and junior, and friend and friend. It is also a political
              and social philosophy that emphasizes the values of in (translated as “human-heartedness”). Death and
              the afterlife are other areas of strong involvement from South Koreans. They believe in ancestral spirits
              and observe Confucian rituals concerning funerals, mourning practices, and memorial services
              (Advameg, Inc., 2011).



              Summary
              Although the culture of South Korean can be vastly different from that of the United Stares, RAC
              Inc. can overcome these differences. JASS recommends that additional education in Korean culture
              and business practices be given to any RAC employee that would be directly doing business with
              them to prevent disrespect. As for religious practices, they are similar to what exists in the United
              States, though RAC may have to allow special days off work for religious ceremonies. Being
              honorable and respectful is at the heart of Korean culture and should not be difficult for RAC to
              adapt. JASS finds the culture favorable for expanding into South Korea.


                                       Market Possibilities and Competitors
                                                                                                                            Use author's
                                                                                                                            name in
              Tablets are one of the newest products to emerge in the last few years and are growing in popularity. parentheses
              The tablet is marketed as a computer that is more mobile than a laptop, with the ease of use of a pace onis
              smartphone (Ogg, 2010). With app development supported by several companies, tablets constantly the sentence.
              offer new features.

              Currently, the most popular product around the world, with millions of products sold, is Apple’s
              iPad and iPad 2 (iPad 2, 2011). This product, along with products from Samsung, LG, Motorola,
              and other companies, will create a tough foreign market for RAC to enter. However, since RAC Inc.
              is competing with these companies and their products in the United States, a successful integration
              of RAC’s Notion Tab is definitely possible. In this section, we will cover information on technology
              use in South Korea, competition—LG and Samsung—and integration of the Notion Tab.


              Technology Use
              Tablets are one of the fastest-growing devices in the technology field worldwide; South Koreans
              have been quick to embrace this technology. In general, the country is on the cutting edge with new
              technologies such as tablets and NFC (near field communication). Earlier this decade, a greater
              number of South Korean homes had faster Internet connections than United States homes (Borland
              & Kanellos, 2004). As of 2009, the year with the latest data, South Korea has the 1 1th most Internet
              users worldwide, with 39.4 million (Central Intelligence Agency, 2011).

              About 90% of South Koreans own a cellular phone (Koreans love, 2009). Along with
              the normal calling and texting, they also have Digital Multimedia Broadcasting (DMB), which is
              used for watching videos, listening to radio, and datacasting (Cho, 2006). The country is set up
              nicely for technology companies like RAC Inc. to produce and sell their products.




                                                                                                                               (Continued)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




588                                 Part5      Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.5       A Formal Report (Continued)



               Slated for Success


               Competition
                                                                                               should understand
               Since RAC Inc. has decided what specifications their Notion Tab will have, they
               what the competition offers with their tablets. Currently, LG and Samsung are the leading
                                                                                                      Galaxy
               competition for RAC Inc. in South Korea. The current specs for LG’s G-Slate, Samsung’s
               Tab and Apple’s iPad 2 are as outlined i                            Refer to figure or table before it appears in text.

                                     G-Slate                Galaxy Tab              iPad 2               Notion Tab
                       Specs
                                     1 Ghz NVidia Terga 2   1 Ghz NVidia Terga 2                  ,      1 Ghz NVidia
                       Processor
                                     Dual-Core              Dual-Core                a Gti Duet Coes     Terga 2 Dual-Core

                       Memory        1GB                    1 GB                    512 MB               1GB

                                     32 GB                   16 GB or 32 GB          16 GB, 32 GB,64GB   32 GBor64GB
                       Hard Drive
                       Screen @      4280 x 768              1280 x 800              1024 x 768          1024 x 768
                       Resolution                                                                                   =
                                                             Front and Rear          Front and Rear      Front and Rear      Because   tables
                       Camera        Front and Rear
                                                                                                                             are numbered
                       Pes aie       8.9" LCD                8.9” or 10.1” LCD       9.7” LED            9.0” LCD            Separately
                       Cech          Android 3.0             Android 3.0             Osis                Android 3.0         from other
                                                                                          x              (Honeycomb)         aon ie6 za
                       System        (Honeycomb)             (Honeycomb)
                                                            $469.99-$599.99         $499.99              $499.99             a Figure 1
                       Price         $699.99
                                                                                                                             and a Table 1
                                     Table 1: Comparsion of Specifications for Existing Tablets
                                      (Sources: LG Slate, 2011; Samsung Galaxy Tab, 2011; iPad 2, 2011)



                BG
                                                                                                                Their
                The LG Corporation is the second largest company in South Korea behind Samsung (see below).
                revenues, as of 2009, were $78.89 billion (in U.S. dollars). LG is not as diversified as Samsung, but
                                                                                                          (LG Corp,
                they do produce products in the fields of electronics, telecommunications, and chemicals
                                                                                                         version of a
                2011). LG will be one of the main rivals for RAC Inc. in South Korea. LG released their
                                                                                                                             tablet
                tablet, the G-Slate, as it is called in the United States, in March 2011. The specifications of this
                are outlined in Table 1 (LG Slate, 2011). LG is relatively new to the field of tablets, so JASS believes
                RAC Inc. will not have to worry as much about LG as it does about Samsung.


                Samsung
                                                                                                             of 2009,
                Samsung is the largest company in the world, and in South Korea, based upon revenue. As
                their revenue was $172.5 billion (in U.S. dollars). Samsung is part of a larger group of corporations
                that comprise a diverse set of areas; technology is the biggest (Samsung, 2011). Samsung would be
                                                                                                                 Tab,
                RAC Inc.’s largest competitor in South Korea. Samsung has a tablet, called the Galaxy
                launched at the end of 2010. They have a newer version hitting retail stores sometime late 2011.
                The specifications of this tablet are outlined in Table 1 (Samsung Galaxy, 2011). The Galaxy Tab
                                                                                                                  and
                is actually the second version of their tablet that they have released, with updated technology
                                                                                                               to win
                software. As a hometown Seoul business, Samsung will present a challenge for RAC Inc.
                the loyalties of the South Korean people and increase market share.


                 Integration
                 One way RAC Inc. could improve receptiveness from the South Korean people, and possibly cut
                 costs for their Notion Tab, is to partner with a South Korean company to more readily manufacture
                 their product. Some of these companies are Digitech Systems, Nextchip, and Partron. Digitech
                 Systems has an emphasis on touch screens for phones and other devices, which is a major
                 component of tablets. Nextchip deals with the sensors that are used in touch screens, which is
                 another important element of the device. And finally, Partron deals with basic parts for mobile
                 phones and telecommunication devices (Settimi, 2010).
                                                               Business and Administrative Communication,
                                                                                                      Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter18    Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                    589


Figure 18.5       A Formal Report (Continued)



          Slated for Success



          If RAC Inc. does expand to South Korea, they will need to have a telecommunications company to
          carry the service, at least the data service for their Notion Tab. The best option JASS has researched
          is SK Telecom. SK Telecom, part of the SK group, is South Korea’s largest telecommunications group
          for cellular phone service in the region. They have 50.5% of the market share (SK Telecom, 2011).
          The other two options are LG Telecom and KT, formally Korea Telecom. LG Telecom would not be
          a good choice since they are a subsidiary of a competitor, LG (LG Telecom, 2010). KT would also
          not be the best choice because they are not the largest provider in the country and all of the competitors
          use SK Telecom as their data service (KT, 2011).


          Summary
          The people of South Korea are in sync with the latest technology trends such as NFC and DMB.
          Their affinity with technology has led JASS to choose South Korea as a viable option. However,
          there are disadvantages as well. The main competitors of RAC Inc. in South Korea, LG and
          Samsung, are major hurdles. They are the top two companies in South Korea, with Samsung being
          the largest in the world. Because of these factors, we have determined this criterion is only somewhat
          favorable for expansion. This criterion could go either way; therefore, JASS cannot give it a full
          favorable recommendation for expansion into South Korea.



                                            Location, Location, Location

              South Korea offers many suitable cities for RAC’s expansion. We researched many before picking
              a city that will generate the most benefits for RAC Inc. Our research covered possible locations for
              RAC’s headquarters, operations, and Notion Tab product launches. We researched the cities of Seoul,
              Busan, Incheon, Daegu and Cheongju. We picked these cities to research based on size and location.
              The factors we used in determining the right cities are economic status, population, proximity to North
              Korea, proximity to shipping ports (coastline), and direct competition to Samsung and LG, whose
              headquarters are in Seoul. The entire country of South Korea is technologically advanced, so any of
              these cities could be a possibility for expansion.
              JASS has decided that the city with the highest potential to expand business operations is the
              centrally located Busan. Busan is the second largest city in South Korea with population of 3.4
              million. Busan is also the largest port city in South Korea and the fifth largest port city in the world
              (Park, 2009). Because Busan is a port city, it will allow easy importation of raw materials, as well as
              easier exportation of finished product to other countries and back to the United States. If
              manufacturing is cheaper in South Korea, RAC Inc. may decide to create more products in South
              Korea and ship them back to the United States.
              JASS also recommends that the headquarters be in Busan, allowing close proximity to the
              manufacturing plant, if any issues arise. RAC Inc. should initially launch the Notion Tab in Seoul
              and Busan. These are the two largest cities in South Korea and have a high-density population.
              Launching the Notion Tab in these cities will result in the greatest benefit for RAC Inc.




                                                                                                                         (Continued)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




590                                        Part5    Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.5                  A Formal Report (Continued)



                        Slated for Success                                                                                  I
          Conclusions repeat                                                                                    Some companies ask for
      points made in the report.                                                                           Conclusions and Recommendations
        Recpienen  cana ais                        Conclusions and Recommendations                            = the beginning of the report.
         actions the audience
             should take.                                                                                Korea. The
                        All of the research that we have done supports the decision to expand into South
                                                                                                     ions for a total of
                        government, economy, and culture criteria all received favorable recommendat
                        60%. Market possibilities and competition received half support for an additional 20%. Together,
                        South Korea has earned 80% based on our criteria.
                                                                                                                        Tab is
                        Therefore, we believe that RAC Inc. could profitably expand into South Korea. The Notion
                                                                                                                            In
                        a high-quality product, and it will be easily integrated into this technologically advanced county.
                        conclusion, we recommend that RAC Inc. should expand into South Korea.

                        To ensure a successful expansion, JASS LLC recommends the following:

                        1. RAC Inc. should establish its headquarters and manufacturing plant in Busan.
                           e Purchase a building to have a place to begin manufacturing the Notion Tab.
                           e Educate RAC employees about South Korean culture and business practices before they
      Numbering pointe makes     vee working directly with pou Koreans to avoid being disrespectful.
         te eacter forthe         xplore hiring South Koreans; the available workforce is large.
        audience to follow     © Ensure that the Notion name is appropriate when translated into Korean. If not, change
           and discuss           the name to better market the product.
              them.            e Market and sell the product in both Busan and Seoul.

                        2. After one year RAC should determine the acceptance and profitability of the
                           expansion.
                                                                                                        Tab living
        Make sure all tem ¢ Conduct a customer satisfaction survey with people who purchased the Notion
            inalist are,         in Seoul and Busan to determine the acceptance of the product.
              paral              Compare and contrast first-year sales with a competitor’s similar product.

                         3. If the tablet is competitive and profitable, RAC Inc. should expand its product
                               line into all large cities in South Korea.
                               e To gain an edge on the competition, create a marketing plan that will offer the Notion Tab
                               e at some discount in the new cities.
                                 Explore integrating other RAC Inc. products into South Korea. These products could also
                                 be manufactured at the new manufacturing plant in Busan.
                                                                                                                                   that the
                                 Because many readers turn to the “Recommendations” first, provide enough information 50
                                                                                                                                   made ana
                                 reason is clear all by itself. The ideas in this section must be logical extensions of the points
                                 supported in the body of the report.
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                       Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                  591


Figure 18.5       A Formal Report (Continued)



          Slated for Success

                                                                                 This re   ort uses
                                                                References       AG citation otyle.

          Advameg, Inc. (2011). Culture of South Korea. Countries and Their Cultures.
                       Retrieved April 2, 2011, from http://www.everyculture.com/Ja-Ma/South-Korea.html.

          AFP. (2010, December 5). U.S., South Korea sign sweeping free-trade agreement. Taipei Times.
                    Retrieved from http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/front/archives/2010/12/05/200349014.

          Borland, J., & Kanellos, M. (2004, July 28). South Korea leads the way. CNET News.
                       Retrieved from http://news.cnet.com/South-Korea-leads-the-way/2009-1034_3-5261393.html.

          Central Intelligence Agency. (2011). The world factbook: South Korea. Retrieved March 18, 2011,
                    from https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ks.html#.

          Cho, J. (2006, February 12). Korea: Terrestrial-DMB adds color to Korean lifestyle. Asia Media
                       Archives. Retrieved from http://www.asiamedia.ucla.edu/article-eastasia.asp?parentid=38998.

          Grand National Party. (2011, April 1). In Wikipedia. Retrieved April 6, 2011, from
                   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_National_Party.

          iPad 2 specs. (2011). OS X Daily. Retrieved from http://osxdaily.com/201 1/03/02/ipad-2-specs.

          Kirk, D. (2001, July 26). World business briefing: Asia: South Korea: Shorter workweek. New York
                       Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2001/07/26/business/world-business-         this list of
                       briefing-asia-south-korea-shorter-workweek.html.                                 Corres with those
                                                                                                             in the proposa.
              Koreans love their mobile phones. (2009, January 28). Korean JoongAng Daily. Retrieved fromNotice how
                       http://joongangdaily.joins.com/article/view.asp?aid=2900275.                       avast the list ao
                                                                                                              shey completed
              KRWUS. (2011). MSN Money. Retrieved April 10, 2011, from                                        research.
                        http://investing.money.msn.com/investments/currency -exchange-rates/?symbol=%2fKRWUS.

              KT. (2011, April 1). In Wikipedia. Retrieved April 2, 2011, from
                        http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KT_%28telecommunication_company%29.

              Kwintessential. (2010). South Korea: Language, culture, customers and etiquette. Retrieved from
                        http://www.kwintessential.co.uk/resources/global-etiquette/south-korea-country-profile.html.

              LG Corp. (2011, April 1). In Wikipedia. Retrieved April 2, 2011, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LG.

              LG Slate full specifications and product details. (2011, February 2). Gadgetian, Retrieved
                        April 3, 2011, from http: //gadgetian.com/7069/lg-g-slate-t-mobile-specs-price/.

              LG Telecom. (2010, November 29). In Wikipedia. Retrieved April 2, 2011, from
                        http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LG_Telecom.

              Life in Korea. (n.d.). Cultural spotlight. Retrieved March 31, 2011, from
                        http://www.lifeinkorea.com/Culture/spotlight.cfm.
                             List all the printed and online sources cited in your report.
                             Do not list sources you used for background but did not cite.




                                                                                                                   (Continued)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




592                             Part5      Proposals and Reports


Figure 18.5       A Formal Report (Concluded)
  -—




                                                                                                                      13
               Slated for Success



                                                                                                     DC:
               Manyin, M. E. (2007). The proposed South Korea-U.S. free trade agreement. Washington,
                        CRS of Congress.
                                                                                                                  Executive
               Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. (2011, February 10). Korea—U.S. free trade agreement.
                                                                                                               April 3,
                          Office of the President: Office of the United States Trade Representative. Retrieved
                          2011, from http://www.ustr.gov/trade-agreements/ free-trade-agreements/korus-fta.
                                                                                                          from
               Ogg, E. (2010, May 28). What makes a tablet a tablet? CNet News. Retrieved March 23, 2011,
                         http://news.cnet.com/8301-3102 1_3-20006077-260.html?tag=newsLeadStoriesArea. 1.
                                                                                                  from
               Olson, P. (2008, May 21). The world’s hardest-working countries. Forbes. Retrieved
                         http://www. forbes.com/2008/05/21 /labor-market-workforce-lead-citizen-cx_po_0521
                         countries.html.

                                                                                                      Retrieved
               Park, K. (2009, March 3). Empty containers clog Busan port as trade slumps. Bloomberg.
                         from http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=ah2Znx0vQ580.

               Samsung. (2011, April 5). In Wikipedia. Retrieved April 8, 2011, from http://en.wikipedia.org/
                        wiki/Samsung

               Samsung Galaxy Tab. (2011, March 22). Retrieved from
                       http://www.phonearena.com/phones/Samsung-GALAXY-Tab-8.9_id5333.
                                                                                                   from
               Settimi, C. (2010, September 1). Asia’s 200 best under a billion. Forbes. Retrieved
                          http://www.forbes.com/2010/09/01/bub-200-intro-asia-under-billion-10-small-companies.html.

                SK Telecom. (2011, April 8). In Wikipedia. Retrieved April 10, 2011, from
                         http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SK_Telecom.

                South Korea: Political structure. (2009, June 11). The Economist. Retrieved from
                          http://www.economist.com/node/13805244.

                South Korea’s GDP Growth. (2010, May 28). In Wikipedia. Retrieved April 10, 2011, from
                                                                                    growth_from_1911_to_2008.png.
                          http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:South_Korea’s_GDP_(PPP) |

                U.S. Bureau of Labor of Statistics. (2008, March). “Around the world in eight charts.” Retrieved
                          from http://www.bls.gov/spotlight/2008/around_the_world/.
                                                                                                       March
                U.S. Department of State. (2010, December 10). Background note: South Korea. Retrieved
                          21, 2011, from http://www.state.gov/1/pa/ei/bgn/2800.htm.

                World Bank Group. (201 1a). Ease of doing business in Korea, Rep. Doing Business: Measuring
                         Business Regulations. Retrieved from http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/
                         exploreeconomies/korea/.

                World Bank Group (201 1b). Ease of doing business in United States. Doing Business: Measuring
                         Business Regulations.Retrieved from http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/
                         exploreeconomies/united-states/.

                World Business Culture. (n.d.). Doing business in South Korea. Retrieved March 22, 2011, from
                           http://www. worldbusinessculture.com/Business-in-South-Korea-html.
                                                                   Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                              Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                          593


Title Page
The title page of a report usually contains four items: the title of the report, the
person or organization for whom the report is prepared, the person or group
who prepared the report, and the release date. Some title pages also contain a
brief summary or abstract of the contents of the report; some title pages con-
tain decorative artwork.
   The title of the report should be as informative as possible. Like subject
lines, report titles are straightforward.
     Poor title:         New Plant Site
     Better title:       Eugene, Oregon, Site for the New Kemco Plant

   Large organizations that issue many reports may use two-part titles to
make it easier to search for reports electronically. For example, U.S. govern-
ment report titles first give the agency sponsoring the report, then the title of
that particular report.

_ Small Business Administration: Management                Practices Have       Improved for the
’ Women’s Business Center Program

     In many cases, the title will state the recommendation in the report: “Why
the United Nations Should Establish a Seed Bank.” However, the title should
omit recommendations when

 =      The reader will find the recommendations hard to accept.
 =      Putting all the recommendations in the title would make it too long.
 =      The report does not offer recommendations.

If the title does not contain the recommendation, it normally indicates what
problem the report tries to solve or the topic the report discusses.
   Eliminate any unnecessary words:
     Wordy:        Report of a Study on Ways to Market Life Insurance to Urban Professional People
                   Who Are in Their Mid-40s
     Better:       Marketing Life Insurance to the Mid-40s Urban Professional

   The identification of the receiver of the report normally includes the name
of the person who will make a decision based on the report, his or her job title,
the organization’s name, and its location (city, state, and zip code). Govern-
ment reports often omit the person’s name and simply give the organization
that authorized the report.
   If the report is prepared primarily by one person, the Prepared by sec-
tion will have that person’s name, his or her title, the organization, and its
location (city, state, and zip code). In internal reports, the organization and
location are usually omitted if the report writer works at the headquarters
office.
   If several people write the report, government reports normally list all their
names, using a separate sheet of paper if the group working on the report
is large. Practices in business differ. In some organizations, all the names are
listed; in others, the division to which they belong is listed; in still others, the
name of the chair of the group appears.
   The release date, the date the report will be released to the public, is usually
the date the report is scheduled for discussion by the decision makers. The
report is frequently due four to six weeks before the release date so that the
decision makers can review the report before the meeting.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




594                    Part5     Proposals and Reports


                          If you have the facilities and the time, try using type variations, color, and
                       artwork to create a visually attractive and impressive title page. However, a
                       plain typed page is acceptable. The format in Figure 18.5 will enable you to
                       create an acceptable typed title page.

                       Letter or Memo               of Transmittal
                       Use a letter of transmittal if you are not a regular employee of the organization
                       for which you prepare the report; use a memo if you are a regular employee.
                          The transmittal has several purposes: to transmit the report, to orient the
                       reader to the report, and to build a good image of the report and of the writer.
                       An informal writing style is appropriate for a transmittal even when the style
                       in the report is more formal. A professional transmittal helps you create a
                       good image of yourself and enhances your credibility. Personal statements are
                       appropriate in the transmittal, even though they would not be acceptable in
                       the report itself.
                          Organize the transmittal in this way:
                       1. Transmit the report. Tell when and by whom it was authorized and the
                          purpose it was to fulfill.
                       2. Summarize your conclusions and recommendations. If the recommen-
                          dations will be easy for the audience to accept, put them early in the trans-
                               mittal. If they will be difficult, summarize the findings and conclusions
                           before the recommendations.
                        3. Mention any points of special interest in the report. Show how you sur-
                           mounted minor problems you encountered in your investigation. Thank
                           people who helped you. These optional items can build goodwill and
                           enhance your credibility.
                        4. Point out additional research that is necessary, if any. Sometimes your
                           recommendation cannot be implemented until further work is done. If
                           you'd be interested in doing that research, or if you’d like to implement the
                               recommendations, say so.
                        5. Thank the audience for the opportunity to do the work and offer to
                           answer questions. Provide contact information. Even if the report has
                           not been fun to do, expressing satisfaction in doing the project is expected.
                           Saying that you'll answer questions about the report is a way of saying
                           that you won't charge the audience your normal hourly fee to answer
                           questions (one more reason to make the report clear').
                           The letter of transmittal on page i of Figure 18.5 uses this pattern of
                        organization.

                        Table of Contents
                        In the table of contents, list the headings exactly as they appear in the body of
                        the report. If the report is less than 25 pages, you'll probably list all the levels
                        of headings. In a long report, pick a level and put all the headings at that level
                        and above in the table of contents.
                           Page ii of Figure 18.5 shows the table of contents.

                         List of Illustrations
                        A list of illustrations enables audiences to refer to your visuals.
                           Report visuals comprise both tables and figures. Tables are words or num-
                        bers arranged in rows and columns. Figures are everything else: bar graphs,
                                                            Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                     595


pie charts, flow charts, maps, drawings, photographs, computer printouts,                                    Executive Summary
                                                                                                             of a Government Plan
and so on. Tables and figures may be numbered independently, so you may
have both a Table 1 and a Figure 1. In a report with maps and graphs but no                                  On February 18, 2009,
other visuals, the visuals are sometimes called Map 1 and Graph 1. Whatever                                  the Obama adminis-
you call the illustrations, list them in the order in which they appear in the                  tration announced a “Homeowner
report; give the name of each visual as well as its number.                                     Affordability and Stability” plan
                                                                                                to counter the home mortgage
  See Chapter 16 for information about how to design and label visuals.
                                                                                                crisis. The executive summary of
                                                                                                the plan—given to the press—
Executive Summary                                                                               included the following:
An executive summary or abstract tells the audience what the document is                        =   First, a statement of back-
about. It summarizes the recommendation of the report and the reasons for                           ground, which included bullet
                                                                                                    points listing the effects of the
the recommendation or describes the topics the report discusses and indicates
                                                                                                    crisis (for example, that nearly
the depth of the discussion. It should be clear even to people who will read
                                                                                                    6 million households will face
only the abstract.                                                                                  foreclosure), and ending with
   A good abstract is easy to read, concise, and clear. Edit your abstract care-                    the purpose of the plan (that
fully to tighten your writing and eliminate any unnecessary words.                                  the plan will help nearly 7 to
  Wordy:    The report describes two types of business jargon, businessese and reverse gob-         9 million families to “restruc-
                                                                                                    ture” their mortgages to avoid
            bledygook. \t gives many examples of each of these and points out how their use
                                                                                                    foreclosure).
            can be harmful.
                                                                                                =   Then, the two main compo-
  Tight:   |The report describes and illustrates two harmful types of business jargon, busi-        nents of the plan (“affordabil-
            nessese and reverse gobbledygook.                                                       ity” and “stability”) together
   Abstracts generally use a more formal style than other forms of business                         with their subcomponents
                                                                                                    (a few subcomponents are
writing. Avoid contractions and colloquialisms. Try to avoid using the second-
                                                                                                    given below as examples):
person you. Because reports may have many different audiences, you may
                                                                                                =   “Affordability”
become inaccurate. It’s OK to use exactly the same words in the abstract and
                                                                                                    ® “Enabling refinancing”
the report.
   Summary abstracts present the logic skeleton of the report: the thesis or                        = “Reducing monthly
recommendation and its proof. Use a summary abstract to give the most use-                            payments”

ful information in the shortest space.                                                          a   “Stability”
                                                                                                    = “Helping homeowners stay
                                                                                                      in their homes”
  To market life insurance to mid-40s urban professionals, Interstate Fidelity Insurance
                                                                                                    = “Not aiding speculators”
  should advertise in upscale publications and use direct mail.
       Network TV and radio are not cost-efficient for reaching this market. This group             8 “Protecting neighborhoods”
  comprises a small percentage of the prime-time network TV audience and a minor-               The summary provided numbers
  ity of most radio station listeners. They tend to discard newspapers and general-             and, where appropriate, exam-
                                                                                                ples to inform and explain the
  interest magazines quickly, but many of them keep upscale periodicals for months
                                                                                                plan. A busy reader—or one who
  or years. Magazines with high percentages of readers in this group include Architec-
                                                                                                wanted to know the broad con-
  tural Digest, Bon Appetit, Forbes, Golf Digest, Metropolitan Home, Southern Living,           tours of the plan without going
  and Smithsonian.                                                                              through     its nuts   and    bolts—
       Any advertising campaign needs to overcome this group’s feeling that they                would likely benefit from reading
  already have the insurance they need. One way to do this would be to encourage                the summary before deciding
  them to check the coverage their employers provide and to calculate the cost of               whether to read the whole plan.
  their children’s expenses through college graduation. Insurance plans that provide
                                                                                                Adapted from “Homeowner Affordabil-
  savings and tax benefits as well as death benefits might also be appealing.                   ity and Stability Plan Executive Sum-
                                                                                                mary,” BusinessWeek, February 18,
    One way to start composing an abstract is to write a sentence outline. A sen-               2009, http://www.businessweek.com/
                                                                                                bwdaily/dnflash/content/feb2009/
tence outline not only uses complete sentences rather than words or phrases                     db20090218_403370.htm.
but also contains the thesis sentence or recommendation and the evidence that
proves that point. Combine the sentences into paragraphs, adding transitions
if necessary, and you'll have your abstract.
    Descriptive abstracts indicate what topics the report covers and how deeply
it goes into each topic, but they do not summarize what the report says about
each topic. Phrases that describe the report (“this report covers,” “it includes,”
 PROFESSIONAL WRITING




 596                                    Part5      Proposals and Reports


             Analyzing Numbers,         “it summarizes,” “it concludes”) are marks of a descriptive abstract. An addi-
<A           “West Concord, MA, tional mark of a descriptive abstract is that the audience can’t tell what the
             has... one of the —report says about the topics it covers.
             highest [per capita
             incomes] in the nation.
  _. . It also has one of the highest         This report recommends ways Interstate Fidelity Insurance could market insurance
                                                                                                                        pro-
  number of single men in Massa-              to mid-40s urban professionals. It examines demographic and psychographic
  chusetts. Why? On the outskirts             files of the target market. Survey results are used to show attitudes toward insur-
  of West Concord is a medium-to-              ance. The report suggests some appeals that might be successful with this market.
  maximum security prison!
    So, when one naively juxta-
  poses these data points, one
  can be led to assume that there       Introduction
  are plenty of single, wealthy
  men there—when that isn't the         The Introduction of the report always contains a statement of purpose and
  case. . . . Think before arriving     scope and may include all the parts in the following list.
                                                                                          ,     ae
  to conclusions indicated by data                                                                                     the report
  crunching.”                             =       Purpose.    The purpose     statement   identifies the problem
     :                                            addresses, the technical investigations it summarizes, and the rhetorical
                                                                    =
  Quoted from Thomaseee
  i                     M. Bodenberg,
                                reas.             purpose (to explain, to recommend).
  graphics, August 2001, 8.               =m      Scope. The  scope   statement identifies how broad an area the report sur-
                                            veys. For example, Company XYZ is losing money on its line of com-
                                            puters. Does the report investigate the quality of the computers? The
                                            advertising campaign? The cost of manufacturing? The demand for
                                            computers? A scope statement allows the reader to evaluate the report
                                            on appropriate grounds.
                                          = Assumptions. Assumptions in a report are like assumptions in geom-
                                            etry: statements whose truth you assume, and which you use to prove
                                            your final point. If they are wrong, the conclusion will be wrong too.
                                                For example, to plan cars that will be built five years from now, an
                                            automobile manufacturer commissions a report on young adults’ atti-
                                            tudes toward cars. The recommendations would be based on assump-
                                            tions both about gas prices and about the economy. If gas prices radically
                                            rose or fell, the kinds of cars young adults wanted would change. If there
                                             were a major recession, people wouldn’t be able to buy new cars.
                                                 Almost all reports require assumptions. A good report spells out its
                                             assumptions so that audiences can make decisions more confidently.
                                          = Methods. If you conducted surveys, focus groups, or interviews, you
                                             need to tell how you chose your subjects, and how, when, and where
                                             they were interviewed. If the discussion of your methodology is more
                                             than a paragraph or two, you should probably make it a separate sec-
                                             tion in the body of the report rather than including it in the introduction.
                                             Reports based on scientific experiments usually put the methods section
                                                  in the body of the report, not in the Introduction.
                                                      If your report is based solely on library or online research, provide a
                                                  brief description of significant sources. See Appendix C on how to cite
                                                  and document sources.
                                              =   Limitations. Limitations make your recommendations less valid or
                                                  valid only under certain conditions. Limitations usually arise because
                                                   time or money constraints haven't permitted full research. For example,
                                                   a campus pizza restaurant considering expanding its menu may ask for
                                                   a report but not have enough money to take a random sample of stu-
                                                   dents and townspeople. Without a random sample, the writer cannot
                                                   generalize from the sample to the larger population.
                                                       Many recommendations are valid only for a limited time. For
                                                   instance, a campus store wants to know what kinds of clothing will
                                                        Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                    Chapter18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                          597


     appeal to college men. The recommendations will remain valid for only
     a short time: three years from now, styles and tastes may have changed,
     and the clothes that would sell best now may no longer be in demand.
 =   Criteria. The criteria section outlines the factors or standards that you are
     considering and the relative importance of each. If a company is choos-
     ing a city for a new Office, is the cost of office space more or less impor-
     tant than the availability of skilled workers? Check with your audience
     before you write the draft to make sure that your criteria match those of
     your audiences.
 =   Definitions. Many reports define key terms in the introduction. For
     instance, a report on unauthorized Internet use by employees might
     define what is meant by “unauthorized use.” A report on the corporate
     dress code might define such codes broadly to include general appear-
     ance, so it could include items such as tattoos, facial piercings, and gen-
     eral cleanliness. Also, if you know that some members of your primary,
     or secondary audience will not understand technical terms, define them.
     If you have only a few definitions, you can put them in the Introduction.
     If you have many terms to define, put a glossary in an appendix. Refer
     to it in the Introduction so that audiences know that you’ve provided it.


Background or History
Formal reports usually have a section that gives the background of the situa-
tion or the history of the problem. Even though the current audience for the
report probably knows the situation, reports are filed and consulted years
later. These later audiences will probably not know the background, although
it may be crucial for understanding the options that are possible.
    In some cases, the history section may cover many years. For example, a
report recommending that a U.S. hotel chain open hotels in Romania may
give the history of that country for at least several decades. In other cases, the
background section is much briefer, covering only a few years or even just the
immediate situation.
    The purpose of most reports is rarely to provide a history of the problem.
Do not let the background section achieve undue length.


Body
The body of the report is usually its longest section. Analyze causes of the
problem and offer possible solutions. Present your argument with all its evi-
dence and data. Data that are necessary to follow the argument are included
with appropriate visuals and explanatory text. Extended data sets, such as
large tables and long questionnaires, are generally placed in appendixes. It
is particularly important in the body that you use headings, forecasting state-
ments, and topic sentences to help lead your audience through the text. Audi-
ences will also appreciate clear, concise, and engaging prose. Remember to
cite your sources (see Appendix C) and to refer in the text to all visuals and
appendixes.

Conclusions and Recommendations
Conclusions summarize points you have made in the body of the report; Rec-
ommendations are action items that would solve or ameliorate the problem.
These sections are often combined if they are short: Conclusions and Recommen-
dations. No new information should be included in this section.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




598                    Part5     Proposals and Reports


                          Many audiences turn to the recommendations section first; some organi-
                       zations ask that recommendations be presented early in the report. Number
                       the recommendations to make it easy for people to discuss them. If the rec-
                       ommendations will seem difficult or controversial, give a brief paragraph of
                       rationale after each recommendation. If they'll be easy for the audience to
                       accept, you can simply list them without comments or reasons. The recom-
                       mendations will also be in the executive summary and perhaps in the title and
                       the transmittal.




                       = Good reports begin with good data. Make sure your data come from reli-
                         able sources.
                       = Analyze report numbers and text for accuracy and logic.
                         Choose an appropriate organizational pattern for your information and
                         purposes. The most common patterns are comparison/contrast, problem-
                         solving, elimination of alternatives, SWOT analysis, general to particular,
                         particular to general, geographic or spatial, functional, and chronological.
                       = Reports use the same style as other business documents, with three
                         exceptions:
                         1. Reports use a more formal style, without contractions or slang, than do
                              many letters and memos.
                         2. Reports rarely use the word you.
                          3. Reports should include all the definitions and documents needed to
                              understand the recommendations.
                        =      Tocreate good report style,
                               1. Use clear, engaging writing.
                               2. Keep repetition to a minimum.
                               3. Introduce all sources and visuals.
                               4. Use forecasting, transitions, topic sentences, and headings.
                        =      Headings are single words short phrases, or complete sentences that
                               describe all of the material under them until the next heading. Talking
                               heads tell the audience what to expect in each section.
                           =   Headings must use the same grammatical structure. Subheads under a
                               heading must be parallel to each other but do not necessarily have to be
                               parallel to subheads under other headings.
                           =   The title page of a report usually contains four items: the title of the report,
                               whom the report is prepared for, whom it is prepared by, and the date.
                           =    Ifthe report is 25 pages or less, list all the headings in the table of contents.
                                In a long report, pick a level and put all the headings at that level and
                                above in the contents.
                           =    Organize the transmittal in this way:
                               1.  Release the report.
                               2.  Summarize your conclusions and recommendations.
                               3.  Mention any points of special interest in the report. Show how you
                                   surmounted minor problems you encountered in your investigation.
                                   Thank people who helped you.
                                4. Point out additional research that is necessary, if any.
                                5. Thank the reader for the opportunity to do the work and offer to
                                   answer questions.
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                          Chapter18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                   599


=     Summary abstracts present the logic skeleton of the article: the thesis or
      recommendation and its proof. Descriptive abstracts indicate what topics
      the article covers and how deeply it goes into each topic, but do not sum-
      marize what the article says about each topic.
=     A good abstract or executive summary is easy to read, concise, and clear. A
      good abstract can be understood by itself, without the report or references.
=     The Introduction of the report always contains a statement of purpose and
      scope. The Purpose statement identifies the organizational problem the
      report addresses, the technical investigations it summarizes, and the rhe-
      torical purpose (to explain, to recommend). The Scope statement identifies
      how broad an area the report surveys. The introduction may also include
      Limitations, problems or factors that limit the validity of your recommen-
      dations; Assumptions,        statements whose truth you assume, and which
  you use to prove your final point; Methods, an explanation of how you
  gathered your data; Criteria used to weigh the factors in the decision, oats
  Definitions of terms audiences may not know.
= A Background or History section is usually included because reports are
  filed and may be consulted years later by people who no longer remember
  the original circumstances.
= The Body of the report, usually the longest section, analyzes causes of the
  problem and offers possible solutions. It presents your argument with all
  evidence and data.
= Conclusions summarize points made in the body of the report; Recom-
  mendations are action items that would solve or ameliorate the problem.
  These sections are often combined if they are short.

                                                                                                    *Go to www.mhhe.com/locker10e for
        CHAPTER         18          Exercises and Problems                                          additional Exercises and Problems.




18.1.        Reviewing the Chapter

    1. What are some criteria to check to ensure you have             7. How do you introduce sources in the text of the
      quality data? (LO 18-1)                                            report? (LO 18-4)
    2: What kinds of patterns should you look for in your               . Why should reports try to have a topic sentence at
       data and text? (LO 18-1)                                           the beginning of each paragraph? (LO 18-4)
    3k What are some guidelines for choosing information                . What are the characteristics of an effective report
       for reports? (LO 18-2)                                            title? (LO 18-5)
    4. Name seven basic patterns for organizing reports.             10. What goes in the letter of transmittal? (LO 18-5)
       For four of them, explain when they would be par-             11. What is the difference between summary and
       ticularly effective or ineffective. (LO 18-3)                     descriptive abstracts? (LO 18-5)
    5. What are three ways that style in reports differs from        12. What goes in the introduction of a report? (LO 18-5)
       conventional business communication style? (LO 18-4)          13, What is the difference between conclusions and rec-
     . Name four good writing principles that are particu-               ommendations? (LO 18-5)
       larly important in reports. (LO 18-4)


18.2         Identifying Assumptions and Limitations
Indicate whether each of the following would be an                        2.   These recommendations are based on the
assumption or a limitation in a formal report.                                 attitudes of current students. Presumably,
a.   Report on Ways to Encourage More Students to Join                         students in the next several years will have the
     XYZ Organization                                                          same attitudes and interests.
     1. Isurveyed a judgment sample rather than a ran-                    Report on the Feasibility of Building Hilton Hotels
         dom sample.                                                      in Romania
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




600                                  Part5   Proposals and Reports


       1. This report is based on the expectation that the                   1. These recommendations may change if the cost
          country will be politically stable.                                   of gasoline increases dramatically or if there is
       2. All of my information is based on library                             another deep recession.
          research. The most recent articles were                            2. This report is based on a survey of adults ages
            published two months ago; much of the                                20 to 24 in California, Texas, Illinois, Ontario,
           information was published a year ago or more.                        and Massachusetts.
           Therefore some of my information may be out                       3. These preferences are based on the cars now
           of date.                                                             available. If a major technical or styling
c.     Report on Car-Buying Preferences of Young Adults                         innovation occurs, preferences may change.


18.3.        Revising an Executive Summary

The following Executive Summary is poorly organized                    effective. Cut information that does not belong in the
and too long. Rearrange information to make it more                  — summary. You may use different words as you revise.


                      In this report |will discuss the communication problems which exist at Rolling Meadows
                                                                                                            areas
                      Golf Club. The problems discussed will deal with channels of communication. The
                      which are causing problems are      internal. Radios would solve these internal problems.


                      Taking a 15-minute drive on a golf cart in order to find the superintendent is a com-
                      mon occurrence. Starters and rangers need to keep in touch with the clubhouse to
                      maintain a smooth flow of players around the course. The rangers have expressed
                      an interest in being able to call the clubhouse for advice and support.

                                                                                                              advan-
                       Purchasing two-channel FM radios with private channels would provide three
                       tages. First, radios would  make  the  golf course safer by providing   a  means  of notifying
                                                                                                                 effi-
                       someone in the event of an emergency. Second, radios would make the staff more
                                                    channel  of communicat ion.  Third, radios   would  enable  club-
                       cient by providing a faster
                       house personnel to keep in touch with the superintendent, the rangers, and the starters.

                       During the week, radios can be carried by the superintendent, the golf pro, and
                       another course worker. On weekends and during tournaments, one radio will be used
                                                                                                   ranger.
                       by the golf professional. The other two will be used by one starter and one
                       Three radios is the minimum needed to meet basic communication needs. A fourth
                                                                                                     .
                       radio would provide more flexibility for busy weekends and during tournaments

                       Tekk T-20 radios can be purchased from Page-Com for $129 each. These radios
                       have the range and options needed for use on the golf course. Radios are durable
                       and easy to service. It is possible that another brand might be even less expensive.

                                                                                                   $600
                       Rolling Meadows Golf Club should purchase four radios. They will cost under
                       and can be paid for from the current equipment budget.



     18.4     Comparing Report Formats

  Locate five business or organizational reports (or white                   The reports you find could be about the organiza-
  papers as they’re sometimes called) on the Internet. A good             tions’ environmental sustainability efforts, their prod-
  online collection of organizational reports is the website of           ucts, or any other aspect of their operations.
     the Council on Library and Information Resources (CLIR)                 Compare the organization (the reports’ contents or
                                                                                                           reports you select.
     accessible at http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/. Addi- _ the way they’re structured) of the five
                                                             of  What    similarities and differences do  you  see in the for-
     tionally, you can find reports linked from the websites
                                                                                                        a table of your find-
     the Fortune 500 organizations, or you can search for them —_matting of all these reports? Make
     on Google using keywords such as “reports,” “business       _ings. Discuss your findings in small groups.
     reports,” “company reports,” or “organizational reports.”
                                                             Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                        Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                601


18.5      Comparing Style in Annual Reports

Locate two annual reports on the Internet. A good source          6.   Is one report easier to understand than the other?
is Report Watch, http://www.reportwatch.net/ Com-                    Why?
pare the style of the two reports. Here are some ques-            7. Is one report more interesting than the other? Why?
tions to get you started:                                         8. Is one report more convincing than the other? Why?
1. How do they use visuals to keep attention?
                                                                  As your instructor directs,
2. What differences do you see in the letters from the
     CEOs?                                                        a. Work in small groups to do your comparison. Share
                                                                      your findings in a five-minute oral presentation to
3. How do they present number-heavy information?
                                                                      the class.
     Do they rely mainly on tables and graphs? Do they
     give prose summaries?                                        b. Work in small groups to do your comparison. Share
                                                                      your findings in a memo posted on the class website.
4. Is the writing easy to understand?
                                                                  c. Work individually to do your comparison. Share
5. Do you see places where negative information is
                                                                      your findings in a memo to your instructor.
     given a positive spin?


18.6      Evaluating a Report from Your Workplace -

Consider the following aspects of a report from your                   the pictures and visuals create? Are color and white
workplace:                                                             space used effectively? (See Chapter 16 on visuals.)
= Content. How much information is included? How                  As your instructor directs,
    is it presented?
                                                                  a. Write a memo to your instructor             analyzing the
= Emphasis. What points are emphasized? What                           report.
    points are deemphasized? What verbal and visual
    techniques are used to highlight or minimize                  b.   Join with a small group of students to compare and
    information?                                                       contrast several reports. Present your evaluation in
                                                                       an informal group report.
® Visuals and layout. Are visuals used effectively? Are
   _they accurate and free from chartjunk? What image do               Present your evaluation orally to the class.


18.7.     Analyzing and Writing Reports
Reread the sidebar about the Pew Internet and American            =    How was the report organized and designed to meet
Life Project at http: / /www.pewinternet.org/ on page 575.             the needs of the audience?
Go to the website and browse through the reports. Select a         =   What language choices did the writer make?
report and answer the following questions:                         Finally, examine the press releases that are written about
    Who is the report’s audience?                                  the report (the press releases for each report are included as
    What is its purpose?                                           links) for the ways the information in the report is adapted
                                                                   for a different audience and purpose. How do the con-
    How were the data collected?                                   tent, organization, tone, and language choices differ from
    What did the data collection measure?                          those of the original report? Do you see any ethical issues
    Why was the data collection important?                         involved in condensing the report into a press release?
Given your analysis of the report’s audience, purpose,             As your instructor directs,
and data collection, consider the strategies used in the           &   Write a report of your findings to your instructor.
report to convey the information. Answer these questions:          =   Present your findings to the class using presentation
= What tone did the writer adopt?                                      software.


18.8      Preparing an Information Report
Visit the website of the Global Reporting Initiative (http:/ /     a memo to your instructor or as a PowerPoint presenta-
www.globalreporting.org/Home), a group of analysts                 tion for the class, describing the organization, the people
from various industries and professions that is committed          behind it, their guidelines, their work, and their impact on
to advancing the cause of socially responsible reporting           the corporate world.
by organizations. Prepare an information report, either as
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




602                                  Part5   Proposals and Reports


18.9           Recommending Action

Write a report recommending an action that your unit or                 Address your report to the person who would have
organization should take. Possibilities include                      the power to approve your recommendation.
= Buying more equipment for your department.                         As your instructor directs,
= Hiring an additional worker for your department.                   a. Create a document or presentation to achieve the
= Making your organization more family-friendly.                         goal.
= Making a change that will make the organization                    b. Write a memo to your instructor describing the situ-
    more efficient.                                                      ation at your workplace and explaining your rhe-
m Making changes to improve accessibility for customers                  torical choices (medium, strategy, tone, wording,
    or employees with disabilities.                                      graphics or document design, and so forth).


 18.10         Writing     a Recommendation Report

Write a report evaluating two or more alternatives. Pos-             4. Should your workplace create a newsletter to
sible topics include the following:                                      communicate internally?
1. Should students in your major start a monthly                     5. Should a local restaurant open another branch?
     newsletter?                                                         Where should it be?
2. Should your student organization write an annual                  In designing your study, identify the alternatives, define
     report? Would doing so help the next year’s                     your criteria for selecting one option over others, care-
     officers?                                                       fully evaluate each alternative, and recommend the best
                                                                     course of action.
 3.     Should your student organization create a wiki,
        blog, or newsletter to facilitate communication with
        a constituency?


 18.11         Writing an Informative or Closure Report

 Write an informative report on one of the following                     background of the situation? What competing loyal-
 topics.                                                                 ties exist? In the past, how have workers responded?
                                                                         How has the organization responded? Have whis-
 1. What should a U.S. manager know about dealing
                             [you fill in the country                    tle-blowers been rewarded or punished? What could
      with workers from
                                                                         the organization do to foster ethical behavior?
        or culture]? What factors do and do not motivate
        people in this group? How do they show respect and            4. Describe a problem or challenge encountered by an
        deference? Are they used to a strong hierarchy or to             organization where you've worked. Describe the
        an egalitarian setting? Do they normally do one thing            problem, show why it needed to be solved, tell who
        at once or many things? How important is clock time              did what to try to solve it, and tell how successful
        and being on time? What factors lead them to respect             the efforts were. Possibilities include
        someone? Age? Experience? Education? Technical                   = How the organization is implementing work
        knowledge? Wealth? Or what? What conflicts or mis-                    teams, downsizing, or changing organizational
        communications may arise between workers from                         culture.
        this culture and other workers due to cultural differ-            =   How the organization uses e-mail or voice mail.
        ences? Are people from this culture similar in these                  How the organization uses telecommuting.
         beliefs and behaviors, or is there lots of variation?
                                                                          =   How managers deal with stress, make ethical
  2. What benefits do companies offer? To get informa-                        choices, or evaluate subordinates.
     tion, check the web pages of three companies in the
     same industry. Information about benefits is usually                 =   How the organization is responding to changing
     on the page about working for the company.                               U.S. demographics, the Americans with Dis-
                                                                              abilities Act, or international competition and
  3. Describe an ethical dilemma encountered by                               opportunities.
     workers in a specific organization. What is the


      18.12.    Writing a Consultant's Report—Restaurant Tipping

  Your consulting company has been asked to conduct                    All are medium-priced, family-friendly restaurants. The
  a report for Diamond Enterprises, which runs three                   CEO is thinking of replacing optional tips with a 15%
  national chains: FishStix, The Bar-B-Q Pit, and Morrie’s.            service fee automatically added to bills.
                                                                Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                          Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                                 603


   You read articles in trade journals, surveyed a random             7. Servers said that it was important to go home with
sample of 200 workers in each of the chains, and con-                    money in their pockets (92%), that their expertise
ducted an e-mail survey of the 136 restaurant managers.                   increased food sales and should be rewarded (67%),
Here are your findings:                                                   and that if a service fee replaced tips they would
 1. Trade journals point out that the Internal Revenue                    be likely to look for another job (45%). Some (17%)
    Service (IRS) audits restaurants if it thinks that                   thought that if the manager distributed service-fee
    servers underreport tips. Dealing with an audit is                   income, favoritism rather than the quality of work
    time-consuming and often results in the restaurant's                 would govern how much tip income they got. Most
    having to pay penalties and interest.                                (72%) thought that customers would not add any-
 2. Only one Morrie’s restaurant has actually been                       thing beyond the 15% service fee, and many (66%)
    audited by the IRS. Management was able to                           thought that total tip income would decrease and
    convince the IRS that servers were reporting tips                    their own portion of that income would decrease
    accurately. No penalty was assessed. Management                      (90%).
    spent $1,000 on CPA and legal fees and spent over                 8. Managers generally support the change.
    80 hours of management time gathering data and                                                               Change
    participating in the audit.                                                                                 to service
 3. Restaurants in Europe already add a service fee                                                    Retain   fee added    Don’t
    (usually 15%) to the bill. Patrons can add more if                                                  tips      tobill       care
    they choose. Local custom determines whether                    FishStix managers (n = 44)          20%        80%          0%
    tips are expected and how much they should be. In
                                                                    Bar-B-Q managers (n = 13)           33%        67%          0%
    Germany, for example, it is more usual to round up
                                                                    Morrie’s managers (n = 58)          55%        45%          0%
    the bill (from 27 € to 30 €, for example) than to fig-
    ure a percentage.
 4. If the restaurant collected a service fee, it could use           9. Comments from managers include: “It isn’t fair for
    the income to raise wages for cooks and hosts and                    a cook with eight years of experience to make only
    pay for other benefits, such as health insurance, rather             $12 an hour while a server can make $25 an hour in
    than giving all the money to servers and bussers.                    just a couple of months,” and “I could have my pick
                                                                         of employees if I offered health insurance.”
 5. Morrie’s servers tend to be under 25 years of age.
    FishStix employs more servers over 25, who are                   10. Morale at Bar-B-Q seems low. This is seen in part in
    doing this for a living. The Bar-B-Q Pit servers are                 the low response rate to the survey.
    students in college towns.                                       11. Ina   tight employment market, some restaurants
 6. In all three chains, servers oppose the idea.                        might lose good servers if they made the change.
    Employees other than servers generally support it.                   However, hiring cooks and other nonservers would
                                                                         be easier.
                                            Change
                                                                     12. The current computer systems in place can handle
                                           to service
                                                                         figuring and recording the service fee. Since bills
                                  Retain fee added Don’t
                                   tips      tobill    care
                                                                         are printed by computer, an additional line could be
                                                                         added. Allocating the service-fee income could take
FishStix servers (n = 115)          90%         7%         3%            extra managerial time, especially at first.
Bar-B-Q servers (n = 73)            95%         0%         5%
Morrie’s servers (n = 93)           85%        15%         0%        Write the report.
Morrie’s nonservers (n = 65)        25%        70%         5%
FishStix nonservers (1 = 46)        32%        32%        37%
Bar-B-Q nonservers (1 = 43)         56%        20%        25%
(Numbers do not add up to 100% due to rounding.)


18.13     Writing a Library Research Report
Write a library research report.                                          Table of Contents.
                                                                          List of Illustrations.
As your instructor directs,
                                                                          Executive Summary or Abstract.
Turn in the following documents:
                                                                          Body    (Introduction,   all information,   recommen-
a. The approved proposal.
                                                                          dations). Your instructor may specify a minimum
b. Two copies of the report, including                                    length, a minimum number or kind of sources, anda
    Cover.                                                                minimum number of visuals.
    Title Page.                                                           References or Works Cited.
    Letter or Memo of Transmittal.                                   c.   Your notes and at least one preliminary draft.
PROFESSIONAL WRITING




604                               Part5   Proposals and Reports


Choose one of the following topics.                               candidates to solve logic puzzles and seeing how
                                                                  they perform under stress by taking frequent phone
1. Selling to College Students. Your car dealership
                                                                  calls during the interview. You are to evaluate
      is located in a university town, but the manager
                                                                  the current interviewing approaches and propose
   doubts that selling cars to college students will be
                                                                  changes that would improve hiring decisions.
   profitable. You agree that college incomes are low to
   nonexistent, but you see some students driving late-           Selling to Walmart. Your company has a reputa-
   model cars. Recommend to the dealership’s man-                 tion for making high-quality lamps and ceiling fans
   ager whether to begin marketing to college students,           sold in specialty stores. Although the company
   suggesting some tactics that would be effective.               has been profitable, it could grow much faster if it
                                                                  sold through Walmart. Your boss is excited about
2. Advertising on the Internet. You work ona team
                                                                  her recent discussions with that retailer, but she
   developing a marketing plan to sell high-end sun-
                                                                  has heard from associates that Walmart can be a
   glasses. Your boss is reluctant to spend money for
                                                                  demanding customer. She asked you to find out if
   online advertising because she has heard that the
                                                                  there is a downside to selling through Walmart and,
   money is mostly wasted. Also, she associates the ads
                                                                  if so, whether manufacturers can afford to say no to
   with spam, which she detests. Recommend whether                a business deal with the retail giant.
   the company should devote some of its advertis-
   ing budget to online ads. Include samples of online            Making College Affordable. The senator you
    advertising that supports your recommendation.                work for is concerned about fast-rising costs of a
                                                                  college education. Students say they cannot afford
3. Improving Job Interview Questions. Turnover
                                                                  their tuition bills. Colleges say they are making all
    among the sales force has been high, and your boss
                                                                  the cuts they can without compromising the quality
    believes the problem is that your company has been
                                                                  of education. In order to propose a bill that would
    hiring the wrong people. You are part of a team
                                                                  help make college affordable for those who are qual-
    investigating the problem, and your assignment
                                                                  ified to attend, the senator has asked you to research
    is to evaluate the questions used in job interviews.
                                                                  alternatives for easing the problem. Recommend
    Human resource personnel use tried-and-true ques-
                                                                  one or two measures the senator could include ina
    tions like “What is your greatest strength?” and
                                                                  bill for the Senate to vote on.
    “What is your greatest weakness?” The sales man-
    ager has some creative alternatives, such as asking           With your instructor’s permission, investigate a
                                                                  topic of your choice.




 18.14      Writing a Recommendation Report

 Write an individual or a team report.                             restaurant, or other organization. Are customers
                                                                   made to feel comfortable? Is workers’ communica-
 As your instructor directs,                                       tion helpful, friendly, and respectful? Are workers
 Turn in the following documents:                                  knowledgeable about products and services? Do
 1. The approved proposal.                                         they sell them effectively? Write a report analyzing
 2. Two copies of the report, including                            the quality of service and recommending what the
                                                                   organization should do to improve.
     Cover.
                                                                   Recommending Courses for the Local Community
     Title Page.
                                                                   College. Businesses want to be able to send work-
     Letter or Memo of Transmittal.                                ers to local community colleges to upgrade their
     Table of Contents.                                            skills; community colleges want to prepare students
     List of Illustrations.                                        to enter the local workforce. What skills are in
                                                                   demand in your community? What courses at what
     Executive Summary or Abstract.
                                                                   levels should the local community college offer?
     Body (Introduction, all information, recommen-                 Improving Sales and Profits. Recommend ways a
     dations). Your instructor may specify a minimum
                                                                    small business in your community can increase sales
       length, a minimum number or kind of sources, and a
                                                                    and profits. Focus on one or more of the following:
      minimum number of visuals.                                    the products or services it offers, its advertising,
      Appendixes if useful or relevant.                            its decor, its location, its accounting methods, its
  3. Your notes and at least one preliminary draft.                cash management, or any other aspect that may be
  Pick one of the following topics.                                keeping the company from achieving its potential.
                                                                   Address your report to the owner of the business.
  1. Improving Customer Service. Many customers
      find that service is getting poorer and workers are          Increasing Student Involvement. How could
      getting ruder. Evaluate the service in a local store,        an organization on campus persuade more of the
                                                        Business and Administrative Communication, Tenth Edition




                                  Chapter 18   Analyzing Information and Writing Reports                           605


students who are eligible to join or to become active          What fringe benefits are offered? What is the corpo-
in its programs? Do students know that it exists?              rate culture? Is the climate nonracist and nonsexist?
Is it offering programs that interest students? Is it          How strong is the company economically? How is
retaining current members? What changes should                 it likely to be affected by current economic, demo-
the organization make? Address your report to the              graphic, and political trends? Address your report
officers of the organization.                                  to the Placement Office on campus; recommend
Evaluating a Potential Employer. What training is              whether it should encourage students to work at
available to new employees? How soon is the aver-              this company.
age entry-level person promoted? How much travel            6. With your instructor’s permission, choose your own
and weekend work are expected? Is there a “busy                topic.
season,” or is the workload consistent year-round?
we
Online Supplements
ee   PROFESSIONAL WRITING




                               & COMMECT
     Connect Plus Business Communications 1 Semester Online Access for Business and Administrative Communication, 10th Edition
         McGraw-Hill Connect™ is a web-based assignment and assessment platform that gives students the
         means to better connect with their coursework, with their instructors, and with the important
         concepts that they will need to know for success now and in the future. With Connect, instructors can
         deliver assignments, quizzes and tests easily online. Students can practice important skills at their own
         pace and on their own schedule.


         GETTING STARTED:
        To get started in Connect, you will need the following:

         1.   Your instructor’s unique Connect URL
               Sample of Connect URL
               http://www.mcgrawhillconnect.com/class/instructorname_section_name


         2.   Connect Access Code
               Using a Print Book? Your access code will appear at the back of the book. Reference
               your Table of Contents for an exact page number.

               Using an eBook? Once you have purchased your Create eBook, you will automatically
               have access to Connect. Simply go to your instructor’s unique URL and sign in using the
               username and password you established when accessing your Create eBook.




         REGISTRATION AND SIGN IN:
                  e   Goto www.mcgrawhillcreate.com/shop.
                  e   Search for the ISBN and select your book.
                  e   Enter your access code.
                  e   Click on Sign In or Register Now.
                  e   Enter your email address.
                            TIP: If you already have a McGraw-Hill account, you will be asked for your
                            password and will not be required to create a new account.
                  e   Goto your instructor's unique site.
                  e   Signin using your username and password
                  e   You are now ready to use Connect.




                                                           Need Help?
                                   Contact us online: www.mcgrawhillconnect.com/support
                                                 Give us a call: 1-800-331-5094
                                                                           Access Code for the Online Supplements     333




 How to access the Online Supplements that accompany your
 McGraw-Hill Create™ book:

     1. Go to https://create.mcgraw-hill.com/shop/
     2. Search for the following ISBN: 9781121587779
     3. Enter the access code listed below
     4. Follow directions to either “Sign in” or “Register”
 Note: Access Code is for one use only. If you did not purchase this book new, then the access code below is no longer valid.



 Access Code:                                9MNY-H8HW-9K4K-QQMD-JVA6


 List of Online Supplements included in this book:

_ ConnectPlus® Business Communications One-Semester Online Access for
  Business and Administrative Communication, 10th Edition
  Instructions: To access this product, get your instructor's UNIQUE CONNECT URL.
 Sign In using the username and password you created on the McGraw-Hill
 Bookstore. You will then have access to Connect Plus.
 http://www.mcgrawhillconnect.com/class/instructorname_section_name
                                          aX        {


             ae




                                                                                                    ISBN-13: 978-1-121-58777-9
                                                                                                    ISBN-10: 1-121-58777-1




              :                                                                                    |  | |
                  ee                                                                                                           il
                                                              ;                                 9 27/8 tome Sie mana           \\)

                                 s                                vo                       )6                     *;




ies   ae




                   iS       oe       ee

                                          ae:




                                                                       y/'


                                                                                                                           #




       “s,              i             :            eo                             {.
                                                   ee
              \
                                               i   Ni                         :
                                           oh           Rao       Ba As           ‘    E        ‘
                                                   HS                  \ fl
