rotessi¢
     g Sk ills
PROFESSIONAL WRITING
        SKILLS

                      a
                       —~.




         A Write It Well Guide


 How to write business letters, e-mails, and other
  business documents that persuade and inform
       clearly, concisely, and professionally




                   Write It Well
Copyright © 2010 by Write It Well
Published by Write It Well
Post Office Box 13098, Oakland, CA 94661
Phone: (510) 655-6477
Fax: (510) 291-9744
www.writeitwell.com


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, except as expressly permitted by the applicable copyright
statutes or in writing by the publisher.


Acknowledgements:
Author: Natasha Terk
Original edition: 1994, Janis Fisher Chan and Diane Lutovich
Book design: Szymon Boniecki
Typography: John Richards
Editor: Christopher Disman

ISBN 13: 9780982447116
Second edition, February 2010

To order this book, visit our website,
www.writeitwell.com, or your favorite bookstore.
Publications by Write It Well include:

      ¢ Writing Performance Reviews: A Write It Well Guide
      ¢ E-Mail: A Write It Well Guide
      ¢ Professional Writing Skills
       ¢ How to Write Reports and Proposals
      e Just Commas
       ¢ Grammar for Grownups

Customized on-site and online training courses include:

       ¢ Writing Performance Objectives and Reviews
       ¢ Effective E-Mail
       ¢ Business Writing
       ¢ Writing Reports and Proposals
       e Grammar Fundamentals


Facilitator kits are available for this title and others.
Please visit www.writeitwell.com for more information.
         Digitized by the Internet Archive
                      in 2024




https://archive.org/details/professionalwrit0000nata
                                      CONTENTS



DTSEEDDCHREC
         UO RU tee Dre eet UNO         I GAT or Ba ives Wye als Sera adie UR                   ka ae iene        ee 1

CNRS
   TS ea        recog      GA       ey cene eine                  eve he RANT ny ee                  aoe cae 5


ISSO Sart aera       PN     SE         Woheiant Rome Cates Salad ECR a                        a          eagle    11


   Pessonm    Develop a-Writing Plan it Six, Steps m5...                           oc   on    ee    ee            11

   DessOn 2 Write tie-First: Fatty          gare sts          ceases ce olen             oe       ae ROM eters 59

   Wesson 3--Use Concise Language ooietite 0b)5.0 eet                              ae + eyes        eons         101

   Lessons: Use Clear Lanouiage..           20 oto At ae seein                    eae    rier A ae         ee    115

   Bessoir on Use Correct Grammars.              «ac 4s Banc                 tae        te ee ee Oe              137


   esson.G: Use Correct Punctuation.               024% ca..ct          ao    ber oe 6 tae aan ere               173


   Hessoncawirie pitective PaMailie            tse            anevaiee ot tine ee aire arene                     217

RESO
  UL COS Beret     Bree oa er Ren   ihre nt oh outegs Mens owties pce    bcp PE     oy AEE                       235
                                                       =


—_
*                                                    oT MR TMON
-

2-9                                     Pay,
»                                   =


                                                           ..   :¢
                                                                                      =           <a
                                                                     beng   he ote hek> Capmany   ae            ~
                                                                                  a                ae
                                                                                                          "i
                                                                                                       —-4 ee




                                                       1° oi akadh
                                                                ~
                                                                   yt        ~~           Y=




                                        i


                            c       2

                   >




             —
             hal                :
         4             <<


                                            —   es

     :
=
_
             ak
                                                                INTRODUCTION


WHY THIS BOOK

Clear communication is one of the most important aspects of any job. You may need to com-
municate in writing with a host of people—for instance, your boss, supervisor, coworkers, mem-
bers, stakeholders, and clients. The purpose of Professional Writing Skills is to help you write
clearly to all of your readers.

The first edition of this book was published in 1997 by Janis Fisher Chan and Diane Lutovich.
While many aspects of the business world have changed since then, clear communication is
more important than ever.


E-mail and other electronic forms of communication have made our written communication
more frequent, making it increasingly important that business writers deliver focused messages.
It's vital to remember that you can never be sure how attentive or how critical your readers are.
As business moves faster and faster, the need for clear, error-free communication grows.


ABOUT THIS BOOK

We've designed Professional Writing Skills: A Write It Well Guide to provide practical informa-
tion, ideas, and strategies for improving your business writing.

You'll find this book helpful whether your workplace is a huge corporation or a small business.
You can benefit from these writing guidelines whether you work in a professional office, a non-
profit organization, an academic institution, or a government agency.

If you write e-mail or any other types of professional documents, the information in this book
will help you communicate more effectively, more efficiently, and more professionally. You'll see
your writing get better results.
2   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




COURSE OBJECTIVES

When you complete this training course, you will be able to:
             Follow a time-tested planning process that will help you think about your reader,
             purpose, and main point; answer the readers’ questions; and organize your infor-
             mation logically
             Write a first draft without a lot of redrafting
             Use concise language that impresses readers with its clarity
             Present a professional image by using correct grammar and punctuation

             Follow e-mail best practices by sending appropriate messages, getting to the point
             quickly and clearly, and crafting attention-getting subject lines

LESSON OVERVIEWS

Each of the seven lessons includes explanations, examples, questions, and activities that are de-
signed to help you write more effectively and efficiently.

Here’s a quick look at what's in the book:

Lesson I:    Develop a Writing Plan in Six Steps
             Thoughtful preparation makes any document more effective. Your writing benefits
             when you put yourself in your readers’ shoes, and when you organize the informa-
             tion you present. This lesson outlines six steps to develop a writing plan for e-mail
             messages, reports, proposals, marketing materials, and more.

Lesson 2:    Write the First Draft
             The six-step planning method will propel you forward through the first draft of any
             written communication. In this lesson, you'll learn to present this information, tran-
             sition from one topic to another, and format your message for the reader.

Lesson 3:    Use Concise Language
             Long-winded writing can be confusing, and it implies that you do not value your
             readers’ time. This lesson helps you identify and avoid sentence clutter, avoid repeti-
             tion, and eliminate unnecessary words in your writing.


Lesson 4:    Use Clear Language
             Your readers may stop paying attention to your documents if they find your lan-
             guage vague or confusing. This lesson helps you write active, specific, straightfor-
             ward sentences that your readers will grasp easily.
                                                                                  INTRODUCTION     3




Lesson 5:   Use Correct Grammar
            Incorrect grammar can reduce your and your organization's credibility. This lesson
            presents widely accepted and easy-to-use grammar and style guidelines to apply to
            your business documents.

Lesson 6:   Use Correct Punctuation
            Incorrect punctuation can give your readers an impression of carelessness. This les-
            son lays out punctuation rules that many business writers either neglect or have
            forgotten.

Lesson 7:   Write Effective E-Mail
            E-mail is a vital way we communicate with coworkers, customers, and clients. Learn
            how to write clear, concise, appropriate e-mail that quickly conveys the information
            people need. This lesson will help you convey a consistent professional image and
            get results from the messages you send.

BEFORE YOU BEGIN

Here are a few things to keep in mind as you work through this book:

USE THE BOOK THE WAY IT WORKS FOR YOU. You might use it as a workbook, scribbling in the
margins and using the Notes pages at the end of each lesson to record your own ideas. Or you
might use the Table of Contents to jump right to the topic that is of most interest to you.

THINK ABOUT WHAT YOURE READING. We've included questions to help you think about the
material and suggested ways you can apply what you learn. Twenty-five years’ experience work-
ing with adult learners helped us create job-relevant exercises and activities.

YOU CAN USE THIS BOOK FOR TRAINING. If you're a manager, human resources professional,
trainer, or team leader, you can distribute this book to anyone in your organization who
writes for work, or you can use the book as the material for a workshop. (See our website,
www.writeitwell.com, for information about our facilitator kits, or contact Write It Well for
information about how wed use the book to deliver a workshop to your staff.)

SCHEDULE TIME TO COMPLETE THE COURSE. If you're going through the book on your own,
be sure to schedule time to work on it. Depending on how quickly you work, each lesson will
take between 30 and 60 minutes to complete. Turn off your e-mail, close your office door, re-
serve a conference room, find a quiet space, or do whatever you need to do to focus on reading
and completing the exercises and activities in the book. Give yourself a deadline for completing
the course. It’s best to complete the entire course within four weeks.
4   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




MAKE IT JOB-RELEVANT. As you work through this course you'll be guided through the plan-
ning and drafting of your own work-related document, so start thinking about something you
need to write. You'll be able to check something off of your to-do list when you’ve finished this
course. Busy professionals learn best by this “learn by doing” approach.

COLLECT WRITING SAMPLES. Before you begin Lesson 1, collect three samples of your writing.
If possible, find samples of writing you’ve done within the last six months. Your discoveries will
inform the way you write in the future.

Let's start by looking at the purpose of business and professional writing.
                                                                                 OVERVIEW


THE PURPOSE OF BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL WRITING

Business writing is unique. It is distinguished from other types of writing by its content, its form,
and its purpose. For example, the purpose of fiction is to create a world, based on reality or not,
in which readers can experience such feelings as fear, amusement, loneliness, suspense, joy, and
adventure.

             The great Pullman was whirling onward with such dignity of motion
             that a glance from the window seemed simply to prove that the plains
             of Texas were pouring eastward. Vast flats of green grass, dull-hued
             spaces of mesquite and cactus, groups of frame houses, woods of
             light and tender trees, all were sweeping into the east over the hori-
             zon, a precipice.

                                    from Stephen Crane’s short story
                                    “The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky”

The purpose of an essay is to analyze or interpret a situation.
             A few years ago | wrote a book which dealt in part with the difficulties
             of the English in India. Feeling that they would have had no difficulties
             in India themselves, the Americans read the book freely. The more
             they read it the better it made them feel, and a cheque to the author
             was the result. | bought a wood with the cheque. It is not a large
             wood-—it contains scarcely any trees, and it is intersected, blast it, by
             a public footpath. Still, it is the first property that | have owned, so it
             is right that other people should participate in my shame, and should
             ask themselves, in accents that will vary in horror, this very important
             question: What is the effect of property upon the character?

                                    from E. M. Forster’s essay “My Wood”
6   PROFESSIONAL    WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




The purpose of personal writing is to express personal experiences, needs, feelings, or
expectations.

                Dear Mom,

                I’m sorry | forgot your birthday. October came so fast this year—|
                hadn’t even realized summer was over. | hope it was a happy day, and
                that you were not too hurt when | didn’t call.

                                                                  Love,
                                                                  Your son


But what is the purpose of business writing? Read the following e-mail, and then briefly describe
its purpose.

                TO:             Data Processing Managers
                SUBJECT:        Delays in Data Processing

                There’s a problem with the Data Processing group, and as a manager,
                you can help solve it.

                The group has failed to meet its deadlines for the past several
                months, and this failure is causing delays and confusion throughout
                the organization. Please take the following steps:

                e   Make sure your team members read the Data Processing Organizational
                    Format

                e   Make sure they follow the format and do not duplicate one another’s efforts

                e   Ensure that each member understands the other members’ responsibilities
                    so that any one person can fill in for another when needed

                When reporting any problems, follow the procedures on page 603 of
                the Manager’s Handbook.

                If you have questions or other suggestions, please call.


I think the purpose of this e-mail is




The purpose of professional writing is to help people conduct business by providing them with
information they need.
                                                                                       OVERVIEW    7




To accomplish its purpose, business writing must be easy to understand. In fact, the best way to
determine whether a business document is well written is to take the reader’s point of view. Try
that now.

Imagine you are one of the staff members who received this e-mail. Read it and then complete
the exercise on the next page.

            FROM:        Department Manager
            TO:          Customer Service Staff
            SUBJECT:     E-Mail Response

            We are very fortunate to be in an industry that is expanding. FLEC
            is the leader in our industry, we are the largest manufacturer of helix
            type FRT’s in the world. There is no reason to be complacent, as the
            competition is working hard to catch up. We must continue to opti-
            mize our opportunities. Again, | want to thank you and keep up the
            good work.

            Customer service will continue to be important and we have received
            a larger number of e-mails than in prior months. Some of the ques-
            tions about the product are difficult to answer and | understand that
            it takes some time to figure out who is the right salesperson for each
            of the clients. | have heard complaints, however, from customers, that
            they got an automated response from the system but didn’t hear back
            from a sales rep for almost a week. That is unacceptable because our
            policy is different. | followed up on a couple of these complaints and
            it looks like our team has been slow to get the messages to the right
            sales rep. | know that there is a lot going on, but we have a high work
            load and need to be as productive as possible.

            If you can’t find the right rep, you need to come to talk to me about it
            because we need to improve these numbers. Our customer service
            guidelines state that anyone who writes should get a personalized
            message within 24 hours, so let me know if that’s a problem. | would
            like to thank each of you for the extra effort that you have expended
            as a result of the heavy work load.
8   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




EXERCISE

     1. State the writer’s main point in one sentence.




         L] I’m not sure what the writer’s main point is.

     2. Did you have to reread the e-mail to understand what the writer was trying to say?

                                                EReYES*        “EI™NoO

     3. What is your image of the person who wrote this e-mail?




                               Turn the page for a discussion of the e-mail.
                                                                                        OVERVIEW   9




ANSWERS

        You may have had difficulty identifying the writer's main point—it’s not clearly stated,
        and what is there is buried in the middle of the e-mail.

        Here are two possible main points:
        m     “You must connect the customer to their sales rep within 24 hours.”
        m     “Thanks for your extra effort.”

        It would be very difficult to understand this e-mail without rereading it, and that’s a
        waste of time. Writers are responsible for presenting information so readers only have to
        read it once.

        Whatever your image of this writer, it’s probably not the image that the writer would like
        to project. The impression is of someone who is disorganized and unfocused—or who
        has trouble expressing what he or she wants to say. The writer doesn’t seem to have spent
        much time on the e-mail, implying that it isn’t very important. And if it isn’t important,
        why should you bother reading it?

Suppose you were asked to help this writer. Use the space below to list suggestions you would
make to help the person write more clearly. The first one is done for you.

        This is my advice for the writer:

            ¢ State the main point clearly, right at the beginning
10   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




CRITERIA FOR EFFECTIVE BUSINESS WRITING

For business writing to be effective, the writer must:
         ™    State the main point clearly, right at the beginning
         @    Organize information logically
         m@   Leave out unnecessary information

         m™ Use short sentences and paragraphs
         @    Eliminate unnecessary words
         @    Include all necessary information
         m    Use active, precise language and plain English
         m™ Use correct grammar, punctuation, and spelling

Now you have a list of standards for your writing to meet. During this course, you’ll learn to
develop business writing that meets these standards.
                                                                                                      11




                                DEVELOP                A WRITING PLAN IN
                                                                SIX STEPS


OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn six effective steps for planning any professional document.

WHAT      YOU NEED

          m™ ‘Two or three samples of your writing

In Lesson 1 of this course, you'll learn a six-step process to help you plan your writing logically
and efficiently. Each step is carefully designed to move you toward a finished product that says
what you want it to say.

Here are the six steps:

    ite   Think about what you're going to write from the reader’s point of view.

    2.    Decide what you want to accomplish: is your primary purpose to influence readers or
          to inform them?

          Compose a key sentence that expresses your most important message.

          List the facts and ideas that will accomplish your purpose.

          Group points into categories.

          Introduce the points you'll make.
12   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE    IT WELL   GUIDE




Professional writers tend to allocate their time by the percentages in this chart. What do you no-
tice about it?

                                                The Value of Planning
                                          % of Time            Activity
                                                       5       Think about readers
                                                       5       Think about purpose
                                                       5       Identify main point(s)
                                                      20       Select information to include
                                                      20       Organize information

                                                      20    ~~Write quick first draft
                                                      20       Revise and edit
                                                       5       Proof and correct


You might notice that professional writers spend more time planning their document than they
do writing. If you're busy at work, you might think that you don’t have time to spend on plan-
ning, but planning will save you time later.

As in the following example, we have all read material by writers who lose us at some point in
the document—sometimes from the first few words. Read this excerpt:

              Some of the current problems that have been experienced with the
              current PDCS process/system that have been highlighted are (1)
              Process/system has become antiquated and inefficient, (2) this means
              it currently takes 30 minutes to process a claim, this time can be
              extended substantially in the case that information has been purged
              from source. (3) Limited reporting functionalities preventing full visibil-
              ity to past and current claims. The system is in need of updating. Your
              feedback on this would be appreciated ASAP.


Obviously, this writer didn’t take much time to think about what he or she wanted to communi-
cate. What do you think the writer was trying to communicate?
                                                             1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   13
                                                    LESSON




Here's one potential revision:

             Please give us approval to update the PCDS system, which is
             antiquated and inefficient. An updated system will allow us to
             streamline claims processing and store documentation so users can
             access it quickly and easily.

                                                                                                 are some of
See how much clearer this message is when the writer takes time for planning? What
the benefits of planning?




                                 Turn the page to see some benefits.
14   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are some of the benefits you may have listed:
         @   Fewer miscommunications
         m   Less time spent clarifying
         m@ Less time spent rewriting
         ™   More positive and more professional image
         ™   Getting the results you want

In the Overview you learned that successful business writing meets specific criteria. In this les-
son, you'll learn a step-by-step process to guarantee that your writing meets those criteria. By
following this process, you develop a plan for an e-mail, a report, or another document that
communicates effectively.

You would never build a house without blueprints. You also need a plan when you write. A writ-
ing blueprint makes it possible to get started easily, decide what information to include, and end
up with a useful product: a piece of writing your readers can understand easily and quickly.

Now youre ready to start learning the six steps for planning any written communication.
                                                        LESSON     1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   RS




STEP     1.
               THINK       ABOUT          WHAT     YOU’ RE GOING                 TO WRITE
                     FROM       YOUR       READERS’       POINT          OF VIEW.
                    SONI   NI   NI   NF   I   NI   IN    I   Nef   NIN           cl




Communication is a two-way process. It takes place when the message you send has been re-
ceived—and understood—by the person at the other end.

When youre face to face with people, it’s easy to know when they aren't getting your mes-
sage. Furrowed eyebrows, a vacant look, restlessness, questions—all are signs that listeners are
confused.

Here's a common situation. Jillian has just started an important project. She will need several key
pieces of information from Alan, who works in another division of her company. She sends Alan
a detailed e-mail explaining what she needs and when she needs it.

As long as Alan understands her message, he will probably send the information—or at least let
her know if he can't.

But what if Jillian’s message is confusing? List some ways Jillian might know that Alan did not
understand what she meant.

    ie

    2

    3.

    4.


If Jillian's message is not clear, Alan might send the wrong information or might not respond
at all. Or he might have to call Jillian to ask what she meant. Jillian would have wasted valuable
time—hers and Alans.

Writers sometimes fail to communicate clearly because they haven't stopped to consider their
readers. Will readers be interested in the information? Do readers know anything about the
subject? Will the message make readers uncomfortable? It’s important to answer these kinds of
questions before starting to write.

One of the most important steps you can take to increase the chances of a reader's getting your
message is to look at what youre writing from the reader's point of view.
16   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Depending on what you're writing, readers may be very interested in the subject, only slightly
interested, or not interested at all. They may agree or disagree with your message. They may
accept you as an authority on the subject, or they may not have the slightest idea how much ex-
pertise you have. They may know as much as you know about the subject, or they may not know
anything about it. All these factors can affect their responses.

By thinking about your readers’ needs and interests, you can usually identify some predictable
reactions before you start writing. Keeping these reactions in mind, you can try to overcome po-
tential resistance, answer questions readers might have, and even increase your credibility.




Here are some typical writing situations. Check one that is real and current for you.

         I am writing to influence my reader to:

         @   Adjust my bill
         ™   Correct a problem
         m@ Hire more staff
         m™ Change a procedure
         @   Other:


         Iam writing to inform my reader about:
         m@ A special assignment I have completed
         m@ A business conference | attended
         m   ‘The status of a current project

             Other:
                                                       LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS   17




After you've chosen the situation, write the name of the person who would receive the written
communication here. (If you have more than one reader, list their names or describe the group:
e.g., my clients.”)

        READER’S NAME:


Now try to get a clear picture of your reader by asking and answering some of the questions
listed below. Add others that you think might be important.

        IS THE READER...

           Expecting to hear from me?
           Familiar with this subject?
           Already interested in what I have to say?
           Likely to consider me an authority on the subject?
           Likely to find what I have to say useful?
            Familiar with my views on this subject?
           Already committed to a point of view?
            Likely to agree with my point of view?
            Likely to find my message uncomfortable or threatening?
            Other:




Never skip this step. Remember, you are writing because you need to communicate something
specific to another person or persons. To determine what information to include and to convey
that information clearly, you must first focus on your reader(s).


Hint    What if you don't know your reader? Consider what you do know about him or her. Is
        the person a decision maker? Busy? Likely to receive many e-mails or documents like
        yours each week? Does the person need your business? A few educated guesses can help
        you focus even on readers you've never met.
18   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL    GUIDE




STEP 2.
     DECIDE         WHAT       YOU       WANT        TO ACCOMPLISH:                       IS YOUR   PRIMARY
        PURPOSE          TO INFLUENCE                   READERS                   OR TO INFORM      THEM?
        —v PDO           DO    OOOO                   esnmn nanirn_—=—=na—_—"n   OOOO   OOOO   OSS




To get results, you must clarify exactly what you want to accomplish. Then you will be able to
state your most important message clearly.

Your primary purpose for writing always falls into one of two categories: to influence your read-
er to do something, or to inform your reader about something.

As you read the following e-mail, try to decide whether this writer’s primary purpose for writing
is to influence his reader or to inform her.

              FROM:             Michael Bellows
              ©:                Diane Anderson
              SUBJEGI:          Annual Sales Conference

              | would like you to consider moving this year’s sales conference to the
              Horizons Resort Hotel in Marina.

              Horizons, which has all the facilities we need, has offered us an excel-
              lent package (I’ve enclosed details). Marina is centrally located and
              is served by all the major airlines. If we sign a contract by January
              15, Horizons will give us an additional ten-percent discount on room
              rates.

              Let me know if you need more information. I’d like to confirm confer-
              ence plans by the end of next week.


What do you think the primary purpose of this message is?
         |] INFORM

         L] INFLUENCE


Michael's primary purpose was to influence Diane to do something: move the sales conference
to the Horizons Resort Hotel in Marina.
                                                     LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS   19




Now read this e-mail and see if you can tell whether the writer’s primary purpose is to influence
the reader to do something or to inform the reader about something.

            FROM:         Eileen McGuigo
            HAG),         George Blocker
            SUBJECT:    — Three-Shift Coverage in Processing

            For the last several weeks, we have been provided with three-shift
            coverage in the Processing Department. Company employees have
            covered the day shift and swing shift. A temporary employee has
            been covering the night shift. The third shift was covered on a trial
            basis and is scheduled to end this week. This has been satisfactory
            and should be continued.

You might have concluded that Eileen’s primary purpose was to influence George to keep the
temporary worker on the night shift. Perhaps you decided the purpose was to inform George
about the way the department has been covered for the last three weeks. Or you may not have
been able to identify Eileen’s primary purpose.

What would you do if you received that e-mail? You might scan it quickly, and then delete it
without hesitating. It has no sense of urgency and no apparent usefulness.

Here’s another version of the e-mail. Now can you identify Eileen’s primary purpose?

            FROM:         Eileen McGuigo
            TO;           George Blocker
            SUBJECT:    — Three-Shift Coverage in Processing

            | recommend continuing our three-shift coverage. It has been working
            out very well in the Processing Department.

            By having company employees cover the day and swing shifts and by
            hiring a temporary employee for the night shift, we have met all our
            deadlines and made the most efficient use of employees’ time.

             Please let me know what you decide.

In the second version of the e-mail, you can easily see the writer wants to encourage the reader
to continue three-shift coverage in the Processing Department. The primary message is right
there in the first paragraph.
20   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




AN IMPORTANT REMINDER: You often have more than one purpose when you write. But if
the purposes have equal weight, they can end up competing with one another for the reader's at-
tention. It is essential to make one purpose primary.

It’s a little like taking photographs. When amateurs use a camera, they often try to get everything
and everybody in the frame. The result? A confusing picture in which it’s hard to see what the
photographer found interesting or worthwhile.

A skilled photographer, on the other hand, makes sure that the most important subject domi-
nates the picture. The viewer’s eye is drawn to the subject, no matter how many other people or
objects are in the frame.

When you write, help the reader focus on the most important Poi by determining your pri-
mary purpose for writing.

Here are some examples:

         You write primarily to INFLUENCE readers when you write
         ™   an e-mail asking the head office to approve your request for a new computer
         ™ a proposal urging a prospective client to hire your firm for a consulting project

         You write primarily to INFORM readers when you write
         m™ a message to a client explaining the reasons for canceling an insurance policy
         ™@ a report detailing the results of a research project
                                                    LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS   21




Here are two messages on the same subject. Notice how easy it is to see the writer’s purpose in
each message.

EXAMPLE         1: Influence the reader to agree to be the keynote speaker

            Dear Ms. Layton:

            | know you are very busy, but we would be delighted if you would
            agree to be the Keynote Speaker at the first meeting of Mountain
            Climbers Anonymous.

            Our members would love hearing about your struggles with the
            obsession to scale great heights. | know your experience and
            perspectives will be of great value to us.

            The meeting will be held on Thursday, October 11, at 6:30 p.m. at the
            Tiptop Cafe. Please let me know by August 31 whether you will be
            available to speak.


EXAMPLE 2: Inform readers about the first meeting

            Dear Mr. Williams:

            The first meeting of Mountain Climbers Anonymous will be held on
            Thursday, October 11, at 6:30 p.m. at the Tiptop Cafe.

            Our Keynote Speaker will be Ms. Marybeth Layton, who will share
            with us her own struggle to overcome the obsession to scale great
            heights.

            If you plan to attend, we need your reservation form by September 16
            So we can order dinner. We hope to see you at the meeting.
22   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

         Read each message and identify its primary purpose.


              Alicia—

              I’d like to suggest that you prepare and distribute an agenda several
              days before each monthly meeting.

              Without an agenda, people waste time coming to meetings they really
              don’t have to attend. Also, people come unprepared to discuss issues
              because they don’t know in advance what will be covered.

              I’ll be glad to help in any way | can—just let me know.


               PRIMARY PURPOSE:                             L] INFLUENCE   L] INFORM



             TO: Planning Committee Members
             RE: Monthly Planning Meeting, August 12

              Here’s the agenda for our next meeting. I’ve listed the issues we’re
              discussing so you can come prepared.

             If you’re not involved in any of the areas on the agenda, you may skip
             this meeting, but please call me if you do not plan to attend.


               PRIMARY PURPOSE:                             L] INFLUENCE   L] INFORM
                                                     LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS   23




ANSWERS

            Alicia—

            I’d like to suggest that you prepare and distribute an agenda several
            days before each monthly meeting.

            Without an agenda, people waste time coming to meetings they really
            don’t have to attend. Also, people come unprepared to discuss issues
            because they don’t know in advance what will be covered.

            l’ll be glad to help in any way | can—just let me know.


             PRIMARY PURPOSE:                      INFLUENCE                  L] INFORM


        The writer's primary purpose is to influence Alicia to prepare and distribute an agenda
        before the monthly meetings.



            TO: Planning Committee Members
            RE: Monthly Planning Meeting, August 12

            Here’s the agenda for our next meeting. I’ve listed the issues we’re
            discussing so you can come prepared.

            If you’re not involved in any of the areas on the agenda, you may skip
            this meeting, but please call me if you do not plan to attend.


             PRIMARY PURPOSE:                  L] INFLUENCE                       INFORM



        The writer's primary purpose is to inform committee members of the agenda for the
        meeting.




The purpose is clear in these e-mails because the writers took the time to decide whether they
wanted to influence or to inform readers.
24      PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                      Assignment

Look at your own writing. Read each sample and decide if your primary purpose was to influ-
ence readers to do something, or to inform them about something.

Do you think your purpose was clear to your readers? If not, make a mental note to determine
your primary purpose the next time you write.




©8024   e000




Here are some typical writing situations. Check one that is real and current for you.

               I am writing to influence my reader to:

                  Adjust my bill
                  Correct a problem
                  Hire more staff
                  Change a procedure
                  Other:


               I am writing to inform my reader about:
                  A special assignment I have completed
                  A business conference I attended
                  The status of a current project
                  Other:
                                                       LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   25




STEP 3.
                COMPOSE          A KEY         SENTENCE        THAT       EXPRESSES
                        YOUR         MOST      IMPORTANT            MESSAGE.
                       Ne      Nee   Nn   eI   Nee   OO     Nil     eal    CeO   eat




Think of your key sentence as the one youd shout if you had three seconds to get your most im-
portant message across to someone driving by.

In a well-written document, the sentence carrying the most important message should be so
clear that the reader can easily identify it.

Which of the documents below has a clear key sentence?

                                               DOCUMENT    A

            Dear Mr. Weller:

            Safety is our number-one concern and our safety record shows that
            we are all trained well. There is a lot of traffic on the block of Jefferson
            Street between South Main and Mission. The street sees heavy traffic
            very regularly, yet its current condition is a safety hazard. The street
            should probably be widened. That would have tremendous benefits
            and we can get the job done. A night permit would allow us to start
            right away.


                                               DOCUMENT    B

            Dear Mr. Weller:

            My construction company is asking for a noise permit to allow night
            work on the block of Jefferson Street between South Main and
            Mission. The street sees heavy traffic very regularly, yet its current
            condition is a safety hazard.

            Widening the street would have tremendous benefits, and we are
            ready to work day and night to make the necessary repairs.

            We hope to begin work as soon as possible. If you have any ques-
            tions, please contact me at my office.
26   PROFESSIONAL    WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




The key sentence in Document B jumps right out, doesn't it? All key sentences should be this
easy to find:

                Dear Mr. Weller:

                My construction company is asking for a noise permit to allow
                night work on the block of Jefferson Street between South Main
                and Mission. The street sees heavy traffic very regularly, yet its cur-
                rent condition is a safety hazard.


But what about Document A? The purpose is obviously to influence, but the message has no
clear key sentence, leaving it up to the reader to figure out what the writer wants him or her to
do. That document may not get results.

Writers often fail to include a clear key sentence because they either
         m      haven't decided what they want to say
         m      hesitate to state their main point directly

But readers are busy people. They don't have time to guess what you mean to say. It is your job to
express your most important message clearly. You must be willing to take the time to compose a
key sentence that is clear and complete.

EXAMPLES          OF KEY SENTENCES

                                         WRITING TO INFLUENCE


         I want my reader to do something:

         ™      Give mea   20 percent raise

         m™ Reduce your fee by half
         @      Build a swimming pool at the new facility

                                            WRITING TO INFORM


         I want my reader to know something:

         =      ‘The project I'm coordinating will be finished by May 19
         ®      [am sorry to tell you that your application for a loan has been denied
         m      ‘The needs assessment we conducted indicates that two-thirds of your staff would
                benefit from writing skills training
                                                      LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   27




        In the Active Language section of Lesson 4: Use Clear Language, you'll learn
        how to develop key sentences that are more engaging, direct, and strong.




It is important to include your most important message, but more importantly, you must express
this main point as specifically and directly as possible.

In each situation below, the writer wants to influence the reader to do something. For each situ-
ation, write a key sentence that says clearly what the writer wants the reader to do. Feel free to
invent information if you need to.

        SITUATION: Employees are parking in the visitor lot instead of the employee lot, taking
        up all the spaces reserved for clients.




        SITUATION: You collect timecards on the first Friday of the month for the work complet-
        ed for the prior month. About half of the contractors send the reports about a week late,
        and you can't bill the client until all the reports are in. The policy is that contract workers
        can't get paid until the client has been billed. If people sent the report in on time, your
        manager wouldn't be calling you all the time and the accounting office would be able to
        manage project billing much better.
28   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Your key sentences probably resemble these. If yours are very different, be sure they clearly ex-
press what the writer wants the reader to do.

              All employees should park in the employees’ lot instead of the
              visitors’ lot.

              To get paid for your work last month, you must complete your
              timecards by Friday.


Clear key sentences make it much more likely that your writing will get results, The key sen-
tences you just composed were for situations where the writers want to influence readers to do
something. Key sentences read a little differently when your primary purpose is to inform read-
ers about something.

Read the example below. Find and underline the key sentence or most important message in the
following example.

                                   PRIMARY         PURPOSE:       TO INFORM

              TO: Staff

              RE: Holiday Party

              The Holiday Party will be held on December 16 at the Redwood
              Lodge from noon to 5:00 p.m.

              The sign-up sheet will be posted in the cafeteria by Friday. This year,
              we’re asking everyone to bring a few cans of food for the food drive
              instead of gifts.

              If you have questions, please call Miriam Belladora at Extension 403.
              We hope you and your family can attend.


Did you underline the first sentence in the message? If so, you found the key sentence.
                                                        LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS   29




Notice that when you're writing to inform, your key sentence or most important message may
actually be a statement of one to three sentences, as shown in the example.

                                PRIMARY       PURPOSE:     TO INFORM

            Dear Clients:

            On June 15, | am beginning a three-month leave. While I’m away,
            my associate, Annabel Leong, will be managing my projects.

            Before | leave, Annabel and | will do the following to make sure that
            everything runs smoothly:

             e    We will review the status of all projects and meet with the project teams.

             e    During the last two weeks of May, Annabel will call each of you to introduce
                  herself and answer any questions you may have.

             ¢    | will provide Annabel with all the project files so she can answer questions
                  and resolve any problems that might come up.

             I’ve enclosed Annabel’s contact info. You can reach her by phone or
             e-mail.

             | look forward to working with you again when | return in September.



PRACTICE

If you have your own writing samples, take them out now. Read each sample and underline your
key sentence: the one that tells the reader precisely what to do or what to know.

If you cannot find a key
EES ACO SRE ONE:                  NOTE If youre writing to inform, keep in mind that your key
Promise yourself to in-           sentence may actually be a two- or three-sentence statement.
clude a clear key sentence
ERE              VOU MTS:         Hint     You have probably noticed that there is a close rela-
                                           tionship between the key sentence and the primary
                                           writing purpose. If you have trouble composing a
                                           key sentence, ask yourself if you have really decided
                                           whether your primary purpose is to influence or to
                                           inform.
30   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




EXERCISE

For this assignment, complete the first part of a writing plan for a current writing situation of
your own. Do the following:

     1. Think of an e-mail, message, or short report you need to write. If nothing comes to
        mind, consider one of these topics:
         B®   Convince your lawyer, doctor, accountant, etc., to reduce his or her fees for a spe-
              cific service or visit

         =    Encourage your manager to make a particular purchase for your department
         m    Suggest a change in the way a procedure is carried out at your place of work

     2. Now, go to page 91 and use one of the Writing Worksheets. Notice that the Worksheet
         includes all six steps of the writing process. For this assignment, however, complete only
         Steps 1, 2, and 3.

Now you've learned the first three steps to take when you write: consider your readers’ point of
view, decide what you want to accomplish, and state your main point clearly.

Next you'll learn the rest of the planning process:
         ®    Select the information to include
         @    Organize information logically

By the time you've finished Steps 1, 2, and 3 of your writing plan, you've gone a long way toward
making sure your writing communicates clearly and effectively.

You have a pretty good idea about how readers are likely to respond to your message. You know
whether your primary purpose is to influence readers or to inform them. And you have already
put your most important message into words—what you want your readers to do or to know.

The steps you'll learn now will take you through the processes of selecting the right informa-
tion to influence or inform readers, and organizing that information so readers can follow your
points easily.

When you have completed all six steps of the writing plan, you will have a logical, effective
structure for the specific piece you are writing. Moving from plan to first draft will be easy. You
won't have to think about how to get started, or what you want to say, or how you should orga-
nize your facts and ideas. You will have taken those steps already.
                                                          LESSON   1       DEVELOP    A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   31




EXAMPLE


         SITUATION: The writer, Sue, knows someone who would be perfect for the position of
         administrator in her friend Pete Starkey’s company. Sue knows Pete has been swamped
         with applications, and she really wants him to consider her colleague.

Here are Steps 1 through 3 of Sue's writing plan:

    1. Sue looks at what she’s going to write from her readers’ point of view:

                      Pete is not expecting to hear from Sue, considers her knowledgeable, needs
                      the information, and is very busy. He is anxious to fill the position, and
                      wants to interview only three candidates.

    2. Sue knows that her primary purpose is to influence Pete.

    3. Sue composes a key sentence that expresses what she wants Pete to do:

                      “Hire Gail Schacter to fill the new administrative position in your
                      company.”

    4.   Sue lists the facts and ideas to accomplish her purpose—all the reasons she can think of
         to answer Pete’s obvious question, “Why should I hire Gail Schacter?”

         @   leader                                                    @    reports are accurate
         @   strong team member                                        @    tactful
         @   self-starter                                              ™    encourages others to do their
         m   friendly                                                       pest
                                                                       H    conscientious
         ™@ good sense of humor
                                                                       @    sensitive
         ™   communicates clearly
                                                                            does not need to be told what
         ™   finishes what she starts
                                                                            to do
         ™   gives credit where due                                             '
                                                                       @    revised procedures manuals on
         ™   represents company well                                        her own

         = high management potential                                   B never loses sight of big picture
         ™   attentive to detail
32   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




     5. Sue groups the points on her list into categories and decides what information belongs
        in which category. She comes up with five categories, or key points:
         m@ high management potential
         ™   conscientious

         m@ strong team member
         @   self-starter
         ™   represents company well

     6. Sue writes a summary sentence for each key point and puts the sentences in the order
        she thinks will be most effective. Under each sentence, she lists the points she plans to
        include in that category.

         Pete should hire Sue's friend because:
                  She has high management potential
                           — leader
                           — communicates clearly
                           — never loses sight of big picture
                  She is a self-starter
                           — does not need to be told what to do
                           — revised procedures manual on her own
                  She is conscientious
                           — attentive to detail
                           — reports are accurate
                           — finishes what she starts
                    She is a strong team member
                              — gives credit where due
                            — encourages others to do their best
                    She represents the company well
                            — tactful
                              — friendly
                              — sensitive
                              — good sense of humor




                       On the next page you will see the e-mail that Sue wrote.
                                                          LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS




Notice that Sue only had to add an opening, a few transitions, and a closing to transform her
writing plan into a finished message.

               Dear Pete:

               | heard that you’re trying to fill the new administrative position in your
               department. Look no further—I have the perfect person for the job. |
               strongly recommend that you hire my colleague, Gail Schacter.

               | have always felt that Gail has high management potential. A
               strong leader who communicates clearly, she never loses sight of the
               big picture. Those are qualities the person you hire needs to have.

               Gail has shown herself to be a true self-starter who needs little
               direction. She finds out what needs doing and gets it done. We were
               very pleased by the way she took it upon herself to revise our outdat-
               ed procedures manual; the manual now serves as a model for other
               departments.

               You’ll quickly discover that Gail is very conscientious. She is at-
               tentive to detail and her reports are always accurate because she
               takes the time to check her facts carefully. | have noticed that once
               she starts a project, she stays with it until it is completed to her
               satisfaction.

               Another of Gail’s attributes should be of particular interest to you:
               she’s a very strong team member. Time after time | have seen her
               encourage others to do their best, and she is always quick to give
               credit where credit is due.

               Finally, because the position requires working with the public, you’ll
               want to know that Gail represents the company well. Tactful, friend-
               ly, and sensitive to others, she also has a great sense of humor—and
               knows when to use it.

               I’ve enclosed Gail’s resume and urge you to give her your serious
               consideration. She’d be a valuable addition to your staff.


At the end of this lesson, you'll practice these steps by developing a writing plan for a situation
of your own.
34   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL    GUIDE




STEP 4.
                        LIST THE         FACTS         AND         IDEAS   THAT   WILL
                                 ACCOMPLISH                 YOUR      PURPOSE.
                                PL       LO     LOO   IO   OOO      IT     eer




When you start to write something, you usually have a general idea about what information to
include. But you still have to determine exactly what facts and ideas readers need to hear before
they may feel convinced, or fully informed.

Start by writing down every fact or idea that might influence or inform your readers. This is a
brainstorming process, similar to the one you've probably used with your team to come up with
creative solutions to problems.

The key is giving yourself permission to write down every point that comes to mind when you
ask yourself two basic questions:

         WRITING        TO INFLUENCE
             WHY should readers do what I want them to do?


         WRITING        TO INFORM
             WHAT do readers need to know?


At this stage of the planning process, it’s very important to write quickly without blocking the
flow of ideas by evaluating items on your list. In Step 5, you'll decide which items to keep and
which to throw out.


PRACTICE

Try this process yourself with a simple practice situation for Steps 1-4. Imagine that you’re an
auto dealer replying to an e-mail with a question from a young couple. They don’t know much
about cars, and would like to buy their first new car.

You've met with them once and know that they care about fuel efficiency, want a car with an in-
tegrated hands-free phone device, and that the young man injured his back and wants a car with
a very comfortable front seat. You think one model at your dealership might be perfect for them.
Their e-mail gives you a chance to write back and tell them why.
                                                 LESSON   1       DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   35



                                          STEPS 1-3

1   Look at what you're going to write from your readers’ point of view. In this case, imagine
    youre the salesperson, but put yourself in the readers’ shoes. Here’s a list of questions
    you should consider before you write anything.

    ARE THE READERS...

    ™   expecting to hear from you?                           @    familiar with your views on the
    @   familiar with the subject?                                 subject?
                                                              @    already committed to a point of
    @   already interested in what you                              ;
                                                                   view?
        have to say?
                                                              @    likely to agree with your point
    ™@ likely to consider you an author-
                                                                   of view?
       ity on the subject?
                                                          @        likely to find your message
    @   likely to find what you have to
                                                                   uncomfortable?
        say useful?


    Decide what you want to accomplish:
    @   INFLUENCE the readers to buy the car, OR

    @   INFORM the readers about the car’s features


    In this situation, there is definitely something you want your reader to do—buy the car.
    So it’s more effective if your primary purpose is to influence your reader.

    Compose a key sentence that says exactly what you want the reader to do:

        I want my reader to


    Your key sentence should clearly state what you want your reader to do: “You should
    consider buying model _____ from our dealership.”




                        Step 4 of the Practice is on the next page.
36   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                          STEP 4

     4.   List the facts and ideas that will accomplish your purpose.

          Now youre ready to collect information that will influence your reader to buy the car
          from you. Remember to keep your readers’ point of view in mind and look for points that
          will be of direct interest to them.

          Which of the following thoughts are likely to be influential? Put an X beside each
          thought that might not sway the reader.
          —
              “The model includes the Bluetooth hands-free cellphone link I remember they
              mentioned.”
              “This model gets excellent mileage.”
              “T want to sell more cars this month than another coworker.’

              “This model’s seats are unusually comfortable.”
              “Tt is inside the price range they mentioned.”
              “This is one of our more expensive models.”
          (Es “They would be safer in this model than the cars made by another company they
          8
          a
              mentioned when I met them.”

          If you put an X beside “This is one of our more expensive models” and “I want to sell
          more cars this month than another coworker,’ you're correct. Those two statements may
          be true, but the dealerships profit and the salesperson’s personal competitiveness are not
          likely to encourage the potential buyers to do what the salesperson wants.




                                  A new Practice begins on the next page.
                                                    LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   oy.




PRACTICE

Think of something you want to convince or influence someone to do. Write down your idea

here:


Now write down all the reasons it will benefit them or their organization:




In the next step—Step 5—yourre going to practice grouping your ideas into categories.
38    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




STEP 5.
                               GROUP         POINTS         INTO        CATEGORIES.
                               OR AON   OR LOO   LI   LO   IOI          ON ION IIe




Whenever you write anything longer than a few sentences, it is important to organize your facts
and ideas by grouping them into categories. These categories provide the reader with a road
map—a route through the information.

Grouping is a way of organizing information to help people understand it. For example, look at
how people learn long-distance phone numbers. Try learning this number:

                                                      5135553938


Hard, isn't it? But the number is much easier to learn if it’s broken down into groups:

                                Area Code                  Prefix            Number
                                   (513)                   555-               3938


In the same way, you can help your readers understand what you have to say by grouping infor-
mation into related topics.

Grouping points during the planning process also makes writing easier because you don't have
to worry about where to begin paragraphs. As you'll see, each group, or topic, usually forms one
paragraph.

There is no standard way to organize information. It is a highly individual process that emerges
from the situation and your own unique perceptions of what things have in common.


ees   @   @   ©



Can you name a trait that the three items in each of these groups have in common?
                                     Group A                  Group B
                                     hammers                  paper clips
                                     nails                    staples
                                     paint                    white-out

You may have noted that the items in Group A are supplies you could get in a hardware store,
while those in Group B are office supplies.

You could also regroup the items this way:
                                                      LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS   39




                                 Group A           Group B
                                 paint             hammers
                                 white-out         nails
                                                   paper clips
                                                   staples

Now the items in Group A are things you wouldnt want to spill, while the items in Group B are
solid tools.

The grouping of facts and ideas is your organizational scheme. The scheme you use depends
mostly on the types of information you need to organize, and what you want to accomplish by
writing.

The organizational scheme is more useful than a conventional outline because it lets the infor-
mation determine the organization. In a conventional outline, you tend to start with the catego-
ries before you know what information you'll include. It’s like forcing your family to fit a house
that already exists, rather than letting the size and needs of your family determine the size and
layout of the house you build.

Here are some typical organizational schemes:

TOPICS: Suppose you are providing readers with details about three computer systems. You
might group information into these categories:

        cost
        size
        special features

CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER: Use this way of grouping information when you want to show
events or actions over time. For instance, you might use either of these organizational schemes
to present information about a long-term research project:

                   Scheme 1                        Scheme 2
                   first year                      past history
                   second year                     present status
                   third year                      projection for future

COMPARISON AND CONTRAST:              Sometimes it’s most effective to organize information into
two categories and compare them. You might use one of these schemes to give managers details
for evaluating whether a particular building is suitable for your company’s new offices:

                   Scheme 1: _ pros/cons
                   Scheme 2:        _advantages/disadvantages
                   Scheme 3:        meets/fails to meet our criteria
40   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




You could also consider organizing topics by department, priority, or date needed. There is no
right or wrong way to organize information; the important point is that you’ve developed an or-
ganizational scheme that works.


PRACTICE

Here’ a list of different foods. Imagine youre writing a report or magazine article about these
foods, and organize them into two or three logical groups.

                      chocolate ice cream                    sweet-and-sour pork
                      spaghetti                              strawberries
                      hamburgers                             artichokes
                      spare ribs                             pecan pie
                      cheese Danish                          roast turkey
                      crab                                   walnut torte
                                                     LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   41




Here are some ways of grouping the foods on the list. You may have grouped them differently.
It’s only important that you found some logical organizational scheme.

CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER
      Main Courses             Fruits and Vegetables              Desserts
      sweet-and-sour pork      artichokes                         chocolate ice cream
      spaghetti                strawberries                       cheese Danish
      roast turkey                                                pecan pie
      hamburgers                                                  walnut torte
      spare ribs
      crab

TOPICS

      High in Vitamins         High in Protein                      High in Starch
      strawberries             chocolate ice cream                  spaghetti
      artichokes               hamburgers                           cheese Danish
                               spare ribs                           pecan pie
                               crab                                 walnut torte
                               sweet-and-sour pork
                               roast turkey

COMPARISON         & CONTRAST—PROS       & CONS

      Foods I Like                    Foods I Dislike
      chocolate ice cream             hamburgers
      cheese Danish                   pecan pie
      roast turkey                    artichokes
      spare ribs                      spaghetti
      sweet-and-sour pork             walnut torte
      strawberries
      crab
42   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE    IT WELL   GUIDE




Suppose you are writing a magazine article about these athletic activities:

       surfing                              swimming                             volleyball
       skiing                               scuba diving                         baseball
       wind surfing                         football                             mountain climbing
       snowboarding                         basketball                           rock climbing
       mountain biking                      canoeing                             kayaking
       rollerblading                        tennis                               jogging


Here's one way you might organize them:
       Water-Related                                         Not Water-Related
       surfing                                  basketball                       rollerblading
       canoeing                                 skiing                           rock climbing
       wind surfing                             tennis                           football
       swimming                                 volleyball                       jogging
       scuba diving                             baseball                         snowboarding
       kayaking                                 mountain climbing
                                                mountain biking

Now you try it. Organize the activities another way:
     >——
                                                                     LESSON       1     DEVELOP       A WRITING   PLANIN   SIX STEPS   43




         Here is one way you might have grouped the activities:

       Little or No Cost             Moderately Expensive                                      Costly
       swimming                      surfing                                                   canoeing
       football                      tennis                                                    skiing
       basketball                    mountain climbing                                         scuba diving
       volleyball                    rock climbing                                             mountain biking
       baseball                      rollerblading                                             wind surfing
       jogging                                                                                 snowboarding
                                                                                               kayaking

Now you've completed Step 5— organizing the points you're going to cover. Next, you'll learn
how to introduce these points.




STEP     6.

                     INTRODUCE             THE         POINTS               YOU'LL MAKE.
                    OND    Nie   a   dO   cel   Nail   ered   nual   cent   ell       Nell   eal   Nail   alee




Earlier, you learned that each category of information will usually form one paragraph when you
write your draft. To guide your readers through your paragraphs, it helps if they have signposts
for the main groupings of ideas you set out in your writing.

Summary sentences and introductions to lists are two kinds of signposts you can plant in your
writing to show your readers the way forward. Each of them gives readers a heads-up for what
they’re about to encounter in the text.

SUMMARY       SENTENCES

The summary sentence—also known as a paragraph’s topic sentence or introductory sentence—
expands a category into a statement that introduces the paragraphs central topic, and tells read-
ers why the topic is important. The summary sentence provides a context for the paragraph.
Without this context, readers might have trouble following your points, or they might miss im-
portant points altogether.

To write a summary sentence when you are writing primarily to influence the reader, simply
expand the category heading into a statement that directly answers the reader’s question, “Why
should I do what you want me to do?” (We'll discuss writing summary sentences when your pri-
mary purpose is to inform later in this section.)
44   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here's a hypothetical situation to illustrate the process.

         SITUATION: Jason wants to influence his manager, Sarah, to authorize the purchase of da-
         tabase software for his department.

         Jason knows Sarah's question will be, “Why should I authorize this purchase?” To answer
         the question, he came up with these points about the software:

             It’s easier and faster to search and sort a database than a spreadsheet
             It will save the company money in the long run
             It will help me be more productive
             Production delays have been increasing
             More deadlines have been missed
             I need to import e-mail addresses to my documents quickly
             I need colleagues to help with mailing lists and project plans

Here's how Jason grouped these points:

         CATEGORY             Production Delays
                              m   ‘There have been long delays and missed deadlines this year because
                                  information is scattered across different company departments
                              m    This scattered information takes too long to locate

         CATEGORY _           Increased Workload

                              #   Work will be streamlined and faster as coworkers pool information

         CATEGORY             Save $$

                              m   I'll be more productive when I search for data, assemble mailing lists,
                                  and plan projects

To complete his writing plan, Jason developed a summary sentence for each category by adding
a few words to the category heading.
                                              LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   45




                               Jason’s Writing Plan
Jason believes that Sarah should authorize the purchase of database software for his de-
partment because of the factors grouped under the following three headings:

Production Delays
                    We are experiencing too many production delays
                    We have missed several deadlines this year after delays of five days or
                    more
                     Materials were often late because they were hard to find, being scat-
                     tered across different programs

Increased Workload

                     Our workload continues to increase

                     It would go faster as coworkers pooled information in a single data-
                     base

Save $$

                     A system of our own will more than pay for itself
                     I'll be more productive as I search for information
                     I'll be able to get needed information from others immediately for
                     mailing lists and project plans

             Turn the page to see the finished e-mail Jason wrote.
46   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here’s how the writing plan provides the logical structure for the e-mail. Notice how the sum-
mary sentences start each paragraph.

              ©:         Sarah
              FROM:      Jason
              RE:        Database Software

              Sarah,

              As we discussed last week, | think it’s very important for you to au-
              thorize the purchase of database software for my department.

              Since the reorganization, we have been experiencing far too many
              production delays. In fact, so many departments are using the pro-
              duction facilities that delays of five days or more have become rou-
              tine. We’ve been unable to meet several deadlines this year because
              our materials weren’t ready on time. We were hunting for information
              that should be in one central, easy-to-find location.

              This problem continues to get worse because our workload contin-
              ues to increase. |’m now responsible for more project planning and
              e-mail blasts than ever before.

              My calculations show that a database program of our own will
              more than pay for itself within six months. The database will sync
              with my e-mail program so that from now on, | won’t have to enter
              contacts’ addresses twice. And the information | need for projects
              and mailings will be available immediately over the local area network.
              | won’t need to spend more time asking other people to hunt down
              the information | need.

              Please let me know if you need more information about the benefits
              of this purchase. Otherwise, I'll stop by on Friday to see what deci-
              sion you’ve made.

              Thanks,


              Jason


INTRODUCTION            TO LISTS


Instead of presenting your information in a series of paragraphs with summary sentences, you
might present the information in a list with bullet points. In that case, develop an introductory
statement to introduce the bulleted points to come. By reading the introductory sentence, the
reader will know if the information is important to them and will either continue reading the
bulleted list items or continue skimming down the page or screen to the next introductory state-
ment. For guidelines for using lists, turn to page 73.
                                                        LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS   Ay]




PRACTICE

Here's an exercise with a new situation to help you practice all six steps.

          SITUATION: Your employees’ group wants to convince your CEO to provide an in-house
          exercise facility. As the group’s representative, you need to draft an e-mail asking the CEO
          to allocate funds for the facility.

Steps 1-5 of the writing plan have been completed for you. Read them, and then complete
Step 6.


     I.   Look at what you're going to write from your readers’ point of view.
          m@ ‘The CEO is not expecting to hear from me.
          @   She is familiar with the employees’ desire for this facility.
          m@ She may be reluctant to spend money.

    Ze    Decide what you want to accomplish.
          In this situation, you definitely want to influence your reader.

    EF    Compose a key sentence that expresses your most important message.
          “Please allocate funds for an in-house exercise facility for employees.”

    4,    Make a list of the facts and ideas that will accomplish your purpose.
          The CEO should allocate funds for an exercise facility because of these benefits:
          ™   Saves money—less absenteeism because people who exercise are less likely to get
              sick
          @   Shows company cares about employees
          =   Better team spirit when people work out together
          ™   Reduces cost of health insurance—healthy people have fewer claims
          —   Gives people something to look forward to—happier
          ®   Would be one of first companies in area to invest in exercise facility rather than
              expect employees to go to outside gyms




                         Steps 5 and 6 of the Practice are on the next page.
48   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




         5. Group points into categories.

         MORALE
         =   Better team spirit when employees work out together
         E   Gives people something to look forward to—happier
         FINANCIAL
         m™ Saves money—less absenteeism because people who exercise are less likely to get
            sick
         =   Reduces cost of health insurance—healthy people have fewer claims
         REPUTATION
         @   Shows company cares about employees
         @   Would be one of first companies in area to invest in its own exercise facility

Now that you've seen Steps 1-5 in action, complete the Practice by writing out summary sen-
tences in Step 6:

        6. Introduce the points you'll make.

         To complete Step 6, write a summary sentence for each of the three categories from Step
         5: “Morale,” “Financial,” and “Reputation.” Remember, in this situation you are writing to
         influence. So the summary sentence should directly answer the question, “Why should
         my reader do what I want him or her to do?”

         Here are the categories from Step 5. For each category, write one complete sentence
         that directly answers the question, “Why should the CEO allocate funds for an exercise
         facility?”
         MORALE
         ®   Better team spirit when people work out together
         H   Gives people something to look forward to—happier
         SUMMARY SENTENCE:




                          Step 6 of the Practice continues on the next page.
                                            LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLANIN   SIX STEPS   49




FINANCIAL

m™ Saves money—less absenteeism because people who exercise are less likely to get
   sick
m@ Reduces cost of health insurance—healthy people have fewer claims
SUMMARY SENTENCE:




REPUTATION
m™ Shows company cares about employees
=   Would be one of the first companies in area to invest in exercise facility
SUMMARY SENTENCE:




                Check your answers for Step 6 on the next page.
50   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


Here are examples of the kinds of summary sentences you may have written.

Your sentences are probably a little different, and they may be very different. That's fine.

The important point is that each sentence should directly answer the question, “Why should the
CEO allocate funds for an exercise facility?”

                                                        MORALE
         EXAMPLE         = Anexercise facility will improve employee morale.
         EXAMPLE _ Exercise is good for morale.


                                                      FINANCIAL
         EXAMPLE              The company would save money by installing an exercise facility.
         EXAMPLE              Exercise facilities can save the company money.


                                                     REPUTATION

         EXAMPLE              Building an exercise facility would do wonders for the company’s
                              reputation.

         EXAMPLE _ Exercise facilities will help give us a positive image.


THERE’S ONLY ONE THING LEFT TO DO. You now have a complete writing plan for the e-mail
to the CEO. The only remaining step is to decide on the best order for the summary sentences.

When determining what information goes first, second, and so on, consider this: pick the sum-
mary sentence that your reader is likely to consider the most important, and put that sentence
first.

When people read quickly, they tend to pick up beginnings and endings. By putting the most
important point first, you increase your chances of catching and keeping your reader’s attention.

Sometimes you can put your second-most-important point last. Sometimes, the information
dictates some other order.
                                                      LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   52




Look at the summary sentences below. Which point do you think is most likely to convince
the CEO to allocate funds for an exercise facility? Number the sentences in the order you think
would be best.

               An exercise facility will help give us a positive image.

               An exercise facility can save the company money.

               An exercise facility will improve employee morale.

Here's the order one writer chose, based on the assumption that saving money was likely to be
the most important concern to her company’s CEO:

    1. An exercise facility can save the company money.

    2. An exercise facility will help give us a positive image.

    3. An exercise facility will improve employee morale.

COMPLETED       WRITING PLAN

Here is an example of the writing plan. Notice the way it creates a blueprint for the entire e-mail.


         READER:                CEO
         PURPOSE:               To influence
         KEY SENTENCE:          Our employees’ group would like you to allocate funds for an in-
                                house exercise facility.
         MAIN POINTS:
         1. Exercise facilities can save the company money.
            ® Less absenteeism because people who exercise are less likely to get sick
            ® Reduced cost of health insurance—healthy people have fewer claims

         2. Exercise facilities will help give us a positive image.
            = A way to show that the company cares about employees
            ™ Would be one of the first companies in area to invest in such a facility

         3. An exercise facility will improve employee morale.
            ® Increase team spirit by working out together
            — Give people something to look forward to—happier                                               |
52   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                  FINISHED E-MAIL


Notice that the most important message is up front in the first paragraph, and the structure of
the e-mail comes directly from the writing plan.

              TO:         Anna Harbin
              FROM:       Acme Employees’ Association
              RE:         Exercise Facility

              Anna,

              After some months of discussion about ways to improve our working
              environment, we’ve decided that we’d like you to allocate funds for an
              in-house exercise facility.

              Our research on this topic makes it clear that exercise facilities can
              save companies money. For instance, people who exercise are less
              likely to get sick, which means that less money is lost to absenteeism.
              Also, healthy employees have fewer insurance claims, thus reducing
              health insurance costs.

              An exercise facility will help give us the positive image we are con-
              stantly seeking by demonstrating that the company cares about its
              employees. We have the opportunity to become known as one of the
              first companies in the area to invest in such a facility.

              We also believe that an exercise facility will improve our employees’
              morale. Working out together is a great way to increase team spirit.
              People also say they would be happier if they had an exercise session
              to look forward to at lunch or after work, and that it’s a hassle to drive
              to the local gym after work.

              We’ve enclosed a summary of the facts we collected; we think you'll
              find them convincing. Please let us know if you need more informa-
              tion. Thanks for considering this request.
                                                      LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS   53




WRITING TO INFORM

So far, we've looked at examples of the planning process when the purpose is to influence.

When you write primarily to inform, the process changes slightly. Instead of asking, “Why
should readers do what I want them to do?” ask, “What do readers need to know?” It’s your an-
swers to that question that make up the list of facts and ideas to include.

Here's an example.

        SITUATION:           Joan Huang is in charge of the conference “Newest Trends in
        Evaluating Performance.’ She wants everyone in her department to know what will be
        covered during the conference and how to make arrangements to attend.
        READERS:               Joan’s staff

        PURPOSE:               To inform
        KEY SENTENCE:          Here is the current information on the upcoming conference,
                               “Newest Trends in Evaluating Performance.”

        Joan asks, “What does my staff need to know?” and lists these questions:
        @   What will be covered at the conference?
        #   Who will be speaking?
        m   Where will it be held?
        @   Dates and times?
        @   What if I can't attend?
        ™   How and where do I sign up?
        ®   Whois responsible for travel and housing arrangements?
        @   Whos paying the airfare and hotel expenses?

        Next, Joan answers the questions:
        &   What will be covered at the conference?
            — Newest computer-based appraisal systems being tested in the U.S., U.K., and Japan
            — Case studies: 360° feedback
            — Peer evaluations
            — Training methods
54   PROFESSIONAL    WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




         #   Who will be speaking?
             — Representatives from National Institute of Performance
             — Representatives of the National Human Resources Organization
             — Executives from leading European organizations
             — Faculty members from the Business Schools in the University of California system
         @   Where will it be held?
             —      Marriott Hotel, San Francisco
             —      Crown Room

         =   Dates and times?
             — February 14, 15
             — 9a.m.-5 p.m. each day
             — Complete agenda available week before conference
         @   What ifIcan't attend?
             —      Ask Josie at ext. 405 for presentation reports

         @   How and where do!             sign up?
             — Josie has all the forms—due January 31
         @   Who is responsible for travel and housing arrangements?
             — Sue at Whole Universe Travel
         @   Who is paying the airfare and hotel expenses?
             — The company

         Joan groups the points into categories. Then she writes a summary sentence for each cat-
         egory and puts them in order.
         =   Logistics: The conference is scheduled for February 14 and 15.
         #   ‘Topics: Representatives from various organizations will make presentations on
             the newest performance evaluation strategies.
         m   Speakers: Speakers include experts in the field from business and academic orga-
             nizations in the United States and abroad.
         =   Arrangements: The company is paying all expenses. Here’s how to make arrange-
             ments and receive presentation reports if you cannot attend.
                                             LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN   IN SIX STEPS   55



                            COMPLETED        E-MAIL

To:      Department Members
From:    Joan Huang, Department Manager
Subject: Annual conference

Here is the information you’ve been waiting for about the upcoming
conference, “Newest Trends in Evaluating Performance.”

                                 Logistics

The conference is scheduled for February 14 and 15. All events will
take place in the Crown Room of the San Francisco Marriott Hotel
between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. A detailed agenda will be available
the week of February 6.

                                  Topics

Representatives from various organizations will make presentations
on the newest performance evaluation strategies, including the
following:

e   The newest computer-based appraisal systems now being tested in the
    U.S., U.K., and Japan

e   Case studies that explore the advantages and pitfalls of using 360°
    feedback

e   Methods of preparing employees to conduct successful peer evaluations

                                Speakers

Speakers include experts in the field from business organizations
and academic institutions in the United States and abroad. We
expect representatives from the National Institute of Performance,
the National Human Resources Organization, leading European
organizations, and the Business Schools of the University of California
system.

                              Arrangements

The company is paying all expenses. Here’s how to make
arrangements or receive the presentation reports if you cannot attend:

e   To sign up, call Josie at extension 405 for a registration form. Make sure to
    return the form to Josie by 5:00 p.m. on January 31.

e   To make air and hotel reservations, call Sue at Whole Universe Travel at
    (510) 655-6477.

e   |f you cannot attend, ask Josie to put your name on the distribution list for
    presentation reports.

If you have any questions about this conference, call me at extension
263. | hope you are able to attend.
56   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




REVIEW

You've reached the end of Lesson 1. Before applying what you've learned to a writing situation of
your own, answer these review questions.


Write the correct word in the blanks. If you’re not sure what to write or want to check your an-
swer, turn to the page in parentheses to the right of the sentence.

     1. To begin a writing plan, think about what you're going to write from your
                                                                    point of view.        (15)

     2.   Decide on your primary purpose: to                                                                 or to

                                                                readers.          (18)

     3.   Compose a                                                                      that expresses your most

          important                                                        zene)

     4. To decide what information to include when you write, list the
                                                             and                                                     that
          will accomplish your primary purpose.                     (34)

     5. Ifyou're writing to influence readers, ask “
          should readers do what I want them to do?”                       (34)

     6.   If you're writing to inform readers, ask “

          do readers need to know?”               (34)

     7. After listing the facts and ideas to include in your writing, the next step is to
                                                                       points into categories.        (38)

     BoA                                                                   expands a category into a
          statement that introduces the paragraph’s central topic, and tells readers why the topic is
          important.     (43)
                                                      LESSON   1   DEVELOP   A WRITING   PLAN IN SIX STEPS   7,




Now you know how the planning process works. Before starting the next lesson, try the entire
process with a writing situation of your own.

You have two options:
    1. Complete Steps 4, 5, and 6 on the Writing Worksheet you already started working on.
                                           —OR=
    2. Remove a new Worksheet from the back of this book and complete Steps 1-6 for a new
        writing situation.

When you have finished the writing plan, you may
        m@ Set it aside and move on to Lesson 2, where you'll learn to use the plan to write a
           first draft.
                                            =O R=

        @   Doa quick first draft before beginning Lesson 2 and choose another situation for
            the assignment at the end of Lesson 2.

WHAT?’S NEXT?

In Lesson 2 you will learn to use your writing plan to write a first draft. You'll see that once you
have completed the six planning steps, you've already done most of the work. Only the final
shaping is left.
58   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE
                                                                                                   59




                                             WRITE THE FIRST DRAFT


INTRODUCTION

When you have completed your writing plan, the first draft almost writes itself. You’ve already
done the hard work—deciding what you want to accomplish, finding the right words to express
your main points, and selecting and organizing the facts and ideas you need to influence or in-
form readers.

The next step is to use that plan to write a first draft.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write a professional and effective first draft by:
         ™   Reviewing your writing plan and revising it as needed to make sure it is sound
         m   Writing an opening that catches readers’ attention and clearly states what you are
             writing about
         ™   Using transitions to link points, paragraphs, and sections smoothly
         ™   Using lists to present information so readers can grasp it quickly
             Writing a closing that sums up points as needed and tells readers clearly what
             happens next

WHAT    YOU NEED

         =   ‘Two or three samples of your writing
         m@ The writing plan that you completed in Lesson 1

REVIEW YOUR WRITING PLAN

Before starting the first draft, take a few moments to review your writing plan. There are two
reasons for doing this:
         m   If there are any inconsistencies in the plan, it's important to correct them before
             you begin the first draft.
         ™   This review helps you keep your plan in mind when you start writing—particu-
             larly if time has passed since you finished planning.
60   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




Here are some questions to ask as you review your writing plan:

             Have I considered my readers’ point of view?
             Have I correctly identified my primary purpose?
             Does my key sentence accomplish my primary purpose?
             WRITING TO INFLUENCE
                        Explain why readers should do what I want them to do?
             WRITING TO INFORM
                        Introduce and/or summarize what readers need to know?
             Have I eliminated unnecessary information?
             Have I included all necessary information?
             Have I organized the information logically and effectively—from the reader's
             point of view?

If you answer “No” to any of these questions, take a closer look at your writing plan. Before you
start the first draft, be sure the plan accurately expresses what you intend to say.
                                                                  LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   61




WRITE AN INVITING OPENING

Why do you think that openings are important? Write down a few reasons here:




The first few lines of any piece of writing are extremely important. It is in the opening paragraph
that you must catch your readers’ attention, set the right tone, and make it clear what you are
writing about.

Read these two openings. Which opening makes you want to continue?

E-MAIL 1      This is in reference to your recent e-mail which was passed to this department for
              review. Unfortunately, the information you requested is not available at this point
              in times

E-MAIL 2.     Thank you for asking about the August 5 computer class. I am sorry that we do not
              yet know the instructor’s name or the location, but we should be able to send you
              all the details by July 15.

You probably preferred the opening of E-Mail 2. E-Mail 1’s opening uses a lot of clichés such as,
“This is in reference to... .” It communicates little specific information.

The opening of E-Mail 1, in contrast, was clearly written by one person to another. It responds
directly to specific questions. The writer gets to the point quickly and provides details.

Here are the criteria for an effective opening:
        m   It establishes a personal contact with the reader and sets the right tone—particu-
            larly important tasks when your primary purpose is to influence
        m   It catches the reader's attention
        m   It includes a key sentence that tells the reader what you are writing about
        ™   It is no more than three or four sentences long
62   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are some examples of openings. In each set, put an X next to the opening you think best
meets the criteria.


            A) We hereby acknowledge receiving your message dated April 20. Your complaint
               has been taken under advisement.

            B) Thank you for telling us about the missing parts in the equipment you recently
                purchased. We will be happy to replace the parts, but we need the following
                information ....



            A) Per your recent inquiry concerning delivery of your car, a fax was sent to the at-
               tention of the manufacturer. We are pleased to provide you with a photocopy of
               the response we received.

            B) Weare happy to say that your car will arrive in port on Wednesday, August 1.
               You can pick it up any time after noon on Thursday, August 2.


If you preferred Opening B in each set, then you recognize an effective opening.

One quick way to improve openings is to avoid overused phrases like these:


       With reference to ...                                      Regarding your recent communication ...
       Pursuant to ...                                        We are in receipt of your message ...
       Enclosed, please find ...                                  On the above date and time ...
       Please be advised ...                                  This is in regards to ...
       Attached herewith ...                                      Per your request ...
       | am writing to inform you ...
                                                              LESSON   2   WRITE THE FIRST DRAFT   63




Here are some examples of how to replace overused phrases with simple, direct language:



    Per your request for shipping                 As you asked, here are the instructions
    instructions ...                              for preparing your shipment.

    Please be advised that your                   Unfortunately, your shipment has been
    shipment has been delayed.                    delayed.
    Enclosed, please find copies of your          | have enclosed copies of your last three
    last three invoices.                          invoices.

                                                  | am sending copies of your last three
                                                  invoices.

                                                  Here are copies of your last three
                                                  invoices.

    | am writing to inform you that your          We have found your shipment.
    shipment has been located.
    This is in regards to your recent             Thank you for telling us that you appreci-
    communication regarding our                   ated our customer service team’s quick
    service.                                      response to your questions about our
                                                  software.

    We are in receipt of your message in          As you asked, we are happy to send
    regards to the vacant position.               you an application for the position of
                                                  Community Relations Director.
64   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




EXERCISE

Using your imagination to fill in missing details, revise the following openings so they cover the
following points:
         @   make a personal contact with the reader,             Hint    tt will be easier to revise
             set the right tone, and catch the reader's           the openings if you look
             attention                                               at the message from the
         ™ include a key sentence that tells the reader                   reader's point of view.
             what you are writing about
         ™   are no more than three or four sentences long

OPENING 1

              Please be advised that your comments on the proposed Computer
              Training Program, received by this office on June 3, have been
              reviewed and, where appropriate, incorporated into the program.




OPENING 2

              | am writing to inform you that payment has not yet been received for
              the current month. The conditions of your note specify that payment
              be made no later than the first day of each month. It is imperative that
              payment be received within 10 days of the date of this message.
                                                               LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   65




OPENING 3

           Attached please find a copy of the Assistant Director’s message to
           Acme Products. Also attached is a copy of the message to Alex Stein
           from Acme’s CEO, as well as a copy of the Test Plan form, which was
           written by Bill Jordan.




ANSWERS

Here are the kinds of changes you might have made.

                                          OPENING 1

ORIGINAL     Please be advised that your comments on the proposed Computer Training
             Program, received by this office on June 3, have been reviewed and, where appro-
             priate, incorporated into the program.

REVISION     ‘Thank you for your comments on the proposed Computer Training Program.
             We have incorporated the suggested changes listed below.

                                          OPENING 2

ORIGINAL     | am writing to inform you that payment has not yet been received for the current
             month. The conditions of your loan specify that payment be made no later than
             the first day of each month. It is imperative that payment be received within 10
             days of the date of this message.

REVISION     We have not yet received the loan payment that was due on April 1. Please make
             sure we receive it no later than April 25.

                                          OPENING 3

ORIGINAL     Attached please find a copy of the Assistant Director’s message to Acme Products.
             Also attached is a copy of the message to Alex Stein from Acme’s CEO, as well as a
             copy of the Test Plan form, which was written by Bill Jordan.

REVISION     I’m enclosing copies of the following:
             ¢ the Assistant Director’s message to Acme Products
             ¢ the Acme CEO’s message to Alex Stein
             ¢ Bill Jordan’s Test Plan form
66    PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS: A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




                                               SUMMARIES


     When youre writing a report, business plan, or proposal, consider including asummary
     for your reader. Summaries, also known as report summaries and executive summaries,
     serve a different purpose from introductions or background statements.

     Under most circumstances, an introduction or background statement is read by people
     who will read the rest of the document. The purpose is to establish a context for what
     people are going to read.

     On the other hand, a summary might be read by people who will never see—or never
     read—the entire document. Summaries are designed for people who need to know your
     most important message and the key facts you have included to inform or influence your
     reader about that important message.

     It’s a good idea to write the summary after you've developed the writing plan. Then you
     can use the summary statements from the writing plan to develop your report or executive
     summary.

     Keep the following points in mind when you write summaries:
           ¢ Always state your most important message at the beginning of the summary
           ¢ Put the summary at the beginning of the document
           ¢ Keep the summary short (between half a page and a full page is ideal; some
             experts say that a summary should be no longer than one tenth of the entire
             document)

           ¢ Make sure that the summary covers all the main points and that they are in the
             same order as in the main document
           ¢ Focus on the most important points—remember that readers can turn to the
             main document if they want or need more details
                                                                    LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   67




TRANSITIONS

To make your writing more readable, use transitions to connect your ideas. A transition is a
word, phrase, or sentence that relates a new topic to the previous one, smoothly connecting the
parts of a piece of writing.

Transitions are rather like the cartilage and tendons that hold your bones together. They form a
connective tissue that links your ideas to one another. In writing, transitions show readers how
your ideas fit together, help you achieve continuity, and help readers follow your points easily.

Read this e-mail. Notice how the boldfaced words and phrases serve as transitions, helping the
reader see the connection between points.

            Alex:

            Thanks for calling yesterday to ask about this year’s sales conference.
            The Planning Committee is running a little behind schedule, but I’m
            happy to tell you what we know so far.

            Despite the problem we had with meeting space last year, we’ve de-
            cided to give Lazy Acres another try. Everyone rates the other facili-
            ties very highly. In particular, people like the tennis courts and exer-
            cise equipment. Also, the guest rooms are spacious, SO we can use
            them for small group meetings.

            Although the date is still under discussion, we’re looking at the sec-
            ond week in August. We are, however, also considering September;
            for one thing, the August date might interfere with people’s vacation
            plans.

            Unless we run into a snag, we hope to have firm plans by the end of
            the month. I'll let you Know what | know as soon as | know it. Until
            then, feel free to pass this information on to your staff.
68     PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS:   A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




Here are examples of words and phrases you can use to link points, sections and paragraphs:
ADDITIONS                               CONTRASTS                COMPARISONS
again                                   although                 equally
also                                    but                      in the same way
and also                                despite                  similarly
as well as                              however
as you asked                            nevertheless             EMPHASIS

equally important                       unless                   above all
for one thing                           until                    certainly
further                                                          especially
furthermore                             RESULT                   indeed
in addition                             accordingly              in fact
moreover                                as a consequence         in other words
next                                    as a result              in particular
now                                     consequently             of course
                                        for that reason
                                        thus                     SUMMARY
                                                                 finally
                                                                 on the whole
                                                                 to sum up
                                                                    LESSON   2   WRITE THE FIRST DRAFT   69




PRACTICE

Underline the transitions in this message. Notice how they help link the points and improve the
tone.
            Dear Frieda:

               As you asked, | am happy to suggest a marketing consultant
            for your new project. The person | recommend most highly is Kate
            Jackson.

                | worked with Kate for two years at Vision West. Although we were
            in different departments, we worked together on at least five projects.
            She was reliable and pleasant. Best of all, she seemed to have a nev-
            er-ending store of creative ideas, although she never tried to impose
            them on the group. In fact, she was quite willing to drop any plan that
            didn’t seem workable.

               Unless Kate’s situation has changed since | last spoke to her in
            May, | suspect she will be very interested in your position. She will, of
            course, want to know something about the opportunities it offers for
            advancement.

               | hope Kate works out for you. If not, give me a call and I'll keep
            my eyes open for someone else.
7O   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Did you underline these transitions?

              Dear Frieda:

                 As you asked, | am happy to suggest a marketing consultant
              for your new project. The person | recommend most highly is Kate
              Jackson.

                  | worked with Kate for two years at Vision West. Although we were
              in different departments, we worked together on at least five projects.
              She was reliable and pleasant. Best of all, she seemed to have a nev-
              er-ending store of creative ideas, although she never tried to impose
              them on the group. In fact, she was quite willing to drop any plan that
              didn’t seem workable.

                 Unless Kate’s situation has changed since | last spoke to her in
              May, | suspect she will be very interested in your position. She will, of.
              course, want to know something about the opportunities it offers for
              advancement.

                 | hope Kate works out for you. If not, give me a call and |’ll keep
              my eyes open for someone else.


USING LISTS

How do you read business documents? Chances are, you don't linger over the words the way
youd linger over a novel. Instead, you probably scan the document to pick out the main points
and the details you need.

Taking the reader’s point of view, it’s easy to see that paragraphs are not always the best way to
present information. The more technical or complicated the information, the more likely it is to
be lost when it’s presented in paragraph form.

Your goal as a writer is to help readers find information as quickly as possible. To show consider-
ation and speed things up for your reader, look for opportunities to present information in lists.

Read the examples on the next two pages. They both present the same information, but look
how much easier this information is to scan when it’s in list form.
                                                       LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   hal




Dear Ms. Fratelli:

    To process your loan application, we need the following informa-
tion and documents as soon as possible.

   In item 12A, please enter the name and address of the lender who
holds your second deed of trust. The current balances on all your
credit cards and outstanding loans should be entered in items 16B
and 16C, except for your automobile loans (item 16D).

   The name and address of your previous employers should be en-
tered in Item 6C if you have been at your current job for less than two
years. Include an explanation of any gap in employment during the
past ten years.

   List the balances on your bank accounts in item 4A. Include the
name and address of the institution and the account number. Use
items 4B, C, and D for certificates of deposit, stocks, etc., as shown.

   The purpose of the loan should be entered in item 3, along with the
amount requested. Finally, be sure to sign and date the form in item
23. The completed form should be sent to the loan processor along
with copies of your last two years’ tax returns and copies of your
most recent pay stubs.

   Please let me know if you have questions.

                      Sincerely,
72   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




REVISION

              Dear Ms. Fratelli:

                 To process your loan, we need a completed application as soon
              as possible. Please send the completed form to the loan processor
              along with copies of the following two documents:

                     Your last two years’ tax returns

                     Your most recent pay stubs

              On the application form, please complete the following items:

                     Describe the purpose of the loan and enter the amount requested.

                     List the balances on your bank accounts (4A). Enter the name and ad-
                     dress of the institution and the account number. List any certificates of
                     deposit, stocks, etc., as shown (4B, 4C, and 4D).

                     If you have been at your current job for less than two years, enter the
                     name and address of your previous employers (6C). Include an explana-
                     tion of any gap in employment during the past ten years.

                     Enter the name and address of the lender who holds your second deed
                     of trust (12A).

                     List the current balances on all your credit cards (16B), outstanding
                     loans (16C), and automobile loans (16D).

                     Sign and date the form (Item 23).

              Please let me know if vou have questions.

                                          Sincerely,
                                                                     LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   73




GUIDELINES FOR USING LISTS

You can use a list in business writing—and, often, you should use a list—whenever you present
three or more related pieces of information. Lists are more effective than long paragraphs be-
cause they
         @   communicate information quickly
         ™@ save valuable writing time
         m   reduce the chance of grammar and punctuation errors

To make sure your lists are easy to read, follow the five guidelines below. Full illustrations of each
of these guidelines follow the list.


    1. Introduce the list. Every list needs an introductory statement, if only a few words, that
       tells readers what the list is about and puts the list items in context. Make sure that you
       leave a space between the introductory statement and the first list item.

    2. Make sure that all items belong on the list. All items on the list should relate directly
       to the introductory statement.

    3.   Be consistent with initial capitalization, sentence structure, and end punctuation.

         m   If you capitalize the first word of one line, capitalize the first word in every line.
         ™   Items in any single list should all be complete sentences, or all be sentence frag-
             ments. List items that are sentence fragments should not end in periods, and do
             not have to begin with capital letters (unless the first word is a proper noun).
         =   For lists of complete sentences, end punctuation (periods or question marks) is
             only necessary for each item if any item contains more than one sentence. In any
             list of complete sentences, you must use end punctuation after all the list’s items if
             even one list item has end punctuation.

    4.   Keep the list parallel in form. For example, if one item begins with an -ing verb tense,
         then all items should begin with -ing verbs.

    5.   Organize the list for your readers. Lists that include more than five or six items can be
         difficult to follow. Make lists easier to read by organizing the items into main points and
         subpoints.
74   PROFESSIONAL    WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are examples to illustrate the five guidelines for lists that you just read.

     1.   Introduce the list.

          A list should never stand alone: it needs an introductory statement. The first item in a list
          cant introduce the list itself.

          WITHOUT AN INTRODUCTION

              e      We offer several thank-you gifts

              e      A10% discount on purchases during May

              e      Adiscount coupon for the Milano Ristorante

              e      Acomplimentary bottle of our best olive oil


          WITH AN INTRODUCTION

              To express our appreciation for your business, we would like to offer
              you a choice of the following thank-you gifts:

              e      A10% discount on purchases during May

              e      Adiscount coupon for the Milano Ristorante

              e      Acomplimentary bottle of our best olive oil

     2. Make sure that all items belong on the list. All items on the list should relate directly
        to the introductory statement.

          NOT ALL ITEMS RELATE TO THE INTRODUCTORY                          STATEMENT

              To prepare the room for training, please do the following:

              e     Set up the tables in a U shape

              e     Put two flipcharts in the front of the classroom

              e     Place the projector on the table in the corner

              e     Make sure that there are lots of exercises and opportunities to practice
                                                             LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   75




ALL ITEMS RELATE TO THE INTRODUCTORY                         STATEMENT

    When training is over, please do the following things:

    e   Recycle used flipchart pages

    e   Turn off the projector and store it in the closet

    e   Put the tables and chairs back the way you found them

    e   Give the completed evaluations to Melissa

Be consistent with initial capitalization, sentences or sentence fragments, and end
punctuation.


Use end punctuation only when at least one item contains more than one complete
sentence. In paragraphs, sentences’ end punctuation (periods and question marks) tells
readers when one sentence stops and another starts. In lists, end punctuation is only
necessary if an item contains more than one sentence. That’s because the format of a list
clearly shows where one item stops and another begins. It’s not wrong to use end punctu-
ation for single sentences in a list. But if you use end punctuation for one item, you must
use it for all items.

END PUNCTUATION            UNNECESSARY

    We are unable to meet the original deadline for the following reasons:

    ¢   Two team members resigned in October and we have been unable to re-
        place them

    e   The client expanded the project scope

    e   Three weeks of heavy rain made it impossible to complete our investigation

END PUNCTUATION            NECESSARY

    Here is a Summary of our findings:

    e   The costs of moving to a new location will be higher than we originally
        estimated.

    e   According to the most current figures, the total cost will exceed $150,000.
76   PROFESSIONAL       WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




              e     If we delay the move for five years, we will need an additional 10,000
                    square feet of space.

              e     Only 30 percent of our employees say they would be willing to move out of
                    California. Over 60 percent, however, would be willing to consider a move
                    within the northern area of the state.

          The following list is hard to read because its format is inconsistent.

          INCONSISTENT

              We are unable to meet the original deadline for the following reasons:

                    ¢    Two team members resigned in October. We have been unable to re-
                         place them.

                    ®    expanded project scope

                    e    Three weeks of heavy rain made it impossible to complete our
                         investigation


          The periods in the first item are inconsistent with the complete sentence in the third
          item, which has no period. The uncapitalized sentence fragment is distracting because its
          form is inconsistent with the other two items. As a general rule, start bulleted items with
          a capital; it looks more professional.

          Here’s the same list in a consistent format.


          CONSISTENT

              We are unable to meet the original deadline for the following reasons:

                    ¢    Two team members resigned in October and we have been unable to
                         replace them

                    e    The client expanded the project scope

                    e    Three weeks of heavy rain made it impossible to complete our
                         investigation

     4.   Keep the list parallel in form.
          The items in a list must be parallel—presented in the same forms. For example, if one
          item begins with a verb, all the items must begin with verbs. If one item is a complete
          sentence, all the items must be complete sentences.
                                                                LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   77




     NOT PARALLEL

         The agenda for the March meeting includes the following:

               Discussion of the new health plan, which will be available to all perma-
               nent full-time employees

               Whether to revise the procedures manual

               Early-retirement policy


     PARALLEL

         At the March meeting, we will do the following:

               Discuss the new health plan, which
               will be available to all permanent full-
                ;                                          For more about parallel struc-
               time employees
                                                           ture, see Lesson 5: Use Correct
               Decide whether to revise the proce-         Grammar, page 137.
               dures manual                                                      -

               Draft an early-retirement policy

5.   Organize the list for your reader.
     As a general rule, keep lists short. There should be no more than five or six items on your
     list. When long lists are necessary, reorganize them as two or more shorter lists. Make
     long lists easier for your readers to scan by organizing the items into main points and
     subpoints.

     TOO MANY       ITEMS

         Please supply the following for the conference that begins on
         October 22:

               30 writing tablets for each meeting room

               Five laptops for the community room

               An overhead projector for each meeting room

               Coffee, tea, and pastry in the foyer each morning

               Four round tables for each meeting room

              At least five telephones with outside lines in the community room

              A basket of fruit for each table in the meeting rooms

              A registration table in the foyer
78   PROFESSIONAL       WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




         ITEMS ORGANIZED                   WITH SUBPOINTS

              Please supply the following for the conference that begins on
              October 22:

              In each meeting room:

                    ¢    30 writing tablets

                    e    An overhead projector

                    e    Four round tables

                    e A basket of fruit for each table

              In the community room:

                    e    Five laptops

                    e    At least five telephones with outside lines

              In the foyer:

                    ¢    Coffee, tea, and pastry each morning

                    e Aregistration table
                                                                 LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   79




TRY IT


Use the space below or a blank sheet of paper to rewrite this paragraph in list format. Remember
to include an introductory statement that tells readers what the list is about and establishes the
context. Remember to follow the guidelines on page 73.

            The task force found that the customer service representatives need
            training in how to respond to problems and complaints. There is
            widespread unhappiness about the quality of food in the cafeteria,
            indicating the need to find another vendor. How to implement flexible
            hours without creating logistical problems requires additional study.
            Finally, field representatives need more powerful laptops, which have
            not been included in this year’s budget. These are the primary areas
            of concern the members of the task force believe they need to ad-
            dress during the next six months.
80   PROFESSIONAL       WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are two ways to revise that paragraph into a list:

REVISION      1

              Below are the primary areas of concern the members of the task force
              believe they need to address during the next six months:

                    e The customer service representatives need training in how to respond to
                      problems and complaints

                    e There is widespread unhappiness about the quality of food in the cafete-
                      ria, indicating the need to find another vendor

                    e Additional study is needed to determine how to implement flexible hours
                      without creating logistical problems

                    e    Field representatives need more powerful laptops, which have not been
                         included in this year’s budget


REVISION 2

              The task force members believe they must do the following during the
              next six months:

                    e    Train customer service representatives to respond to problems and
                         complaints

                    e    Search for a new vendor who will improve the quality of food in the
                         cafeteria

                    e    Study ways to implement flexible hours without creating logistical
                         problems

                    e    Find funds to provide field representatives with the more powerful lap-
                         tops they need
                                                                  LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   81




                                                                                                 paragraph
TRYIT       Use the space below or a blank sheet of paper to rewrite and reformat this
seeeeeees   3 alist.

                      To help us update our database, please review the enclosed
                      listings and notify us of any changes. First, proofread each
                      listing and indicate any necessary corrections. Then please
                      enter the best address for clients to reach you and at the
                      same time verify that the telephone and fax numbers and e-
                       mail addresses are correct. Finally, if you wish, you may add
                       a maximum of two lines of explanation to each listing.
82   PROFESSIONAL       WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




REVISION

Here's one way to present the information more effectively. Your version might differ.

             To help us update our database, please review the enclosed listings
             and notify us of any changes:

                    e    Proofread each listing and indicate any necessary corrections

                    e    Enter the best address for clients to reach you

                    e    Verify that telephone and fax numbers and e-mail addresses are correct

                    e    If you wish, add a maximum of two lines of explanation to each listing
                                                                   LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   83




USING HEADINGS

Can you think of any reasons to use headings in your documents?




                                    The Benefits of Headings
        ™   Headings make it easier for people to find information. At work, people don't read
            every word of every document.
        ™   Headings make a document more attractive by creating an organized visual lay-
            out. Research shows that long, dense paragraphs are the most difficult and dis-
            couraging way to present information to your readers. Headings are a good way to
            break up dense text.
        ™   Headings force you to group relevant facts and information together. This makes
            your document easier for readers to follow.

Headings make your documents easier to understand by presenting your reader with concise
themes. Headings are essential if your document is long or complicated, or contains technical
information. The planning process itself helps you come up with the headings: once you group
information into categories, the headings practically identify themselves.

Here's a single e-mail without headings, and then with them.

WITHOUT     HEADINGS

            Ali:

            Hope you can come to the meeting this summer. The annual presi-
            dents’ circle sales meeting will be held at the Hilton in San Francisco
            and you should bring your updated presentations and spreadsheets.
            You can make travel arrangements yourself or Pam can help you.
            We’ll have one day of learning with workshop leaders including Jamie
            Hartwell, Linda Lou, and Peter Panino, and one day to look internally
            at our processes with Jack Deiner.

            We’re going to Alcatraz. It will be three days long with an optional din-
            ner on Tuesday night. Sally is no longer available to help with travel
            arrangements. Another agenda will be sent out. You can come on
            Wednesday morning or Tuesday night but make sure that you’re there
            till Friday morning. Bring comfortable walking shoes. If you make the
            travel arrangements yourself, use billing code 55789. You don’t need
84   PROFESSIONAL     WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




              to bring anything else. You were selected because you did a great
              job.




WITH HEADINGS

              Subject: Annual Presidents’ Circle Sales Meeting, July 14-17, 2009

              Ali:

              Because of the great job you did this year, you’ve been invited to
              the Presidents’ Circle Sales Meeting in San Francisco this summer.
              Following is all the information you'll need to make your travel ar-
              rangements. We’ll send you a more detailed agenda by May 1.

                                         Meeting Dates and Location

              The meeting will be held in the San Francisco Hilton from Tuesday,
              July 14th, through Friday, July 17th, 2009.

                                             Travel Arrangements

              The travel process has changed; Sally is no longer available to help.
              You can make arrangements yourself using your company credit card
              and billing code 55789, or ask Pam to help.

                                                   What to Bring

              Please bring your updated spreadsheets and presentations. Also,
              bring comfortable walking shoes for an outing to Alcatraz on Friday
              morning. We’ll provide everything else you need.

                                                      Agenda

              e Tuesday: meet for dinner at the hotel restaurant at 7 p.m. (optional)

              e      Wednesday: meetings 9-5 with Jamie Hartwell, Linda Lou, and Peter
                     Panino, followed by dinner at Aziza

              e      Thursday: meetings 9-5 with Jack Deiner followed by dinner at La Mar
                     Cebicheria

              e      Friday: morning excursion to Alcatraz; meeting convenes at 1 p.m.

             That’s it! Please let me know if you have any questions. I’ll send out a
             detailed agenda by May 1st. Thanks, and congratulations!
                                                                    LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   85




CLOSING PARAGRAPHS

A strong closing achieves the following goals:
        @   makes a final personal contact with readers (a crucial factor when you're writing
            to influence)

        @   wraps up any loose ends
        ™   tells readers clearly what happens next
        ™   uses specific language

A closing paragraph might also do the following:
        ™   restate what readers should do
        m@ restate what readers should know

Compare these two closings. Which do you prefer?

CLOSING 1           It would be appreciated if this situation could be rectified in a timely manner.
                    Any questions can be addressed to this writer at the above address.

CLOSING 2           Please find the missing file by June 15. If I can help in any way, please call me
                    at (510) 655-6477.


You probably preferred Closing 2. The first closing is impersonal and vague. The second is spe-
cific to the situation and conveys useful information.

Here are examples of the kinds of clichés that sound tired—as if they were produced by a ma-
chine rather than by a person.

        Please contact the undersigned regarding time constraints on this policy.

        Your assistance and cooperation will be greatly appreciated.

        Do not hesitate to contact this writer should you require additional information.


Minor changes can transform those closings by making them specific to the piece of writing.
86   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                    INSTEAD        OF ...                                       TRY THIS «.:
     Please contact the above regarding time                  Please call John Alcotts about the expiration
     constraints on this policy.                              date on this policy.



     Your assistance and cooperation will be                  | will be grateful for any help you can give me in
     greatly appreciated.                                     tracking down the correct phone number.



     Do not hesitate to contact this writer                   If you need a map or specific directions, please
     should you require additional information.               let me know.
                                                                 LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   87




PRACTICE

Write a closing for this message.




             Dear Mr. Hogan:

             Thank you for asking about our new Flexible Loan Program. I’m
             happy to send a brochure that describes the program and includes an
             application.

             We designed this program after many discussions with customers
             about what types of lending arrangements they wanted. | think you’ll
             find it offers some unique ways of meeting your financial needs.




             Turn the page to see an example of a closing you might have written.
88   PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS: A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




ANSWER


Here's one possible conclusion for the message.



              Dear Mr. Hogan:

             Thank you for asking about our new Flexible Loan Program. I’m
             happy to send a brochure that describes the program and includes an
             application.

             We designed this program after many discussions with customers
             about what types of lending arrangements they wanted. | think you'll
             find it offers some unique ways of meeting your financial needs.

             Please let me know if you have questions about this loan pro-
             gram. If | haven’t heard from you, I’ll call in two weeks to see if
             you’d like to apply for a loan under this new program.
                                                                              LESSON    2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   89




REVIEW

Fill in the blanks with the correct word or phrase. If you're not sure what to write, turn to the
page number in the parentheses to the right of the sentence.

    1. Before starting to write the first draft, always
                                                                      your writing plan.        (59)

    2. An effective opening:
        MG cstablishes.ec- et
                           5 oe                                .contact-with thes.
        Mire          otc neciie Tene! Gee. oa          eee                SS
        M@ includes a key sentence that tells the reader what you are


        Mi no mnored Nan =
                         eee                                                           OF
        eeeS                                      Sentenecs. lone   (61)

    37 Wse tramsijonsiones Soh oe syourddeds,
                            se 24                                                (67)

    4. A strong closing:
         @           makes a final
         a                                                                 with readers
         aia                  fee    FO Se Oe oe                           the mam pomt
         @           wraps up any

         @           tells readers clearly what
         Bibtic or          Oval ve Ss SA         DY Pie                                       language       455)




                                       Now turn the page for an assignment.
90   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




It's time to try out everything you've learned in this lesson.

You will draft a document, using the writing plan you completed at the end of Lesson 1.

OPTION: _ If you wish, you may start with a new situation. But be sure to use a new Writing
          Worksheet to develop a new writing plan. Don’t ignore everything you’ve
          learned so far by starting a draft without a plan!
                                                                   LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   91




                                   WRITING WORKSHEET

SUBJECT:


   1.   LOOK AT WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO WRITE FROM YOUR READERS’ POINT OF
        VIEW.

        Name or describe reader(s):


        Think about your readers’ needs, interests, and concerns. Then check the appropriate
        boxes:

        IS YOUR READER ...
        ™   expecting to hear from you?
        @   familiar with the subject?
        m@ already interested in what you have to say?
        m@ likely to consider you an authority on the subject?
        m   likely to find what you have to say useful?
        ™   familiar with your views on the subject?
        m@ already committed to a point of view?
        m   likely to agree with your point of view?
        @   likely to find your message uncomfortable?
        ™   (other needs, interests, and concerns)

   2.   DECIDE ON YOUR PRIMARY PURPOSE:

                              L]   INFLUENCE              L]   INFORM

   3.   COMPOSE A KEY SENTENCE THAT EXPRESSES YOUR MOST IMPORTANT
        MESSAGE:

        I want my reader(s) to do or to know:
92   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




     4.    LIST THE FACTS AND IDEAS TO INCLUDE:




          Continue on another page if necessary.
                                                  LESSON   2   WRITE THE FIRST DRAFT   93




5.   GROUP POINTS INTO CATEGORIES (Key points):




6.   WRITE A SUMMARY STATEMENT OF ONE TO THREE SENTENCES FOR EACH
     CATEGORY, AND PUT THEM IN ORDER.




     Continue on another page if necessary.
94   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                          WRITING WORKSHEET

SUBJECT:

     1.   LOOK AT WHAT YOU’RE GOING TO WRITE FROM YOUR READERS’ POINT OF
          VIEW.

          Name or describe reader(s):

          Think about your readers’ needs, interests, and concerns. Then check the appropriate
          boxes:

          IS YOUR READER            ...

          ™   expecting to hear from you?
          @   familiar with the subject?
          ™   already interested in what you have to say?
          m   likely to consider you an authority on the subject?
          @   likely to find what you have to say useful?
          ™   familiar with your views on the subject?
          m™ already committed to a point of view?
          m@ likely to agree with your point of view?
          @   likely to find your message uncomfortable?
          ™   (other needs, interests, and concerns)

     2.   DECIDE ON YOUR PRIMARY PURPOSE:

                                    L]    INFLUENCE               L]   INFORM

     3.   COMPOSE A KEY SENTENCE THAT EXPRESSES YOUR MOST IMPORTANT
          MESSAGE:

          I want my reader(s) to do or to know:
                                               LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   95




4.   LIST THE FACTS AND IDEAS TO INCLUDE:




      Continue on another page if necessary.
96   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




     5.   GROUP POINTS INTO CATEGORIES (Key points):




     6.   WRITE A SUMMARY STATEMENT OF ONE TO THREE SENTENCES FOR EACH
          CATEGORY, AND PUT THEM IN ORDER.




          Continue on another page if necessary.
                                                                  LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   97




                                     WRITING WORKSHEET

SUBJECT:


   1.   LOOK AT WHAT YOWRE GOING TO WRITE FROM YOUR READERS’ POINT OF
        VIEW.

        Name or describe reader(s):


        Think about your readers’ needs, interests, and concerns. Then check the appropriate
        boxes:

        IS YOUR READER         ...

        ™   expecting to hear from you?
        @   familiar with the subject?
        ™   already interested in what you have to say?
        m@ likely to consider you an authority on the subject?
        m@ likely to find what you have to say useful?
        ®™ familiar with your views on the subject?
        m@ already committed to a point of view?
        m   likely to agree with your point of view?
        ®   likely to find your message uncomfortable?
        ™   (other needs, interests, and concerns)

   2.   DECIDE ON YOUR PRIMARY PURPOSE:

                              L]     INFLUENCE           L]   INFORM

   3.   COMPOSE A KEY SENTENCE THAT EXPRESSES YOUR MOST IMPORTANT
        MESSAGE:

        I want my reader(s) to do or to know:
98   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS; A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




     4.    LIST THE FACTS AND IDEAS TO INCLUDE:




          Continue on another page if necessary.
                                                      LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   99




    5.   GROUP POINTS INTO CATEGORIES (Key points):




    6.   WRITE A SUMMARY STATEMENT OF ONE TO THREE SENTENCES FOR EACH
         CATEGORY, AND PUT THEM IN ORDER.




Continue on another page if necessary.
100   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




WHAT?’S NEXT?

The next four lessons give you tools to shape the final language of your document. In Lesson 3,
you will learn how to use concise language.
                                                                                                   101




                                             USE CONCISE LANGUAGE


INTRODUCTION

Unnecessary words are obstacles to good business writing. They clutter up your sentences and
slow your readers down. They can also make your documents boring. By eliminating unneces-
sary words, you can keep your readers’ interest and make your writing easier to follow.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write more professionally and effectively with these strategies:
        m™ Finding single words for one-word ideas
        m™ Avoiding repetition
        @   Eliminating wasteful verbs and clauses

WHAT    YOU NEED

        @   The draft document that you completed in Lesson 1
        ™   Samples of your writing

Here are a few examples of sentence with clutter—words that take up space without adding
meaning. Which words do you think are unnecessary? Can you eliminate any words?

             e   Please let me know as to whether you will attend the party.

             e   The noise level of the trains arriving and departing from the station is low by
                 the current standards of the rapid-transit industry.

             e   There are several employees who want to take vacations in June.


Here are the words you could easily eliminate:

             e   Please let me know as-+e whether you will attend the party.
                                                                    trains
             e The noise level of the trains arriving and departing , fem
                                                                      +the-station is low
                 by the current standards? ofthe
                                           rapid-transitindustyy:
                              Several
             e There are-severat i employees whe want to take vacations in June.
102   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




In this lesson, you'll look at several ways to get rid of unnecessary words and you'll practice
revising wordy sentences. Then you'll review your own writing to see if you can make it more
concise.

USE ONE WORD           FOR A ONE-WORD                 IDEA

Sometimes you can collapse several words or a long phrase into one word that conveys your
message quickly and clearly: for instance, at a time prior to simply means before. The longer
phrase is dull and bulky. The single word does the same job more efficiently.

At other times, you can collapse a multiword phrase into one word by identifying the most im-
portant word of the phrase, turning that word into a different part of speech, and cutting out
words that don’t enhance your meaning.

ORIGINAL       We are in agreement with you about the contract terms.

REVISION       We agree with you about the contract terms.

ORIGINAL       She solved the problem in a clever way.

REVISION       She solved the problem cleverly.
                        ZOp=

               She cleverly solved the problem.

In the first example, the short verb “agree” delivers the full meaning of the longer phrase “are in
agreement.”

In the second example, “clever” is the most important word in the phrase “in a clever way.’ The
single word “cleverly” delivers the same meaning faster.

                                 Try a practice exercise on the next page.
                                                                  LESSON   3   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   103




PRACTICE

Eliminate unnecessary words or revise the sentences to make them more concise.

ORIGINAL      he client visited the site of the project in May.

REVISION      The client visited the project site in May.

    1.   She drove in a reckless manner.




    2. We conducted a survey of the members.




    3. The manager made an offer to buy everyone coffee.




    4.   I believe this procedure will make an improvement in the way reports are filed.




    5.   He called us in regard to his recent insurance claim.




    6. Due to the fact that she had been drinking, the accident was her fault.




                              Check your answers on the next page.
104    PROFESSIONAL    WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Your answers should look something like this:

      1. She drove recklessly.

      2.   We surveyed the members.

      3. The manager offered to buy everyone coffee.

      4. I believe this procedure will improve how reports are filed.

      5. He called us about his recent insurance claim.

      6. Because she had been drinking, the accident was her fault.

AVOID REPETITION

Business writers often use two or more words that mean exactly the same thing, leading to un-
necessarily wordy sentences. Here are some common repetitive phrases:

      alternative choices                    equally as effective as    separate entities
      basic fundamentals                     symptoms indicative of     advance warning
      serious crisis                         desirable benefits         two halves
      final outcome                          important essentials       regular weekly meetings
      past experience                        end result                 absolutely complete
      surrounding circumstances           _ future plans                ten a.m. in the morning


A crisis is always serious, plans are always for the future, and ten a.m. doesn't happen at night.
These unnecessary words waste your readers’ time.


PRACTICE

Eliminate the unnecessary repetitions in these sentences.

       1. The urban residents of the city are unhappy with the new regulations.




      2. The subterranean garage, located underground, is more secure than the old one.




      3. Until last week, our group had the best record to date.
                                                                LESSON   3   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   105




Your revisions should look something like this. The underlined words convey the original sen-
tences full meaning without the wasteful extra words on the last page.

    1. The urban residents are unhappy with the new regulations.
                               (R=

         The city residents are unhappy with the new regulations.

    2. The subterranean garage is more secure than the old one.

    3.   Until last week, our group had the best record.




ELIMINATE WASTEFUL POSSESSIVES, CLAUSES, AND THERE IS PHRASES

Some possessive word forms add nothing to a sentence but unnecessary length.

ORIGINAL      Their assumption is that the company should always come first.

REVISION      ‘They assume the company should always come first.

Some sentences can be streamlined by removing unnecessary who, that, and which clauses.

ORIGINAL      ‘The broker who works in Chicago sent the file that is incomplete to the home
              office.

REVISION      The Chicago broker sent the incomplete file to the home office.


Also, phrases such as there is, there are, and there may be can clutter up sentences—either on
their own or by requiring extra words after the phrase.

ORIGINAL      There is a new package on your desk.

REVISION A new package is on your desk.


ORIGINAL      There may be several applicants who have the necessary background for this
              position.

REVISION      Several applicants may have the necessary background for this position.
106   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

Revise these sentences to make them more concise.


      1. The members of the group who are interested in learning more about this software are
         welcome to attend the demonstration that will be conducted on February 16.




      2.   Tomorrow’s meeting, which will be held as always on the fourth floor, will include a
           speech about literacy in the workplace.




      3.   There are thousands of hours wasted because no one can use the files that are out of
           date.
                                                                    LESSON   3.   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   107




Your revisions should be similar to these:

            The group members interested in learning more about this software are welcome
            to attend the February 16 demonstration.
            Tomorrow’ fourth-floor meeting will include a speech about literacy in the
            workplace.
            Thousands of hours are wasted because no one can use the out-of-date files.



PRACTICE

Here's a chance to pull together what you've learned so far. These sentences contain several kinds
of clutter. Revise them to be more concise.

             On the basis of your recent letter, | would like to take this opportunity
             to inform you that | will investigate the problem about the delay in
             processing your loan that you mentioned and send you a letter in or-
             der to report my findings.

             At this point in time, it is our understanding that the new computer
             system will have the capability of processing 50 percent more infor-
             mation than the amount that is processed by our present system.

             With regard to the current status of your request for additional office
             equipment, we have submitted a request for the purpose of obtaining
             the funds that are needed to initiate the purchase.




                               Check your answers on the next page.
108   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Your revisions should look something like this:

             Onthe-basis-ofyourrecentletter-I would like tetake
                                                           this opportunity

             to inform you that | will investigate the-probler-about the delay in

              processing your loan which-youmentioned and send-you atetterin-
                        write you with
                             a my findings.


                                                         EZOR=
                       Thank you for                         0
             Onthe basis of ayour recent letter A }would like to take this oppetu-

             Ay to
             inform-yeuthat                | will investigate the-preblem-about the delay in

             processing your loan which-youmentioned, and send you a letter ia-
                               with
             erderto report amy findings.

                                           We understana
             Atthis point in time itis our atnderstanding that the new computer
                                            be able to
             system will Ravethe-capabilityof aProcessing 50 percent more infor-
                 eA)
             mation


                                                         =OR=

                                       We now understana
             Atthis-pointintme itis our Atnderstanding that the new computer

             system will Ravethe-capabiityof processing 50 percent more infor-

             mation than the-amountwhichis-processed
                                                   by our present system.



                               We                  Reaver
                               e-have submitteda ,
             to purchase the office equiprient you eee
             iagthe funds ,


               You are probably getting good at spotting and eliminating clutter.
             Turn the page for one last practice before searching your own writing
                                    for unnecessary words.
                                                                    LESSON   3   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   109




PRACTICE

Revise these paragraphs to be as concise as possible without changing the meaning. You can
cross out or write in words on this page without recopying the letter.

            During the month of March, the people who are working on the HUF

            project team made a study of the past history of HUF in order to

            come to some conclusions as to whether the necessary information

            was available for the purpose of their determining the project goals.


            The people who were members of this study team are of the opinion

            that the original analysis was done in a hasty manner and there were

            several errors in the original conclusions. At this point in time, it ap-

            pears that the main question is a matter of making a decision as to

            whether you should discontinue the project, or the team should un-

            dertake and perform a new analysis.


            We have enclosed for your information the details that resulted from

            the study. Due to the fact that the short amount of time is a factor in

            this situation, we would greatly appreciate your reviewing the informa-

            tion, and your reaching a decision and informing us of it, in a prompt

            way.




                              Check your revisions on the next page.
110   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING    SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Your revisions should look something like this.

                                         ln
                                         aMarch, the
                                                 people-who-are-working-on the HUF
                          studieA                                                   ‘s histovy
              project team Ampade-a-study of the past history of HUF                 ,in-order to
                                                   AeciAe              they had
             cometosome-conclusions-aste                    ,whether athe necessary information
                                                       necessary to             Aeterwmine its
             was available for the purpese oftheir adetermining the-project agoals.

                                                                          velieve
             The people-who-were members of this study team ,are efthe opinion
                                                      hastily                        that
             that the original analysis was done jifra-hasty manner and there

             were several errors in the original conclusions. At+this-pointintime,-
              It       now
             it ,appears athat the main question is amaterotmaking-adecision-

             as-to whether you should discontinue the project, or the team should

              undertake and perform a new analysis.


             We have enclosed feryournfermaton
                                     the detais which resulted from
                         vesults                                            Since
             the study ,. Duetothe-fact
                                that the short amount of ,time is afacter
                               _ shovt
             inthis-stuation        , we would greatly appreciate yourreviewing
                                                                            the in-
                                                                    it if you
             formation_andyeurreaching a decision and ainforming us
             of ae Aecision soon.
              A      :                        :
                                                              LESSON   3.   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   Tata




                                       Assignment

Read one or more of your writing samples. Select two or three sentences you think are cluttered
and write them below. Then revise the sentences so they are more concise.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




 ORIGINAL




- REVISION
112   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ORIGINAL




REVISION
                                                                LESSON   3.   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   113




REVIEW

To review what you've learned in this lesson, answer these questions.

    1. _________ words are obstacles to good business writing. They clutter up your
         sentences, and slow your readers down.      (101)

    2.   Sometimes you can collapse several words or a long phrase into
         that conveys your message quickly and clearly   (102)

    3.   Some sentences can be streamlined by removing unnecessary
                          io   DD. eas PM     gHTa                       clauses.           (105)

    Aree irases ke                       Can                    clutter up sentences—either on
         their own, or by requiring extra words after the phrase. (105)




WHAT’S NEXT?

In this lesson, you've examined ways to streamline your language to hold your readers’ interest
and save them time. In Lesson 4, you'll learn ways to make your sentences clearer.
114   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE
                                                                                                   115




                                               USE CLEAR LANGUAGE




INTRODUCTION

Language should convey your message swiftly and accurately. Some writers try to impress their
readers with unnecessarily complex language, which slows down and confuses readers more of-
ten than it impresses them.

Unnecessarily complex language can result in miscommunication, frustration, and wasted time.
The most effective and impressive writing makes complex ideas seem simple and clear.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write more professionally and effectively with these techniques:
            Using active language

            Using specific language
            Using plain English
            Avoiding jargon

Here is an e-mail written in language so vague, pompous, and passive that it's hard to tell what
the writer wants to say.

             Dear Ms. Carelli:

             This is in reference to your recent e-mail which has been received and
             forwarded to the appropriate department.

             Please be advised that your complaint will be prioritized immediately
             and you will be contacted when the nature of the difficulty has been
             ascertained. Action will then be taken in accordance with the facts.

             We regret this unfortunate occurrence. Please do not hesitate to con-
             tact this writer if further assistance is required.

             Sincerely,

             Joyce Ellensby
116   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Hard to follow, isn't it? Here’s what the writer may have meant.

              Dear Ms. Carelli:

             Thank you for your e-mail. | am sorry we have misplaced your loan
             documents, delaying your loan approval.

             James Nguyen manages our Research Department; searching for
             your documents is a high priority for his team. He will send me a re-
             port within three days.

              | will call you by next Friday with an update on your application’s
              status.

              Sincerely,

             Joyce Ellensby


The revised e-mail is more concise, even though it includes some new information. The new e-
mail also gets the message across more clearly because the writer used active, specific language,
with plain English instead of business jargon.
                                                                  LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   117




USE ACTIVE LANGUAGE

Passive language can weaken your writing, confuse your readers, and make your sentences lon-
ger. In contrast, active language focuses your readers’ attention and increases the impact of your
message.

As you can see in the following examples, in active language, the actor comes before the action.
To use active language, say who acts, not just what the action is. The actor is underlined in the
following revisions, and the action is boldfaced.

PASSIVE         The project was managed by John.

ACTIVE          John managed the project.
                (unnecessary words: “was” and “by”) (actor: John) (action: managed)


PASSIVE         The design document has been completed by the team.

ACTIVE          The team has completed the design document.


PASSIVE     A     safety plan was prepared and distributed to employees by the committee.

ACTIVE          The committee prepared a safety plan and distributed it to employees.

When you give instructions, it is particularly important to say clearly what you want your read-
ers to do. It can be frustrating and confusing to try to follow instructions that someone wrote in
passive language.

PASSIVE         The water should be measured every 35             Sone           ihe actor i s
              minutes.                                            sentence isimplied rather _
                                                                  than spelled out. For in-_
ACTIVE        The
              technician should measure the water ev-             stance,inthesentence
                ery 35 minutes.                                   “Prepare a safety plan? the
                                   oye                            implied subject is “you.” (Le.,
                                                                  “Tm asking or telling you
                [an implied you] Measure the water every 35       to prepare a safety plan.”)
              THINUtes.                                           The actor in a sentence isn’t
                                                                  always a person: “The plan —
These revisions make the passive language active by imply-        is flawed”; “The weather pre-
ing or stating an actor before the action. Either the techni-     vented us from going out”
cian or the reader—“you”— should measure the water.
118   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PASSIVE        The cover of the printer should be lifted, the ink cartridges that have been emp-
               tied should be removed, and the new ink cartridges should be opened, prepared,
               and inserted in the appropriate slots.

ACTIVE         [implied you] Lift the printer cover, remove the empty cartridges, open and pre-
               pare the new cartridges, and insert them into the appropriate slot.

In this revision, the implied actor—an implied “you,” or the reader—now appears before the ac-
tion of lifting the cover and removing the cartridges.

The next two examples also show how to revise a passive-language sentence by adding a missing
subject or actor.

PASSIVE        The door was found unlocked three times during the past month.

ACTIVE         The security guard found the door unlocked              See the Verbs section of
               three times during the past month.                      Lesson 5: Grammar
                                                                                       for
                                                                        a more complete discus-
PASSIVE _ It would be appreciated if the report could be                sion of passive and active _
          delivered to me on Monday.                                    language, including situ- _
                                                                        ations when passive lan- _
ACTIVE         | would appreciate it if you deliver the report to       guage may be —
               me on Monday.




PRACTICE

Revise these sentences so they are active, direct, and clear. The first step is to identify an actor.
(Feel free to invent one.)


      1. ‘The research project is being conducted by the News Department.
                                                            LESSON 4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   119



2. A copy of the approval must be stapled to the request before it is forwarded to the
   Accounting Office.




3. The new design is attached for your review and its return by March 15 would be
   appreciated.




4.   An investigation will be conducted by Andrea Russo into the concern voiced by Mr.
     Szabo.




5.   Reservations for the conference can be made by telephoning Tom Woo at Extension
     4732 before December 1.
120    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Your revisions should look something like these; the more active, revised words are boldfaced
here. Make sure that the actor comes before the action in your revisions.

1: ORIGINAL            The research project is being conducted by the News Department.

      REVISION         The News Department is conducting the research project.


2: ORIGINAL            A copy of the approval must be stapled to the request before it is forwarded
                       to the Accounting Office.

      REVISION         You must staple a copy of the approval to the request before forwarding it to
                       the Accounting Office.


3: ORIGINAL            The new design is attached for your review and its return by March 15 would
                       be appreciated.

      REVISION          [an implied you] Please review the design and return it by March 15.


4: ORIGINAL            An investigation will be conducted by Andrea Russo into the concern voiced
                       by Mr. Szabo.

      REVISION         Mr. Szabo voiced a concern and Andrea Russo will investigate it.


5: ORIGINAL            Reservations for the conference can be made by telephoning Tom Woo at
                       Extension 4732 before December 1.

      REVISION         You can make reservations for the conference by telephoning Tom Woo at
                       Extension 4732 before December 1.
                                                        =OR=

      REVISION         [implied you] To make reservations for the conference, telephone Tom Woo
                       at Extension 4732 before December 1.
                                                                   LESSON 4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   121




                                        Assignment

Do you use too much passive language when you write? Look through your own writing for
passive, indirect sentences. If you find any, write two of them below. Then revise the sentences
so they are active and direct. If you dont find any passive sentences, go on to the next section of
this lesson.

If youre not sure whether a sentence is passive or active, underline the actor and circle the ac-
tion. The language is passive if you cant find an actor (including an implied “you”) or if the actor
comes after the action.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
122   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




USE SPECIFIC LANGUAGE

Specific language makes your writing easier to read, while vague language paints an unclear pic-
ture. The more specific your language is, the less guesswork and effort your readers will need to
understand your message.

VAGUE          Some time ago, the building was destroyed in a disaster.

SPECIFIC       In 1994, fire destroyed the apartment house.


VAGUE          Our group went to Los Angeles for a meeting.


SPECIFIC       Our project team flew to Los Angeles to meet with Harriet Allen, the system
               designer.

VAGUE          Ask the client to complete the paperwork in a timely manner.

SPECIFIC       Ask the client to complete the new account application form within ten working
               days.

It can show consideration when you supply your readers with precise information. Vague lan-
guage can require them to guess at unknown meanings behind your word choices, so try using
words and phrases like the ones listed here to make your writing less vague and more specific.

               VAGUE                             SPECIFIC
               vehicle                           car
               car                               convertible
               equipment                         computer
               computer                          laptop
               went                              walked; ran; drove
               traveled                          flew; took the train; sailed
               contacted                         called; spoke to; visited
               proper                            correct; easy-to-use

               some                              five
               recently                          yesterday
               in a timely manner                by August 15; within two weeks
                                                                 LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   123




PRACTICE

Underline the vague, general words and phrases in these sentences. Then use your imagination
to fill in details and revise the sentences so they communicate specific, useful information.

    1. Recently, we looked at a structure that might be suitable for our needs.




    2. During the incident, Ms. Brown sustained multiple injuries to her upper torso and
       limbs.




    3. We have identified a few items to be discussed at the meeting, so please leave consider-
       able time in your schedule.
124    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are some possible revisions; yours will be different because you added different details. The
original boldfaced words are vague and imprecise; here are more concrete terms to replace them.


1: ORIGINAL            Recently, we looked at a structure that might be suitable for our needs.

      REVISION         Last week we looked at a four-story building that might be big enough for
                       our new machine polishers.




2: ORIGINAL            During the incident, Ms. Brown sustained multiple injuries to her upper
                       torso and limbs.

      REVISION         During the fall, Ms. Brown’s chest, shoulders, and arms were scratched and
                       cut.




3: ORIGINAL            We have identified a few items to be discussed at the meeting, so please leave
                       considerable time in your schedule.

      REVISION         At the meeting, we will discuss the next conference, the move to the new
                       building, and the new staff position, so please leave at least three hours in
                       your schedule.
                                                             LESSON   4.   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   125




                                     Assignment

Check your own writing to see whether you have used vague words and phrases. Underline any
words or phrases you find and write them below. Revise two of them to be more specific and
clear.


ORIGINAL




REVISION




 ORIGINAL




 REVISION
126   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




USE PLAIN ENGLISH

Do you ever have to read something very slowly because the writer has used unnecessarily for-
mal language, or has used uncommon words when everyday words would have gotten the point
across?

Pompous language can confuse, intimidate, amuse, or annoy your readers. Plain English com-
municates your message more reliably. Stuffy words and phrases can force readers to men-
tally translate your writing into everyday language, which can waste valuable time and create
misunderstandings.

How long does it take for you to read this paragraph and understand it?

             Per your request, enclosed herewith are documents concerning the
             above-mentioned project. Please review said documents and return
             them to this office prior to January 15. We will then initiate the pro-
             cess of implementing the requested system modifications.


See how much easier the paragraph is to read when it’s written in plain English?

              As you asked, | am sending a description of the Acme project. Please
              read the description and send it back to me before January 15. We
              will then start the system modifications.


Pompous language does not improve communication; instead, it gets in the way of your mes-
sage. So use plain English when you write. Choose ordinary words that communicate your mes-
sage as simply and directly as possible.
                                                                 LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   127




PRACTICE

Sometimes, the words in this list are the best, most precise words to use. But writers often use
these words when simpler language would communicate more clearly. What ordinary words
or phrases would be good alternatives to the words listed here? Use a thesaurus or dictionary if
youre not sure.

   1.    prior to

  2.     subsequent to

   3.    utilize

   4.    modifications

   5.    enhance

   6.    beneficial

   7.    supplemental

   8.    magnitude

   9.    supersede

   10.   augment

   11.   heretofore

   12.   parameters

   13.   commence

   14.   endeavor

   15.   optimal

   16.   forthwith
128   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




Here are some possible replacement words. You may have different, equally correct answers.

         1.    prior to                  before
         2.    subsequent to             after; following
         x5    wlitilize                 use
         4.    modifications             changes
         5.    enhance                   improve
         6.    beneficial                helpful
         7.    supplemental              extra
         8.    magnitude                 size
         9.    supersede                 replace
         10.   augment                   increase; add to
         11.   heretofore                before; until now
         12.   parameters                boundaries; limits

         13.   commence                  begin; start
         14.   endeavor                  try
         15.   optimal                   best; most favorable
         16.   forthwith                 immediately
                                                                   LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   129




PRACTICE

Revise these sentences, using plain English and active language.

    1. Division managers are hereupon requested to facilitate the implementation of the afore-
       mentioned program by forwarding details of their personnel requirements.




    2. ‘The injuries sustained by the passengers during the accident were the result of their fail-
        ure to use the vehicle's restraining elements.




    3. Enclosed herewith is a heretofore-unseen listing of procedures that must be implement-
       ed by our team immediately.
130    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


Your revisions might look something like these.

1: ORIGINAL            Division managers are hereupon requested to facilitate the implementation
                       of the aforementioned program by forwarding details of their personnel re-
                        quirements.


      REVISION         Please help us get this program started by letting us know how many people
                       you need to complete the job.
                                                        = ORe=

                       To help us get this program off the ground, please send us a list of your divi-
                       sions personnel needs.




2: ORIGINAL            The injuries sustained by the passengers during the accident were the result
                       of their failure to use the vehicle's restraining elements.

      REVISION         The passengers were injured in the accident because they didn't use seat belts.




3: ORIGINAL             Enclosed herewith is a heretofore-unseen listing of procedures that must be
                        implemented by our team immediately.

      REVISION          Here is a list of new procedures that our team must implement immediately.
                                                        R=

                        Please begin using these procedures at once.
                                                             LESSON 4 USE CLEAR LANGUAGE   131




                                     Assignment

Look for examples of pompous language in your own writing. Underline any words or phrases
you find and write them below. Revise two of them, using plain English.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




 ORIGINAL




 REVISION




                             Next, look at the importance of using
                        plain English instead of jargon when you write.
132    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




AVOID JARGON

Business writing is full of business jargon—words, phrases, abbreviations, and acronyms that
make sense only to people who are used to business language, or who share a particular job.

Sometimes businesspeople give new meanings to familiar words, and sometimes they invent
new jargon terms. Some of these terms enter mainstream language: bankers’ automated teller
machines from the 1970s are today’s ATMs. Networking is another business term that has be-
come widespread and very useful.

However, jargon damages business writing when it’s difficult or impossible for the reader to
understand. Use plain English instead of jargon when you write to someone who may not
recognize general business jargon, or terms that are specific to your job. Define any term that
may be new to your reader. Here are a few examples of business jargon that a reader might find
confusing:

          bullish on: confident of success in a given activity

          going forward: in the future

          push the envelope: to go beyond usual limits

          put a pin in it: “Hold that thought” or “Let’s come back to that later”

Here are three kinds of jargon you should usually avoid:

1.    Everyday words used in a nonstandard way:

          We plan a campaign to migrate customers to our bank.

2.    Words your reader wont find in a current dictionary:

          We hope to maximalize our marketing potential.

3.    Potentially unclear acronyms:

          Next year’s goals include increasing the BOCSE, establishing a RADIT, and improving
          the FAJ.
                                                                    LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   133




   tences could be partof an e-mail to a new intern in an office:
           Pd like you to read the attached request for proposal (RFP). Let’s discuss the
           RFP on Monday; after that, I’d like you to start writing a response to it.




PRACTICE

Look for examples of jargon in your own writing. If you find any, underline the words and then
write them below. Translate two of the jargon words into plain English.

JARGON




TRANSLATION




JARGON




TRANSLATION
134   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

To apply what you learned in this lesson, revise the following paragraphs so the language is ac-
tive, specific, and in plain English. Invent any details you like.

             Enclosed herewith is the information requested by you in your recent
             communication with the undersigned subsequent to your recent
             purchase of our computer system. It is our belief that the enhance-
             ments described therein would be beneficial to the efficiency of your
             organization by making it possible to increase the amount of data
             processed within a given time period.

             It is our policy to endeavor to provide the optimum service possible
             to our customers. Please be advised that should you have additional
             questions or concerns, every attempt will be made to provide a re-
             sponse in a timely manner.
                                                                   LESSON 4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE




ANSWER

Here is one way to revise the paragraphs. The details of your revision will differ.

             As you asked, | am sending a description of the improvements we
             plan to make to the Model 603A computer system you purchased
             from us last year. We believe these improvements will help your orga-
             nization process at least 15 percent more data each month.

             We try to provide the best possible service to our customers. Please
             let me know if you have any more questions or concerns, and | will do
             my best to address them within five working days.
136    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE    IT WELL   GUIDE




REVIEW

Fill in the blanks with the correct word or phrase. If you're not sure, check the page number after
the sentence.

      4,   Inactive laneuace, ites 2
                                  es                                 =       COMes HeLOTC
           (Gs                esis Ce at, Gly)

      2.                                          makes your writing easier to read, while vague language
           paints an unclear picture.        (122)

      3.   Pompous language can confuse, intimidate, amuse, or annoy your readers.
           communicates your message more reliably.                  (126)

      4.   Business writing is full of business __~=~—~=_—~~—~—~—S—S
                                                            SSC that is, words, phras-
           es, abbreviations, and acronyms that make sense only to people who are used to busi-
           ness language or who share a particular job. (132)




WHAT?’S NEXT?

In this lesson, you've examined ways to use language to communicate more actively, simply, and
clearly. In Lesson 5, you'll learn how to ensure that your grammar is correct for any business
document you write.
                                                                                                  137




                                            USE CORRECT                       GRAMMAR


INTRODUCTION

American English can be difficult to write correctly because it doesn’t always follow clear-cut
rules. You might find differences between the advice in this book and another book’s advice, or
the rules you learned in school. That’s because many grammar and word-usage issues are not
matters of hard-and-fast rules, but of style. Throughout this workbook, you'll find widely ac-
cepted and easy-to-use style guidelines that are accepted in the workplace today.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write clearly and professionally with these strategies:
        m   Avoiding incomplete sentences and achieving parallel sentence structure
        m™ Using strategic parts of speech to write clear, correct, dynamic sentences
        m™ Recognizing the effects of passive and active language, and using them
           appropriately
        ™   Recognizing frequently misused words, and using them appropriately and
            confidently




INCOMPLETE        SENTENCES AND PARALLEL STRUCTURE

First, you'll learn how to avoid incomplete sentences and maintain parallel structure in a sen-
tence. These techniques make sure that each sentence you write communicates a complete
thought to a reader, and make sure that the reader grasps the logic of your message.
138   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




INCOMPLETE           SENTENCES


A complete sentence contains a subject and a verb, and it conveys at least one complete thought.

An incomplete sentence ends in a period, but the writer has omitted information that the reader
needs. Some incomplete sentences are missing a subject or verb, or both.

Circle the numbers in front of the incomplete sentences here.

      1. Always arrives on time.

      2. Because she is usually reliable.

      3. ‘The results of inaccurate accounting practices.

      4. Until after the final day of the conference.

You should have circled all the numbers. They are all incomplete sentences.

INCOMPLETE           A few hours.

COMPLETE              It will take a few hours.

Sometimes a complete sentence becomes incomplete when you add another word.

COMPLETE              Janine has returned from Chicago.

INCOMPLETE            Because Janine has returned from Chicago.

COMPLETE              We're happy because Janine has returned from Chicago.

Incomplete sentences like the middle example are often the re-
sult of a writer’s beginning a thought, becoming distracted, and   _ For more tips on com-_
forgetting to complete it. Proofreading your work will help you      plete versus incomplete :
catch unfinished thoughts and incomplete sentences like these.       sentences, see Lesson 7:
                                                                     Write Effective E-Mail,
                                                                     page 217.                  :
                                                                LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   139




PARALLEL      STRUCTURE


To help your writing flow smoothly and make sense, use the same format for items you present
in a series. A series with items in different formats makes a sentence awkward to read. As the
reader scans through a series with parallel structure, the relationships between different pieces
of information are clear.

NOT PARALLEL          At the February meeting we will hold a discussion of the new health plan,
                      whether to revise the procedures manual, and then a draft will be devel-
                      oped of the early retirement policy.

PARALLEL              At the February meeting, we will discuss the new health plan, decide
                      whether to revise the procedures manual, and draft an early retirement
                      policy.

These parallel verb tenses save space and help guide the reader smoothly through the plans for
the February meeting.
140   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

Underline structures in these sentences that either are parallel or should be parallel. If necessary,
rewrite the sentences.


      1. Rita’s responsibilities include sorting the mail, answering the phone, and to run errands.




      2. We have asked managers to reduce travel budgets by 20 percent and that expense re-
         ports should be submitted weekly.




      3. During my annual trip to Asia, I plan to visit our office in Japan, meet with officials in
         South Korea, look at possible manufacturing sites in China, and explore the possibility
         of setting up operations in Vietnam.




                                   Check your answers on the next page.
                                                              LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   141




ANSWERS


  The parallel words are underlined, and the revised words are in bold.

  1. Rita's responsibilities include sorting the mail, answering the phone, and running
     errands.



  2. We have asked managers to reduce travel budgets by 20 percent and to submit expense
     reports weekly.



  3.   (correct) During my annual trip to Asia, I planned to visit our office in Japan, meet with
       officials in South Korea, look at possible manufacturing sites in China, and explore the
       possibility of setting up operations in Vietnam.
142   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRONOUNS

These two kinds of pronoun mistakes are common in business writing:

         @   Unclear pronouns
         @   Gender-biased pronouns




UNCLEAR       PRONOUNS


As you can see from these examples, unclear pronouns quickly confuse readers.

UNCLEAR        When Marta met with Susan Garcia last week, she agreed to accept the revised
               proposal.

CLEAR          Susan Garcia agreed to accept the revised proposal when she met with Marta last
               week.

UNCLEAR        The transit officials plan to increase fares to reduce the annual deficit. This will be a
               hardship for commuters.

CLEAR          Transit officials plan to increase fares to reduce the annual deficit. This increase
               will be a hardship for commuters.

UNCLEAR        Toms shirt stopped fitting his waistline, so he had it taken in.

CLEAR          Tom had his shirt taken in to fit his waistline.
                                                                 LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   143




PRACTICE

See if you can clear up the confusing pronouns in these sentences. Feel free to guess the writer’s
meaning.

    1. The catalog had a picture of the work station the company needed, so Alex decided to
       buy it.




    2.     Ellen was unable to finish the project on time and explained the problem to Brandi. She
           was very frustrated.




                               Check your answers on the next page.
144    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




POSSIBLE REVISIONS


      1. Alex decided to buy the catalog because it had a picture of the work station the company
         needed.
                                                        SOR

           Because the company needed a work station, Alex decided to buy the one pictured in the
           catalog.




      2.   Ellen was unable to finish the project on time and explained the problem to Brandi.
           Brandi was very frustrated.
                                                        Sue

           Brandi was very frustrated when she learned Ellen was unable to finish the project on
           time.
                                                                LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   145




GENDER-BIASED          PRONOUNS


In grammar, the term gender refers to the way a language categorizes words as feminine, mascu-
line, or neutral:
        m    She received her law degree in 1995.

        @    His ambition was to ride his bicycle across the country.

        m@   It's a beautiful building.

Until the late 1960s, it was common practice to use masculine pronouns—he, his, and him—to
refer to both women and men. Today, however, it’s no longer acceptable to use masculine pro-
nouns for groups that include women.

GENDER-       The administrative assistant asked everyone to select his preferred option by the
BIASED        first of next month.

The most effective way to remove gender bias is to revise the sentence, using plural nouns and
pronouns.

REVISED       The administrative assistant asked all employees to select their preferred options
              by the first of next month.
146     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




      It has become more acceptable to use the plural pronouns their and them with singular
      indefinite pronouns such as everyone. But whenever you can, try to phrase sertenes> 8to
      avoid gender bias without using awkward constructions or clumsy grammar.

  AWKWARD                  The administrative assistant asked everyone to select higher preferred
                            health provider option by the first of next month.                     _

      AWKWARD              The administrative assistant asked everyone to select the health pro-
                           vider option s/he prefers by the first of next month. —

      CLUMSY               The administrative assistant asked everyone to select their preferred
      GRAMMAR              health provider option by the first of next month.

 - UNBIASED                The administrative assistant asked all of us to select our preferred
   AND CORRECT             health provider options by the first of next month.




PRACTICE

Revise these sentences to remove gender bias.

       1. This weekend, somebody left the lights on in his apartment.




       2. When compiling figures for the audit, an accountant should always make sure she has
          the most recent figures.




                                     Check your answers on the next page.
                                                              LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   147




ANSWERS


  1. Lights were left on in one apartment over the weekend.

                                         =O

     The lights stayed on in one apartment over the weekend.

  2. When compiling figures for the audit, accountants should always make sure they have
     the most recent figures.
148   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                 Assignment
Review your own writing samples for unclear pronoun references or gender-biased pronouns. If
you find any, write the sentences below and then revise them. If you don't find any examples, go
on to the next section.


ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
                                                                LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   149




SUBJECT-VERB AGREEMENT

It's sometimes hard to know whether to use the singular or the plural form of a verb. Circle the
numbers in front of the sentences that use correct verb tenses:

         Each of the systems are failing.

         Mr. Bruce and Mr. Appleby has received the e-mail.

         One of the calculators was advertised at a reduced price.

         The decision of the judges are final.

    5.   Neither of the clerks wants to change the hours.

    6.   Four dollars are not enough to buy us all coffee.

The verb tenses are correct in Sentences 3 and 5.


On the next few pages you'll find some of the basic rules that ensure subject-verb agreement in
your sentences.
150     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




A plural noun takes a singular verb when it conveys a single expression of time, money, or an-
other quantity. The subjects are underlined and the verbs are boldfaced in this lesson.

EXAMPLES                Ninety-nine cents isn’t much to pay for a song.

                         Three blocks feels like a long way to walk in some parts of this town.

                         Six hours is enough time for me to finish it.




It’s best to use a singular verb after these pronouns:

      anyone                                  everyone                      nothing
      anything                                everything                    one (of)
      each                                    neither                       some
      either                                  nobody                        somebody
      every                                   no one                        someone
      everybody                               none                          something


EXAMPLES                 One of the four systems is problematic.


                         Every agent, supervisor, and floor manager is needed.


                         No one wants to do the chore.


                         Somebody has to revise the protocols.
                                                                  LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   151




Two or more singular subjects joined by and take a plural verb.

EXAMPLE             Pencil and paper are required for the test.

When a noun is the subject of a sentence, the verb agrees with the noun—even if the subject is
followed by other nouns.

EXAMPLE           The use of BlackBerries and phones is prohibited during staff meetings.

In this example, the singular noun “use” is the subject of the sentence. It takes priority over
“BlackBerries and phones,’ and takes a single noun. If the subject of that sentence were plural, it
would take a plural verb.

EXAMPLE            Exits from the room to answer Blackberries and phones are prohibited during
                   staff meetings.

If youre struggling over what verb tense sounds best, then try rewriting the sentence. An
implied subject “you” agrees with the verb in this revised sentence: “Do not use phones or
BlackBerries during staff meetings.” This sentence is also much easier to understand than either
of the examples above.




When a noun is the subject of a sentence, the verb agrees with the noun—even when it’s fol-
lowed by other nouns and a phrase like as well as, along with, or in addition to.

EXAMPLE            Sheila, with the enthusiastic support of Roberta and Jim, plans to protest the
                   new restrictions.

In that case, Sheila is the subject of the sentence. The singular subject takes a singular verb.
152   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




The same rule applies to sentences with other words that come between the subject and the verb.

EXAMPLE              The largest building on the corner where Main St., Fourth St., and Second Ave.
                     intersect has always appealed to me.

In this case, “on the corner where Main St., Fourth St., and Second Ave. intersect” is as irrelevant
as Roberta and Jim’s enthusiastic support in the earlier sentence. The building has always ap-
pealed to the writer. The singular subject takes a singular verb no matter how many words pile
up in the space between.

If that sentence started, “The buildings,” plural, then the verb would be plural to match the plu-
ral buildings: “The buildings on the corner where Main St., Fourth St., and Second Ave. intersect
have always appealed to me.”




                           Practice subject-verb agreement on the next page.
                                                                    LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   153




PRACTICE

Underline the correct verb in each sentence.


    1.   The purpose of his requests (was, were) to get the additional funds.

    2.   I don't think either of the new designs (are, is) going to last for a year.

    3.   Each computer, desk, and printer (is, are) marked down

    4.   The cause of the errors (is, are) unknown.

         One of the reasons for absences (is, are) poor health.

         The largest of the three banks (is, are) in Petaluma.

         Everyone I asked, including the managers of both locations, (agree, agrees) with my
         decision.




                               Check your answers on the next page.
154    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


      1. The purpose of his requests was to get the additional funds.

      2.   I dont think either of the new designs is going to last for a year.

      3.   Each computer, desk, and printer is marked down.

      4.   The cause of the errors is unknown.

      5.   One of the reasons for absences is poor health.

      6.   The largest of the three banks is in Petaluma.

      7.   Everyone I asked, including the managers of both locations, agrees with my decision.
                                                                 LESSON 5 USE CORRECT GRAMMAR      155



PASSIVE LANGUAGE AND HIDDEN VERBS

You learned in Lesson 4 how passive language can make your writing unclear. Many grammar
experts strongly condemn passive language, but many writers still use it. For most business writ-
ing, passive language will weaken your sentences and confuse your readers.

However, there are times when passive language is appropriate. This section gives you some
questions to ask as you decide when and whether to use it.

Active language propels a sentence forward by harnessing its verbs; in this section, you'll also
learn how to unlock verbs from passive language. Your sentences will become more clear, con-
cise, and energetic.




PASSIVE AND ACTIVE LANGUAGE


Passive language is sometimes acceptable. But whenever you use passive language, you should
do it consciously and carefully, and because it fits the sentence better than active language. Save
passive construction only for situations when the person or thing taking an action is unknown,
or not important.


Passive language often obscures who takes an action, while active language clearly reveals who
does what in a sentence. Sometimes a sentence names a person who takes an action, but the sen-
tence is still couched in passive language.




EXAMPLE       Thousands of dollars were saved for the company by Antoine's timely idea.

This sentence wastes space and downplays Antoine's accomplishment. Active language corrects
these problems.

REVISION      Antoine saved the company thousands of dollars with his timely idea.
156    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Sometimes a sentence implies who takes an action or holds an opinion, but the sentence is still
in passive language.

EXAMPLE         Jill explained that business suits are considered unnecessary in this office.

This writer implies that all the people who work in the office recognize a shared rule about ap-
propriate office clothes. It may be unimportant who holds this view. Nevertheless, the sentence is
simpler and stronger in the active voice:

REVISED _ Jill explained that no one considers business suits necessary in this office.




PRACTICE




Examine the passive language in the following sentences. Revise them, feeling free to add details,
if you think active language would improve the sentences. Underline the action, and who takes
the action.




      1.   Safety regulations had not been observed by the setup crew.


      2.   The document was hyphenated automatically.


      3.   Sales declined that quarter, as they were expected to do.




                                    Check your answers on the next page.
                                                                LESSON 5 USE CORRECT GRAMMAR   157



ANSWERS


  1. The setup crew had not observed safety regulations.

  2.   The document was hyphenated automatically. (fine as it is, since a computer takes the
       action)

  3.   Sales declined that quarter, as analysts had expected.




           Turn the page to learn other ways to make your language more active.
158   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




VERBS     FROZEN       IN NOUN         FORMS


Passive constructions often freeze the real action of a sentence behind a noun and two unneces-
sary, passive verbs. In these cases, it saves space and improves the sentence to translate the ac-
tion from a noun into a verb.


EXAMPLE        ‘The suggestion was made that we go.


REVISION       Vikram suggested that we go.




The passive verb “was made” adds unnecessary bulk to the sentence, and the verb to make
doesn't represent the most important action. By examining the noun “suggestion” you can find
another, implied verb and the sentence’s real action: to suggest.




Sentences can be written in active language, but still contain verbs frozen in noun forms. These
sentences often feature stale, everyday verbs like “to be” that don't represent the sentences’ real
action. Sometimes an -ing noun form of a verb slows these sentences down.

EXAMPLE        Her singing is amazingly good.

REVISION       She sings amazingly well.




This revision replaces the stale verb “is” with the more interesting verb “sings.” The new sentence
is crisper because the words “She sings” identify the actor and action much more simply and en-
ergetically than the words “Her singing is... -            »
                                                               LESSON 5 USE CORRECT GRAMMAR      159



PRACTICE

Practice releasing verbs from noun forms in the following exercise. Feel free to add words and
ideas to rewrite the sentences to be shorter and more direct.

    1. Our preference is that you act immediately.




    2. Eating, drinking, and smoking are prohibited on all transit vehicles.




    3. The demonstration of project-management skills is a requirement for all applicants.




                             Check your answers on the next page.
160   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


      1. We prefer that you act immediately.

      2. You may not eat, drink, or smoke on transit vehicles.

      3. We require that all applicants demonstrate project-management skills.
                                                   =OR=

         All applicants must demonstrate project-management skills.
                                                                   LESSON   5 USE CORRECT GRAMMAR   161




FREQUENTLY MISUSED WORDS

Many English words sound alike but have different meanings and spellings, which sometimes
makes it hard to avoid misusing words. Here are two methods that can help you use the right
words:
        ™   Rewrite the sentence, using a word that’s easier to recognize
        ™   Memorize the differences between similar-sounding words

USE A DIFFERENT        WORD


Try rewriting the sentence below with a word that isn’t as easy to confuse with a similar word.

            Nick met with his supervisor for (advise / advice) about ways to han-
            dle a troublesome customer.


The right word is advice, but you could also use suggestions.

            Nick met with his supervisor for suggestions about ways to handle a
            troublesome customer.


MEMORIZE      THE DIFFERENCES               BETWEEN   SIMILAR-SOUNDING            WORDS


Here are some pairs of useful word that people often confuse because they look or sound similar.
Memorizing the differences between them will give you more options when you write.

                       accept / except                     lead / led
                       access / excess                    loose / lose
                       advice / advise                  maybe / may be
                        affect / effect               personal / personnel
                     already/ all ready               principal / principle
                       choose / chose                     than / then

                      cite / sight / site

Also, alright has its own entry in Merriam-Webster’s Eleventh Collegiate Dictionary, but you
should always spell it as two words: all right. Many readers will assume you made a spelling mis-
take if you use the one-word form.
162     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




      You cant count on your spell-check or grammar- check features to catch misused words. In /
      fact, these easily mistaken words often crop up as errors in newspapers ¢and on news sites
      that rely on computers instead of human proofreaders.


On the following pages are definitions and some mnemonic devices to help you remember
which word to use for a given situation.
                                                                  LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   163




accept / except

  We accept your offer with great pleasure.          verb: to receive or to agree

   Sandy is good at everything                       other than
   except totaling the figures.


TO REMEMBER:         Accept and agree both start with a.



access / excess

   The new road gives us access to our               way of getting to
   property.

   This pass guarantees access to                    permission to enter
   the concert.

   The new attorney has an excess                    too much
   of energy.

TO REMEMBER:         The “ex” in excess sounds like extra.



advice / advise

   I'd appreciate your advice about which            noun: recommendation, help
   system to purchase.


   We were called in to advise the company           verb: to give advice
   about ways to trim the budget.




affect / effect

   The delay will not affect our ability to meet     verb: to change
   the deadline.

   One effect of the fire was that                   noun: a result
   we lost five years’ worth of records.
164     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




already / all ready
      The game is already over.                                    before a given time

      The drivers are all ready to leave.                          all prepared


           As a separate word, all refers to several people or objects. If you can place a noun between
           all and ready, as in the sentence “All the drivers are ready to leave,’ use the two separate
           words—all ready—rather than the single word already.



alright / all right

      “The first two years of medical school were                  a highly controversial spelling
      alright.” —Gertrude Stein
      That was a nasty fall: are you all right?                    the unarguably correct
                                                                   spelling

           In short, alright’s wrong. All right is two words.



choose / chose

      Each department can choose the colors for                    present or future tense of the
      its own offices.                                             verb to choose
      We chose Honolulu as the site of its next                    past tense of the verb to
      meeting.                                                     choose
                                                                     LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   165




cite / sight / site


   The attorney cited similar cases.                  verb: to quote or refer to

   She travels because she loves                      noun: something seen
   each new sight.

   The new jail will be built on the site.            noun: location, piece of land,
                                                      place on the Web


TO REMEMBER:

          @    Cite is from the word citation.

          m    Sight is spelled like light. Both words refer to something you can see.



lead / led

   Be sure to place a lead apron on the                noun: metal
   patient's lap for X-rays.

   The facilitator led the discussion.                past tense of the verb to lead

   Do they lead the discussions?                      present or future tense of the
                                                      verb to lead


loose / lose

   Please put your loose change into                  not contained
   the coffee fund.

   The wheel wobbles because it is loose.             not securely attached

   Unfortunately, we continue to lose                 verb: to have fewer, or to have
   customers.                                         less


TO REMEMBER: Lost is the past tense of lose—only the final letter changes.
166     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




maybe / may be

      Maybe we should talk again on Thursday.                        perhaps

      This may be our last chance to change the                      verb: is possibly
      logo on our cards.


TO REMEMBER:

           =   Maybe is one word when youre uncertain about something.
           m   Use may be as two words when you could add the word well between them: “This
               may well be our last chance.”



personal / personnel

      Benefits include one day of personal time                      belonging to an individual
      every four months.

      All newly hired personnel are required                         employees
      to attend an orientation meeting.

TO REMEMBER:             Personnel has the same e as employees.



principal / principle

      Tomas is our first choice for school                           chief, head
      principal.

      The principal reason for her dismissal was                     primary, most important
      her high rate of absenteeism.

      He has paid off the principal and the interest             a financial term
      from the mortgage.



      Because of her principles, she would not                       rules of conduct
      approve the illegal use of funds.
                                                                    LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   167




TO REMEMBER:

        m =A pal and a principal are two kinds of people.
        m     =~Principle ends with e; ethics begins with e.



than / then

  After accepting congratulations                    at that time
  for his sales record, Isaac then graciously
  thanked his associates.

  Anik can complete her statistical assessments      the word sets up a
  faster than anyone else in the department.         comparison

TO REMEMBER:        Then is spelled like when, and both words refer to time.




  For brief, enjoyable tips on grammar and word usage, look up Mignon Fogarty’s Grammar
  Girl podcast. You can also read and play episodes on her website at grammar.quickand-
   dirtytips.com. Her topics include the distinctions between lay and lie; assure, ensure, and
 _ insure; will and shall; and who and whom. She also covers issues like “How to Write a
  Great Blog Comment.”                                               .




                                 Turn the page for some practice.
168    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

Circle the correct word or words to complete each sentence.

      1.   Ifall goes well, next year’s budget will include funds for a significant increase in the
           number of employees in the (personal / personnel) department.

      2.   Everyone on the team believes that Davida is a more competent administrator (then /
           than) Eugene is.

      3.   ‘The small (principal / principle) sum accrues little interest.

      4.   The drop in the stock market will have no (affect / effect) on our plans for expansion.

      5.   Weare (already / all ready) two months late with our loan payment.

      6.   He has a tendency to ask for too much (advise / advice).

      7.   Earlier, she (led / lead) the dog out into the yard.

      8.   The inspectors found that the safety rules were far too (lose / loose).

      9.   Her test performance was (alright / all right).




                                    Check your answers on the next page.
                                                               LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   169




ANSWERS


  1. Ifall goes well, next year’s budget will include funds for a significant increase in the
     number of employees in the personnel department.

  2.   Everyone on the team believes that Davida is a more competent administrator than
       Eugene is.

  3.   The small principal sum accrues little interest.

  4.   ‘The drop in the stock market will have no effect on our plans for expansion.

  5.   Weare already two months late with our loan payment.

  6.   He has a tendency to ask for too much advice.

  7.   Earlier, she led the dog out into the yard.

  8.   The inspectors found that the safety rules were far too loose.

  9.   Her test performance was all right.
170   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                 Assignment

Review your own writing sample for any subject-verb agreement errors and misused words. Use
the space below to revise any incorrect sentences.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
                                                                LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR    171




REVIEW

To review what you've learned in this lesson, answer these questions.

    1.   Acomplete sentence containsa_______anda_______, and it conveys at least
         ONG =
             ae              (138)

    2.   A plural noun takes a ________ verb tense when it conveys a single expression of
         time, money, or another quantity. (150)

    3.   Two or more singular subjects joined by and takea _________verb.             (151)

    4.   _________ language often obscures who takes an action, while ____                 language
         clearly reveals who does what ina sentence.    (155)

    5.   the spelling alright is__-
                                 - ___- correct.       (164)




WHAT?’S NEXT?

In this lesson, you've learned how to ensure that your grammar is correct for any business docu-
ment you write. In Lesson 6, you'll learn the correct uses of various punctuation marks.
172   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE
                                                                                                173




                                   USE CORRECT PUNCTUATION


INTRODUCTION

Punctuation mistakes distract your readers and reduce your credibility. No workbook can offer
comprehensive coverage of punctuation in the American workplace: our language is too com-
plex, and it changes too quickly. Nevertheless, this lesson will help you review punctuation rules
that many business writers neglect.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write clearly and professionally with these guidelines:
        m@ Using punctuation marks to correct run-on sentences
        m™ Using strategic punctuation marks correctly
174   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PUNCTUATION AND RUN-ON SENTENCES

To start with a grammar term, a clause is any set of words within a sentence that contains its
own subject and predicate. Clauses are the building blocks of correct and incorrect sentences,
including run-on sentences.

See if you can underline the final clauses here:

              | got the job through Ms. Bucholz, who is a family friend.

              | remember that he joined the firm in September.


You recognized the final clauses if you underlined “who is a family friend” and “that he joined
the firm in September.”

A run-on sentence contains two or more clauses that are connected incorrectly. The clauses lack
one of the following, necessary links:
         ™   A conjunction such as and, or, but, because (etc.)

                                  —AND/OR—

         m   ‘The right punctuation

Run-on sentences are not necessarily long, and some run-on sentences have no punctuation at
all. (An example might be “Arrive on time leave on time.)


Here are two other kinds of run-on sentences:

      1. Two complete sentences joined only with a comma:

             The office will not be open over the holiday, please complete all
             important work by the day before.

      2. Two complete sentences joined only with a comma and a word like however, therefore,
         or meanwhile:

             The office will not be open over the holiday, therefore please complete
             all important work by the day before.
                                                                LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION




Here are four ways to correct a run-on sentence:

    1. Usea    period to divide the sentence into two or more new sentences:

              The office will not be open over the holiday. Please complete all
              important work by the day before.

    2.   Use acomma and a conjunction such as and, or, but, because, etc.:

              The office will not be open over the holiday, so please complete all
              important work by the day before.

    3.   Useasemicolon on its own:

              The office will not be open over the holiday; please complete all
              important work by the day before.

    4.   Useasemicolon and a word such as however, therefore, meanwhile, also, etc.:

              The office will not be open over the holiday; therefore, please
              complete all important work by the day before.
176   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Identify the run-on sentences below, and put an X beside them. Then use any of the methods
explained earlier to correct them.


                                                                        RUN-ON?
ORIGINAL        We met for six hours, however, we could not
                reach a consensus.
                                                                            x
REVISION        We met for six hours; however, we could not
                reach a consensus.


      1. The agency completed the investigation last month; its
         findings were inconclusive.


      2. We believe the problem is separate, it is not related to
         the earlier fire.


      3.   She has received the most up-to-date treatment, her
           depression hinders her recovery.




      4.   Let me know if you would like to meet with our team;
           meanwhile, we will proceed with the project.




      5. We had hoped to make a decision by now, however,
         we are still waiting for information from the client.
                                                          LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION




ANSWERS                                                                       RUN-ON?


     The agency completed the investigation last month; its
     findings were inconclusive.


     We believe the problem is separate; it is not related to
     the earlier fire.                                                     esas Kes

     She has received the most up-to-date-treatment, but
     her recovery is hindered by her depression.




     Let me know if you would like to meet with our team;
     meanwhile, we will proceed with the project.




     We had hoped to make a decision by now; however,
     we are still waiting for information from the client.
178   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                 Assignment
Check your own writing samples for run-on sentences. If you find any, write the originals and
revisions here. If you dontt find any, go on to the next section of this lesson.


ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
                                                               LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   179




SENTENCES THAT ARE TOO LONG

Some sentences are too long to comprehend easily in one reading. Studies show that people gen-
erally have to read sentences of more than 28-30 words at least twice.

How many times do you have to read this sentence?

            To help Debra succeed in her present position, we recommend that
            she be given the opportunity to participate with the department su-
            pervisor, in meetings to be held twice a month starting in the first
            quarter of next year, with the specific purpose of discussing alterna-
            tive work methods for processing work flow. (51)


See how much easier these shorter sentences are to follow?

            To help Debra succeed in her present position, we recommend that
            she be given the opportunity to participate in meetings with the de-
            partment supervisor. (24) These meetings will be held twice a month
            starting in the first quarter of next year. (16) During these meetings,
            Debra and her supervisor can discuss alternative methods for pro-
            cessing work flow. (15)


As a general rule, keep the average length of your sentences to 17-24 words, with only one or
two thoughts per sentence. If you are using technical or unusual terms, drop the count to 15-18
words.

Here’s how to determine if your sentences are too long:
        ™   Count the number of words in each of five consecutive sentences. Include small
            words such as 4a, the, to, etc.

        ™   Divide the total by five.

            EXAMPLE

            The Data Processing Group has failed to meet its schedules for the
            past six months, causing delays and confusion throughout the or-
            ganization. (22) To remedy this situation, please make sure all team
            members follow the Data Processing Organizational Plan procedures
            to the letter. (20)


            The Plan, which was distributed to all the teams in November, clearly
            establishes objectives and priorities for all department projects. (20)
            The procedures it contains explain each team member's responsibili-
            ties in detail. (11) The procedures also provide steps to take in the
            case of problems. (12)
180    PROFESSIONAL     WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are the word counts for those five sentences:

           Words per sentence: 22 + 20+ 20+ 11+ 12=85

           Average words per sentence: 85 + 5 = 17


Now look at one of your writing samples. Count the number of words in each of five consecutive
sentences.
           ®   Write down the number of words in each sentence:

               Sentence 1:____————              Sentence 4:

               Sentence 2:_________—~—«CSenttence 5:

               Sentence 3:

           @   Add the five numbers and write the total:

           @   Divide the total by five and write that number:

If the average number of words per sentence is more than 25, pay closer attention to the length
of your sentences.

Here is an easy, two-step method for revising a long sentence:

      1.   List the ideas.

      2.   Write separate sentences containing only one or two ideas. Use transitions to link the
           sentences.
                                                               LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   181




Here's an example of a long sentence. Use the method listed on the previous page to revise it.

            | worked with a number of managers and supervisors to explore the
            issues which surfaced during the change process, including concerns
            about their own limitations, a sense of loss as a result of change,
            reconciliation of conflicting needs and priorities, and how to preserve
            their own sense of worth when everyone else seems to be moving
            forward. (57)




Your two-step revision might look like this:

    1. List the ideas.

            | worked with managers and supervisors to explore the issues
            resulting from changes. The issues included

            ¢   Concerns about their limitations

            e   Sense of loss as a result of change

            ¢   Concerns about conflicting needs and priorities

            e   Ways to preserve their sense of self-worth

    2. Write separate sentences containing only one or two ideas. Use transitions to link the
        sentences.


            | worked with a number of managers and supervisors to explore the
            issues that surfaced during the change process. (19)

            Two of the major issues concerned feelings about their own limita-
            tions and their sense of loss as a result of change. (21) In addition,
            they wanted to reconcile their conflicting needs and priorities. (11)
            Finally, they are working to preserve their own sense of self-worth
            when everyone else seems to be moving forward. (19)




                                      Now try some practice.
182   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Revise this 55-word sentence into several shorter ones.

               | have enclosed a survey form that will allow you to give me feedback
               about the process used to set up the display booth that will help us
               learn whether our customers were satisfied with the arrangements
               and if they were not, we want to know what specific changes we
               should make for next year.

      1.   List the ideas.




      2.   Write separate sentences containing only one or two ideas. Use transitions to link the
           sentences.




                                   Turn the page to check your revision.
                                                            LESSON 6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   183




Once you've listed the ideas and written out separate sentences for them, your revision should
look something like this. Word counts are noted in parentheses.

            | have enclosed a survey form that will allow you to give me feedback
            about the process used to set up the display booth. (25) Your feed-
            back will help us learn whether our customers were satisfied with the
            arrangements. (14) If they were not satisfied, we want to know what
            specific changes we should make for next year. (18)




                                        Assignment

Review your own writing. Look for a sentence that is more than 24 words long. Write the origi-
nal and the revision here. (If you don't find any, go on to the next section of this lesson.)

ORIGINAL




REVISION
184   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




COMMAS

We'll review four situations when you must use a comma:
         1.   To set off a clause that does not change the meaning of a sentence
              In some dates and addresses
              To prevent misunderstanding

        ee!
          For items in a series


1. COMMAS       AND     CLAUSES


A clause is set off with commas if it could be removed without changing the meaning of the sen-
tence. That rule can be restated in two ways.

First, do not set off a clause with commas if removing the clause would change the meaning of
the sentence.

         WITH CLAUSE                    Cars that have faulty brakes are a menace.


         WITHOUT        CLAUSE          Cars are a menace.


Without the clause “that have faulty brakes,” the sentence has a different meaning. Therefore, it
would be incorrect to surround the clause with commas.

Second, use commas to set off a clause that does not affect the meaning of the sentence.


         WITH CLAUSE                    Dave's mother, who is 57, is visiting him in July.

         WITHOUT CLAUSE                 Dave's mother is visiting him in July.

In this example, removing the clause “who is 57” does not change the essential meaning of the
sentence. The age of Dave's mother is irrelevant to the fact that she’s visiting in July. The clause
stating her age is therefore set off with commas.




                               On the next page you'll find some practice.
                                                            LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   185




PRACTICE

Underline the clauses in these sentences. Then insert commas to set off clauses that don't change
the meaning of the sentence.

    1. Her e-mail which I received yesterday stated very clearly that the work was to be com-
       pleted by next month.

    2.   Activities of our company that are directly related to this program are developed by the
         Processing Division.

    3. Engineers who are new to this procedure should not try to carry it out themselves.

    4,   The report which was written by hand was submitted on time.




                              Check your answers on the next page.
186   PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS: A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




ANSWERS

      1. Her e-mail, which I received yesterday, stated very clearly that the work was to be
         completed by next month.

      2. Activities of our company that are directly related to this program are developed by the
         Processing Division.

      3. Engineers who are new to this procedure should not try to carry it out themselves.

      4, The report, which was written by hand, was submitted on time.




2. COMMAS       IN DATES AND ADDRESSES


In sentences, use commas to set off the year after a day of the month, and the town and state in
an address. In addresses and dates, it’s often necessary to use commas in pairs.

         INCORRECT           She lived at 186 Elm Lane Hibbing Minnesota.

         CORRECT             She lived at 186 Elm Lane, Hibbing, Minnesota.




         INCORRECT           January 1 1988 was the date of the great flood.

         CORRECT             January 1, 1988, was the date of the great flood.




When the date consists only of the month and year, omit the comma after the month.

         He retired in June 2004.


         The magazine was dated April 1996.




                             On the next page you'll find some practice.
                                                           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   187




PRACTICE

Add commas where they’re necessary.

    1. When the client died on September 28 2007 his policy was still pending.




    2. We inspected the property at 230 Clark Street Novato and found that an illegal unit had
       been constructed.




    3. She has been with the company since July 2000.



                            Check your answers on the next page.
188   PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS: A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




ANSWERS

      1. When the client died on September 28, 2007, his policy was still pending.




      2. We inspected the property at 230 Clark Street, Novato, and found that an illegal unit

         had been constructed.




      3. She has been with the company since July 2000. [correct: no comma is necessary between
         the month and the year]
                                                            LESSON 6    USE CORRECT PUNCTUATION   189




3. COMMAS     THAT PREVENT       MISUNDERSTANDING

Some sentences sound clear in a writer’s mind, but could confuse the reader. Commas are in-
valuable, multipurpose tools to make your meaning clear by showing the reader how you pace
your thoughts.

A reader would probably be confused by the unpunctuated, rapid-paced sentences below. In
each case, a comma easily clears up the confusion by showing the reader where to pause be-
tween ideas.

        CONFUSING       Although there were jobs for a hundred thousands applied.


        CLEAR           Although there were jobs for a hundred, thousands applied.




        CONFUSING       In brief the report will take about an hour.

        CLEAR           In brief, the report will take about an hour.




                               Turn the page for some practice.
190   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

Insert commas where you think they're necessary.

         ORIGINAL        After all the time he has taken has been well spent.

         REVISION        After all, the time he has taken has been well spent.



      1. As you know nothing changed as a result of the investigation.



      2. Ifyou want to swim the pool is a block away.



      3. To summarize case histories are the most important documents in our files.




                                   Check your answers on the next page.
                                                               LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   191




ANSWERS

    1. As you know, nothing changed as a result of the investigation.

    2.   Ifyou want to swim, the pool is a block away.

    3.   ‘To summarize, case histories are the most important documents in our files.


4. THE SERIES COMMA


Finally, without commas, three or more items in a series can run into one another. The result can
be confusing.

             Alphonse’s first assignments will be to clean the shelves move the
             filing cabinets put the books in alphabetical order and take the out-
             dated files to the warehouse.


Commas make it clear that each item in the series—in this case, four activities—is separate.

             Alphonse’s first assignments will be to clean the shelves, move the
             filing cabinets, put the books in alphabetical order, and take the out-
             dated files to the warehouse.


“Red, white, and blue” is an example of three items in a series. The most common conjunctions
for items in a series are the words and and or.


One of the most common punctuation questions is whether to use a comma before the final
conjunction in a series of three or more items. This punctuation is sometimes called the series
comma. In fact, there is no hard-and-fast rule about including or omitting the series comma.

         WITHOUT      SERIES        The store has the shirt in red, blue, green and yellow.
         COMMA


         WITH SERIES                The store has the shirt in red, blue, green, and yellow.
         COMMA
192    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




In most situations, you can use the series comma or omit it, as long as you consistently use it or
omit it throughout your entire document. But you must use the series comma whenever a sen-
tence would be confusing without it.

          WITHOUT        SERIES            The tasks our group must complete by next Wednesday
          COMMA                            include editing the brochure, preparing the mailing list and
          (CONFUSING AND                   printing the labels and printing and mailing the brochures.
          INCORRECT)

          WITH SERIES                      The tasks our group must complete by next Wednesday
          COMMA                            include editing the brochure, preparing the mailing list and
          (CLEAR AND                      printing the labels, and printing and mailing the brochures.
          CORRECT)

The series comma always goes before the conjunction, and never after it.

          INCORRECT                        Send the company treasurer your last three pay stubs, a
                                           copy of your federal tax return and, copies of any form
                                           1099s you might have received.

          CORRECT                          Send the company treasurer your last three pay stubs, a
                                           copy of your federal tax return, and copies of any form
                                           1099s you might have received.




      SOME ORGANIZATIONS HAVE RULES ABOUT COMMA USAGE.                      If your organization
      doesn't have this kind of rule, we recommend always using the series comma before the _
      conjunction. Then you'll never have to ask yourself whether the comma will prevent con- _
      fusion, and you'll never be wrong.



                            Before practicing the use of commas in a series,
                            take a look at the use of semicolons and colons.
                                                                 LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   193




SEMICOLONS AND COLONS

Like commas, semicolons can separate items in a series. Semicolons and colons also indicate dif-
ferent kinds of transitions within a sentence from one clause to another.


SEMICOLONS


Here are three situations when youd use a semicolon.
        1.   To separate a series of items that already contain one or more commas:
                      Four people were unable to attend the meeting: Joe Masumoto, the club
                      treasurer, Keira Jones; Louise Boswarty the club president} and José
                      Rodriguez.
        2.   To join two unrelated clauses when you don’t want to use a conjunction such as
             and, but, etc.:
                      They agreed to select the lowest bidders they had to wait ten days for the
                      results.
        3.   To join two clauses with a word like therefore, however, etc., plus a comma:
                      We expected the report the first week of June} however, the project man-
                      ager has asked for a two-week delay.

COLONS


Next, we'll look at the three most common uses for colons in business writing.

        1.   Useacolon after the salutation of a formal business letter:
                      Dear Ms. Young.

        2.   Useacolon to introduce a series of items or a bulleted list after a word or phrase
             like the following:
                      The additional materials are as follows.

                              « business newspapers
                              ¢ trade magazines
                              e instructional DVDs

                              ¢ more computers

        3.   Use acolon to introduce a series after a stated or implied number:
                      There are three things you must know about your new job. starting hours,
                      ending hours, and vacations.
194    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                 SIDE-BY-SIDE PUNCTUATION MARKS


      Here are some guidelines for how punctuation marks appear beside other punctuation
      marks in American English.
             &   Don't put two periods side by side: use only one period for a sentence that
                 ends with an abbreviation.

                         We'll need to take a change of clothes, something to
                         read, snacks, etc.

                         | consulted Susan Leung, M.D.

             m@ ‘Tuck commas and periods inside quotation marks. Put colons and semico-
                 lons outside quotation marks.

                         Their supervisor reminded them, “It’s important to be on
                         time.” This reminder was unnecessary.

                         Their supervisor reminded them, “It’s important to be on
                         time”; this reminder was unnecessary.




      On the next page you'll find some practice involving commas, semicolons, and colons.
                                                           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   195




PRACTICE

Add colons, semicolons, or commas where they’re necessary.


    1. The doctor said the condition has three symptoms itching hunger and thirst.



    2. ‘There are three new team members Erin Copland pitcher Jennifer Steinblum catcher
       and Pat Jonas shortstop.



    3. ‘The boys walked home from practice their coach had left earlier.



    4. I find the Sherwood proposition very appealing however Id like to know more about the
        product before continuing.



    5. She explained that the outbound train is delayed the news couldn't have been more
       unwelcome.




                             Turn the page to check your answers.
196   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING    SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


      1. The doctor said the condition has three symptoms. itching hungery and thirst.



      2. There are three new team members: Erin Copland, pitcher Jennifer Steinblum, catch-
           ery and Pat Jonasy shortstop.



      3.   The boys walked home from practice, their coach had left earlier.



      4.   I find the Sherwood proposition very appealingy however, I'd like to know more about
           the product before continuing.




      5. She explained that the outbound train is delayedy the news couldn't have been more

           unwelcome.




                               Up next is a section on dashes and parentheses.
                                                             LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   197




DASHES AND PARENTHESES

Dashes and parentheses set off information that isn’t essential to the meaning of a sentence.

Dashes call attention to information:

            Aileen has a knack for learning new computer software—even though
            she has never taken a class—and she often teaches her colleagues
            new computer skills.


And parentheses indicate that information is less important than the rest of the sentence:
            Aileen has a knack for learning new computer software (even though she has never
            taken a class), and she often teaches her colleagues new computer skills.


In that sentence, you could also use commas to set off the information about Aileen’s never hay-
ing taken a class. You would choose dashes to emphasize this information, and choose parenthe-
ses to deemphasize it.

DASHES


If youre setting off information that comes in the middle of a sentence, be sure to use a pair of
dashes: one before and one after the information.

INCORRECT        Asa   receptionist, Miri has several good qualities—a good voice and an excellent
                 memory, but she is sometimes rude to callers.


CORRECT          As a receptionist, Miri has several good qualities—a good voice and an excellent
                 memory—but she is sometimes rude to callers.

But if youre setting off information that comes at the end of a sentence, only one dash is
necessary:

            Mel was hoping to be given the new territory—he said that he was
            disappointed when it was assigned to Peter instead.


Never use a comma before or after a dash.


INCORRECT        [will not be able to meet with you on December 28,—our company closes down
                 that week—,but let’s try for the first week of January.

CORRECT          I will not be able to meet with you on December 28—our company closes down
                 that week—but let’s try for the first week of January.
198    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                    DIFFERENT WAYS TO TYPE A DASH


      The following are a hyphen, an en dash, and an em dash: - - — . We've used em dashes in
      this book (—), but many writers now use an en dash surrounded by spaces ( — ). Either
      kind of dash is correct; just be sure to be consistent and use only one kind.

      If neither kind of dash is available, it is also correct to use two side-by-side hyphens to
      represent a dash ( -- ), though em or en dashes look more professional. It's incorrect to use   _
      a single hyphen surrounded by spaces ( - ) to represent a dash.




PRACTICE

Insert dashes into these sentences.

       1. Because so many of our customers moved last year, our business dropped by 10 percent
          our first drop in three years.

       2. Brenda is delighted with her new position it is much more challenging than her previ-
          ous one and she is already preparing for her next promotion.
                                                         LESSON 6 USE CORRECT PUNCTUATION   199



ANSWERS


Here is where the dashes go:

    1. Because so many of our customers moved last year, our business dropped by 10 per-
       cent—our first drop in three years.

    2. Brenda is delighted with her new position—it is much more challenging than her previ-
       ous one—and she is already preparing for her next promotion.
200   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PARENTHESES


Readers often skip information included in parentheses (or pay less attention to it), so save pa-
rentheses for information that is not essential to your message.

             We are requesting bids for remodeling the building on Elm Avenue
             (formerly Sixth Street Center).

Also use parentheses when you want to present a new acronym:

             The engineers learned how to prepare an environmental impact as-
             sessment (EIA).


For parenthetical statements that appear in the middle of a sentence, do not use a comma before
the first parenthesis. You should use a comma after the closing parenthesis only if you would add
the comma at that place if the parenthetical information were removed.



INCORRECT            We have found a graphic design service-{Elephant Graphics) that does excellent
                     work and has reasonable prices.

INCORRECT            We have found a graphic design service (Elephant Graphics}, that does excellent
                     work and has reasonable prices.

CORRECT              We have found a graphic design service (Elephant Graphics) that does excellent
                     work and has reasonable prices.

The third example is correct because the sentence would have no comma without the name
Elephant Graphics: “We have found a graphic design service that does excellent work and has
reasonable prices.”




Here's an example of a sentence that could either include or omit a comma if the parenthetical
information were removed. If the comma is included, it must follow the parentheses.

INCORRECT            After the developers finish their field tests, {their deadline is May 15) they can
                     give us a good idea of when we can launch the system.

CORRECT              After the developers finish their field tests (their deadline is May 15), they can —
                     give us a good idea of when we can launch the system.

CORRECT              After the developers finish their field tests (their deadline is May 15) they can
                     give us a good idea of when we can launch the system.
                                                                 LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   201




When parentheses set off words at the end of a sentence, the final punctuation mark goes outside
the parentheses.

               Emmie said she would chair the committee (she says the same thing
               every year).

               When do you think you will complete the project (assuming all goes
               well)?


When an entire sentence is enclosed in parentheses, put the final punctuation mark inside the
parentheses.

               You can use your telephone to listen to the radio. (You will need to
               purchase the optional radio headset accessory.)

               We will activate your membership on October 1. (Isn’t that the start
               date you requested?)


Always use both opening and closing parentheses.

INCORRECT          It seems likely that we will finish the project by next week (as long as we receive
                   the necessary information from the client, so it’s time to alert the Production
                   Department to expect our draft report.

CORRECT            It seems likely that we will finish the project by next week (as long as we receive
                   the necessary information from the client), so it’s time to alert the Production
                   Department to expect our draft report.




PRACTICE

Try inserting parentheses in these sentences to deemphasize information or correct the
punctuation.

     1. After months of research, the journalist found the information she needed in a July 14,
        2007, New York Times website article which she had saved on her computer, and then
        forgotten.

    2. Anne Sumida says she will not serve as director she is hoping for a transfer to the
       London branch, but she is willing to take on the job until someone is hired.

    3. It took us more than three weeks including two Saturdays to complete the Grady report.
202   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


You could have inserted parentheses as shown below.

      1. After months of research, the journalist found the information she needed in a July 14,
         2007, New York Times website article (which she had saved on her computer, and then
         forgotten).

      2. Anne Sumida says she will not serve as director (she is hoping for a transfer to the
         London branch), but she is willing to take on the job until someone is hired.

      3. It took us more than three weeks (including two Saturdays) to complete the Grady
         report.
                                                                 LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   203




 APOSTROPHES

 Apostrophes have two primary functions: to show possession, and to take the place of missing
 letters when you combine words to form contractions.

          EXAMPLES       OF POSSESSION:


          Thank you for inviting my client’s manager to your presentation.

          All four candidates’ references were excellent.

          EXAMPLES       OF CONTRACTIONS:


          It’s [it is] a very interesting perspective on the problem.

          We know you'll [you will] find our time management software very useful.

          I’ve [I have] enclosed a brochure.




 APOSTROPHES         TO SHOW POSSESSION


 Apostrophes usually show that a noun or pronoun possesses something. These apostrophes’ po-
 sition depends on whether the noun or pronoun is singular or plural.

 When the noun or pronoun is singular, you usually show possession by adding an apostrophe
 +S.

          the laptop’s screen            the team’s schedule

          my driver’s van                somebody’s briefcase

~ Most plural nouns end in s or es. To form the possessive, place the apostrophe after the final s.

          the students’ progress        two weeks’ worth of work [not “two weeks worth of work”

          the buses’ tires              the Mitulskis’ car [for the Mitulski family as a group]
204   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




For plural nouns that do not end in s, you usually indicate possession by adding an apostrophe +
s, just as you do for singular nouns and pronouns.

         the children’s accounts                           the women’s offices


         the mice’s nests                                  the oxen’s yokes



PRACTICE


Add apostrophes to these nouns and pronouns to indicate possession, as shown in the example.

         EXAMPLE         one carpenters hammer

         REVISION        one carpenter’s hammer




         the presidents office                    the mens locker room

         several days backlog                     anyones guess
                                                              LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   205




 ANSWERS


 These are the apostrophes you should have added:

         the president’s office             the men’s locker room

         several days’ backlog              anyone’s guess




 These eight possessive pronouns never need apostrophes. Some of them resemble contractions
 that always need apostrophes (it’s, there’s, who’s, and you’e).
         its                theirs                hers
         his                whose                 yours
         ours               your

 It’s important to remember that possessive pronouns already show possession—so do not add an
 apostrophe to them.

    INCORRECT                The truck needs it’s brakes adjusted.

    CORRECT                  The truck needs its brakes adjusted.


    INCORRECT                This table is not our’s.

    CORRECT                  This table is not ours.

 Another common error is to add apostrophes to plural nouns that are not possessive.

    INCORRECT                We plan to offer all our customer’s a rebate.

    CORRECT                  We plan to offer all our customers a rebate.

_ Never add an apostrophe to a noun unless you mean to show possession.




                                   Turn the page for some practice.
206    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Ee Ge
To show possession, add missing apostrophes and circle incorrect ones.

      1.   We will test each applicants skill level.

      2.   My assistant never makes mistake’s in entering data.

      3.   The refrigerator door fell off it’s hinges when we opened it.




                                   Check your answers on the next page.
                                                           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   207




ANSWERS


  1.   We will test each applicant’s skill level.

  2.   My assistant never makes mistakes in entering data.

  3.   The refrigerator door fell off its hinges when we opened it.
208   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




APOSTROPHES           IN CONTRACTIONS


You form a contraction by combining two words, such as “it is” and “you are.” An apostrophe
replaces the missing letters.

Here are the correct contractions for some common word pairs:

         it is                   it’s

         you are                 you re
         they are                they’re
         you will                youll
         cannot                  can’t

         who is                  who’s

         will not                wont

Be careful not to confuse contractions with pronouns that show possession. They may sound
alike, but they’re different words and are written differently.

         POSSESSIVE                       The conference table has lost its luster.
         PRONOUN


         CONTRACTION                      It’s been a profitable year for our stockholders.

         POSSESSIVE                       Please give me your comments on my report.
         PRONOUN


         CONTRACTION                      Let me know when yow’re ready to discuss the problem.

         POSSESSIVE                       Tell your colleagues that I appreciate their ideas.
         PRONOUN


         CONTRACTION                      They will provide the information when they’
                                                                                     re ready.




                                  On the next page you'll find some practice.
                                                                LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   209




PRACTICE

Add apostrophes, where necessary, and circle missing apostrophes or incorrect words. Some
sentences have the correct possessive forms and contractions.


    i    Who’ cubicle is this?

    2.   I told her your going; you are, arent you?

         The plan appealed to us because of its practicality.

         Ive been planning it for weeks.

         Their careful work paid off. They're going to be promoted.




                                 Turn the page to check your answers.
210    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


      1.   Whose cubicle is this?

      2.   I told her youre going; you are, aren’t you?

      3.   The plan appealed to us because of its practicality. [correct]

      4.   I’ve been planning it for weeks.

      5.   Their careful work paid off. They’re going to be promoted. [correct]
                                                            LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   211




HYPHENS

Hyphens can be as complicated as apostrophes, but there are a handful of simple rules to follow.
The usual rule is to hyphenate a two-word phrase that describes a noun when the phrase comes
before the noun. The companion rule is to use a space and no hyphen between the same two
words after the noun.

EXAMPLES           The high-end merchandise sold well.


                   The merchandise is high end.


This approach also works with three-word or longer phrases, and hyphenated phrases that are
split up.

EXAMPLES           They design ready-to-wear clothing.

                   Their clothing is ready to wear.

                   The six- and seven-year-old students were separated into two groups.

                   The students are seven years old.

There are two exceptions to this rule. First, don't hyphenate a two-word phrase before a noun if
the first word ends in -ly. Do not hyphenate these -ly phrases after a noun, either.

EXAMPLES           Their carefully phrased suggestion had a good effect.

                   The conveniently located store may close next year.

                   The store may close next year, although it is conveniently located.

And second, a phrase is not hyphenated before or after a noun if it is very well known.

EXAMPLES           Word processing skills are required.

                   Post office prices change regularly.




                                Turn the page for some practice.
212    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




PRACTICE

Add hyphens, where necessary, and circle any incorrect hyphens. Each sentence may already be
correct.


      1. The proposal was well received.

      2.   It was a well received proposal.

      3.   ‘The latest real estate figures are in.

      4.   ‘The carefully-polished grant application impressed the foundation.

      5.   They saw their highest ever attendance last year.



                                    Check your answers on the next page.
                                                           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   213




ANSWERS


  1.   ‘The proposal was well received. [correct]

  2.   It was a well-received proposal.

  3.   ‘The latest real estate figures are in. [correct]

  4.   ‘The carefully polished grant application impressed the foundation. [incorrect: no
       hyphen]

  5.   They saw their highest-ever attendance last year.




                                 Turn the page for an assignment.
214     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                   Assignment

Review your own writing samples for run-on sentences and incorrect or missing commas, semi-
colons, colons, hyphens, and apostrophes. If you see any errors, write the originals and revisions
here.


ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   215




ORIGINAL




REVISION
216    PROFESSIONAL    WRITING    SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




REVIEW

To review what you've learned in this lesson, answer these questions.

      1.   A run-on sentence contains two or more                                 that are connected

           incorrectly.       (174)

      2.   A clause is set off with commas if it could be removed                                 the
           meaning of the sentence.           (184)

      3.   Use a semicolon to join two                                with a word such as “however,”
           therefore,’ etc.           (193)

      4.    Usea                             to introduce a series introduced by a phrase like the
           following, or by a stated or implied number.    (194)

      5.   Never add an apostrophe to a noun unless you mean to
           show                                      wr(205)

      6.   Never hyphenate two-word adverb phrases that endin ___.                        (211)

      7.   Hyphenate most two-word phrases when they come                                  a noun they
           describe.      (211)




WHAT?’S NEXT?


In this lesson, you've learned how to punctuate your document with confidence. In the next sec-
tion, you'll learn how to write e-mail that looks professional and gets results.
7                                        WRITE EFFECTIVE                             E-MAIL




INTRODUCTION

Now youre ready to apply the planning and writing skills you've learned in the previous lessons
to a specific type of writing which is probably crucial to your work life: e-mail.

The advances in electronic communication are rapidly changing the way we work. Yet common
writing challenges keep e-mail from being as productive as it could be.

People still send e-mail that is confusing, unprofessional, or offensive, or that lands them and
their organizations in court. Like any other business writing, effective, professional e-mail re-
quires thought and attention.

OBJECTIVES


This lesson will help you with the following challenges:
        ™   Writing clear, concise e-mail that quickly conveys the information people need
            and gets the results you want
        ™   Conveying a professional image of yourself and your organization through the e-
            mail you send
        m   Avoiding trouble by recognizing what topics and information are and are not
            appropriate
218   PROFESSIONAL      WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




E-mail is ideal for the kinds of quick messages that most of us send in response to questions, to
pass along information, and to make requests. We use e-mail because it's quick and easy—more
like leaving a phone message than writing. It may not seem to take the same kind of thinking
and planning time as writing a hard-copy letter, or a report.

But e-mail is still writing. Even if you have only a simple message to convey, you will get better
results if you stop and think about why youre writing, what information you want to pass along,
and what you want the recipient to do. Unplanned messages waste everybody's valuable time.




IS E-MAIL THE APPROPRIATE CHOICE FOR THIS MESSAGE?

What if you received the two e-mail messages below? Is e-mail the best way—or the right way—
to communicate the information? Why or why not?

              Dear Daniel,

             This is to notify you that you have come in more than half an hour late
             four days out of the past seven. We spoke about this issue during
             your last performance evaluation. If you show up late one more time, |
             will be forced to institute disciplinary proceedings.

              Sincerely,


              Larissa




              Billie,

              | Know how you feel about that invoice. | almost screamed at the
              finances woman when she kept telling me she didn’t have it. | can’t
              find my copy either, and | know you sent me at least two of them.

              Could you please fax me copies ONE MORE TIME? This will get
              solved today, or | start building a death-ray laser gun out of office
              supplies. Sorry for the tirade!

              By the way, | heard that your manager is thinking about leaving the
              company. His daughter told my daughter in gymnastics class.

              Better keep it to yourself, but | thought you’d like to know.

              Parker
                                                                 LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   219




You probably agree that e-mail was not the appropriate choice for either of these messages.
Larissa’s message to Daniel addressed performance issues, which should always remain confi-
dential and are best addressed in person. And Parker used e-mail to vent his feelings, something
he might later regret. He also passed on a rumor, assuming that Billie would keep it confidential.

Convenience is not a good-enough reason for using e-mail to communicate certain kinds of in-
formation. E-mail is too public for some messages. It’s more like sending a postcard than sealing
a letter into an envelope.

CONSIDER THE CONSEQUENCES

To make sure that e-mail is the appropriate choice, think carefully whenever you need to
communicate

            @™ confidential or private information
            ™   sensitive topics

            ™   complex information

People other than your intended recipients could always see any e-mail you send. Before clicking
Send, ask yourself what might happen if someone published your e-mail draft in a newspaper.

E-mail is no substitute for a conversation, or a memo or letter, that only the recipient is likely to
see. Sometimes it’s easy to throw negative feelings into an e-mail and send it off without paus-
ing to think how the recipient might react. Face-to-face interaction is vital when your message
might upset other people.

The casualness of e-mail also makes it easy to forget that it can be the wrong place to poke fun
at an individual or a group. Something that seems funny to you could offend others who see the
message. Offensive e-mails can get you—and your organization—in a lot of trouble.

An e-mail is not the best way to convey complex information, which is hard to read on a screen
and may look different in a printout. To make the document more useful for the recipient, send
complex information as an attached file that describes—and perhaps summarizes—the file’s
contents.
220   PROFESSIONAL      WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




THINK        ABOUT...
eoneoeas   ee2eoeeonneesesen




Have you ever received an inappropriate e-mail? How did you feel about it? Did other people see
it? Were there any consequences? Did it affect the business relationship?

In the last two weeks, have you sent e-mails with messages more appropriate to a different kind
of document—or that should not have been communicated at all?

APPLYING THE SIX STEPS TO E-MAIL

Think about how you read e-mail. Do you sit back with a cup
                                                                        For a review of the six
of coffee and ponder every word? Most readers are likely to
                                                                        steps, see Lesson 1:
read only the first few lines before deciding whether the e-mail
                                                                        Develop a Writing Plan
merits any more of their time. If it does, they scan the rest of
                                                                        in Six Steps.
the message to pick out the important points.

This fast reading makes it all the more important to plan your document. ‘The six steps you
learned in Lesson 1 work as well for e-mail as for any other kind of document.

Remember that communication is a two-way process: your e-mail recipients must receive and be
able to understand your message. Stop to think about the point of view of your e-mail recipients
as carefully as you would for the readers of a letter youd write.

When sending the same message to several people or a large group, ask yourself whether the
readers’ needs, interests, and concerns are similar enough for one message to be appropriate for
all of them. If not, you'll get better results by writing more than one e-mail, tailored to different
audiences. You might write one e-mail providing some background context for a topic, and an-
other short e-mail to people who already know this information.

WRITING TO PEOPLE YOU DON’T KNOW

When you do not know your e-mail recipients, weigh factors like the type of organization they
work for, their positions, and their relationship to you and your organization. Here are some
profiles of different types of recipients.
            =   Customer service representatives. You can assume they want to be helpful, know
                a lot about a product but little or nothing about your specific question or com-
                plaint about it, and receive hundreds of similar messages every week.
            m   Prospective clients who have asked for information about your products. They
                probably know something about your business, but need details from you to de-
                cide whether your product meets their needs.
                                                                 LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   221




          ™   Managers in another area who have asked for information about a project.
              They're interested in your information, probably need a suminary of key points
              rather than small details, and may lack your technical knowledge.

 Too often, we write e-mail out of habit, without thinking about why we are writing. Like any
 other business document, e-mail is far more clear—and gets better results—when you determine
 your purpose before writing.

 To get the most important information across quickly and clearly for a reader skimming your
 e-mail, decide on your single, main point; frame it as a key sentence; and put it at the beginning.
 Expand on your main point with facts and ideas. As you write, stop and think about exactly
 what information a reader needs. For an e-mail to be useful, your information should answer all
 the reader’s questions—and only those questions. In a document as brief as an e-mail, it’s espe-
 cially important to group your points into logical categories that facilitate skimming.

 Together, these steps will leave the recipients of any e-mail you write with a complete, coherent
 message that accomplishes your purpose.

 LAUNCHING        YOUR MESSAGE

 E-mail can save us a lot of time, but it raises concerns that don't come up in other business
 documents:
          ™   How do! make sure my message conveys the right tone?
          =   How can I format my e-mail to be easy to read?
          #   Do [always have to use a salutation? A closing? Complete sentences?
          ®   Do my punctuation and grammar have to be perfect?
          @   What should be on the subject line?

  These questions don’t have quick and easy answers. But the tips and techniques on the following
_ pages will help you send e-mail that achieves your goals and meets your readers’ needs.

 READ FOR SENSE


Keep yourself in the recipient’s shoes, and read through your e-mail before sending it. Make any
  necessary changes to the content of the message right away, before worrying about the format-
  ting, subject line, or other components. If there is any unnecessary information, delete it. If you
_ forgot anything essential, add it.
222   PROFESSIONAL     WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Stop yourself if you find yourself rewriting the message, moving things around, or adding a lot
of new information. Remember your purpose, audience, and main point, and the questions the
e-mail needs to answer.


When you read for sense, also check the tone. Is the e-mail too abrupt? Too casual? Too formal?
Not friendly enough?
       ABRUPT:                   Get me the revisions by Thursday.
       POLITE:                   Please be sure to get me the revisions by Thursday.
       POLITE:                   I would appreciate your getting me the revisions by Thursday.
       CASUAL:                   Got a lot on my plate right now—not sure I can take on a new gig.
       PROFESSIONAL:             I’m very busy at the moment, and I’m not sure I can take on a new
                                 project.

       FORMAL:                   Prior to July 23, payments can be sent only through the Postal Service.
                                 Subsequent to that date, payments must be made through our website.
       FRIENDLY:                 Before July 23, you can make payments only by mail. After July 23, you
                                 can make payments on our website.

Dont use all-capital or all-lowercase letters. They are hard to read and, respectively, sound either
too demanding or too casual.

MAKE     THE E-MAIL EASY TO READ


How easily can you follow this e-mail message?

              Hi, Laura,

             The total contribution you’ve made for this tax year is $7,200. The
             maximum contribution for the year is $11,000 plus an additional
             $1,000 if you are age 50 or older. If Craig wishes to contribute the
             maximum, he can contribute $4,800 for the rest of the year (12,000
             less 7,200 = 4,800).

             If he can get the Salary Reduction Agreement form to me by Tuesday
             we can take advantage of the last three months in this tax year
             (4,800 divided by 3 = $1600). Next year’s maximum is $12,000 plus
             an additional $2,000 if age 50 or older. Our tax year begins with the
             December pay period (the check that’s issued on January 1.) | hope
             this information is helpful.

              Best wishes,

              Pierre
                                                                LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   223




Pierre clearly didn’t think about how that message would look on a computer screen—or on a
handheld device. Even though the message is well written, it takes effort to understand it.

Notice how much easier the message is to read when it’s broken down into short paragraphs,
with a blank line between each one:

            Hi, Laura,

            The total contribution you’ve made for this tax year is $7,200. The
            maximum contribution for the year is $11,000, plus an additional
            $1,000 if you are age 50 or older.

            If Craig wishes to contribute the maximum, he can contribute $4,800
            for the rest of the year ($12,000 less $7,200 = $4,800). If he can get
            the Salary Reduction Agreement form to me by Tuesday, we can take
            advantage of the last three months in this tax year ($4,800 divided by
            3 = $1,600).

            Next year’s maximum is $12,000 plus an additional $2,000 if you are
            age 50 or older. Our tax year begins with the December pay period
            (the check that’s issued on January 1).

            | hope this information is helpful.

            Best wishes,

            Pierre



               CAN A PARAGRAPH             BE ONLY ONE SENTENCE              LONG?

_ Sure it can. One-sentence paragraphs are fine in e-mail messages, as long as the sentence
 - communicates a complete thought.

               Mark,

               As you asked, I'll make the necessary changes to the project
               timetable and send you a revised calendar by next Friday.

               Deanna




               Marketing Team,

               We’ve scheduled the telephone meeting for 10:30 a.m. tomor-
               row, May 3.

               Billy
224   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




If a message is clearly written and presented, the reader should be able to grasp the important
information by quickly scanning it.

Keep these points in mind:
         B   Short sentences and paragraphs are
             easier to read than long ones                             Use short sentences how

         H   Lists are easier to read than sentences                   paragraphs, and bullet points to :
             and paragraphs                                            convey information in your e-mail.
                                                                       See pages 38, 43, 73, and 179-80 for
         &   Information is easier to follow when                           :        :
                                                                       more information.
             there’s space between list items and
             paragraphs

SALUTATIONS

E-mail doesn't always need to follow the same rules as formal business correspondence. But a
salutation or greeting is like saying “Hi” or “Hello” when you begin a conversation. It helps you
         @   establish a personal contact by using the reader's name
         ®@ assure readers that the e-mail is meant for them
         #   set the tone


Salutations or greetings can be formal or informal, depending on the situation. If you're writing
to a group, sometimes all you need is “Hi” or “Hello,” followed by the first line.


SHOULD       I INCLUDE         A SALUTATION?


You should usually use a salutation. You can leave it off when you are holding an extended back-
and-forth e-mail exchange, and sometimes when you are providing a brief answer to a question.
But an e-mail that begins without so much as “Hi” can seem abrupt.

Your company policy might include guidelines for determining which kind of salutation to use.
Otherwise, you can use the ones that follow.
              Dear Mr. Wolinsky,             Hi, Bob,                Dear Bob,         Hello, Bob,

              Bob,                           Dear clients,           To my clients:    Hi, team,

              Hi, everyone,                  Hello, associates
                                                                  LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   225




  COMMAS       IN SALUTATIONS?


  These days, people often omit the comma between the “Hi” or “Hello” and the person's name for
  informal salutations:

                 Hi Bob,

                 Hi, Bob,


  Either form is okay. Be sure, however, to use the comma after the person’s name.

  You usually need a formal salutation (“Dear . .”) only for people outside your organization.
  But there are exceptions. If you're writing to someone who is senior to you, such as a director
  or chairman of the board, it might be more appropriate to use “Dear Ms. Moreno” or “Dear
  Director” instead of “Hi, Allison.”


  Are you writing to a colleague or friend? Use an informal salutation or greeting, or just begin
  with the person's name. It’s sometimes better to use a formal salutation when you write to some-
  one you've never met, never spoken with on the phone, or never communicated with by e-mail.

- When you reply to an e-mail message, note the way the person addressed you. If the person used
  a formal salutation, you should probably use a formal salutation in return. When you write to
someone in another country, you might want to use a formal salutation, at least when you first
  begin to exchange messages. People outside the U.S. tend to be more formal in business settings.

  COLONS IN SALUTATIONS?


  A common question is whether to use a colon after a formal salutation, the way you would if you
  were writing a business letter.

                 Dear Mr. O’Connor:


  The evolving style is to use a comma instead of a colon.

                 Dear Mr. O’Connor,

  Unless your organization's style guide addresses this topic, do what feels right to you.

| THINK ABOUT...
  Seeseeoooeasseesoonseee   °




| Do you ever receive e-mail that has no salutation or greeting? Under what circumstances does
  that seem okay?
226   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




What kind of salutation or greeting do you normally use when you send e-mail messages? How
do you make that decision?

CLOSINGS AND SIGNATURES

A closing is like the period that ends a sentence—it lets the reader know youre done. Closings
can show good manners and efficiency: they let readers know they’ve reached the end of the
message. Your signature also tells them how to reach you.

CLOSINGS


Like the salutation, the closing can be formal, informal, or casual.
          Formal               Sincerely; Regards; Yours truly
          Less formal          Best wishes; Warm regards; Thank you
          Casual               Thanks; See you soon

Choose a salutation and a closing that complement each other. For brief messages to friends and
colleagues, it can be okay to close with only your name or even your initials. But keep in mind
that this kind of closing can have a rather abrupt tone:

              Parker,

              UPS picked up the package today. It should arrive by next Tuesday.

             Sheila




             Thanks for the update, Brendon—will let you know if | need more
             details.

             J.


SIGNATURES


An e-mail without a signature is like a voicemail message without a name or telephone number:
the assumption is that the other person knows who you are and how to reach you. But just as
someone you call might not recognize your voice or have your number handy, an e-mail recipi-
ent might not recognize your e-mail address or know your number.

To avoid these problems, always include your name and number. Repeating your e-mail address
in the signature can make it easier for people to find you if they’re not replying immediately.
And if you use more than one e-mail address, make sure that the e-mail address on the From
line is the one you want people to use.
                                                                  LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   227




 Depending on the situation and your organization's policy, also include all or some of these
 details:
         @   Your title or position
         @   Your company name
         m@ A fax number
         @   Your office and cell numbers, if necessary
         @   A mailing address
         m™ The URL for your website

 WORRIED      ABOUT WHETHER            YOUR MESSAGE WAS RECEIVED?

 If you need to know that someone received your e-mail, but you don't need a full reply, add a
 line requesting a reply at the beginning or the end of the e-mail. (E.g., “Please let me know that
 you got this message.)

 PROOFREAD!

 Some people believe that a professional writing style isn’t important for e-mail—that the rules
 of grammar, punctuation, and spelling don’t apply. Let’s look closely at that belief. Suppose you
 received the following message from someone you've never met. What would be your image of
 the person who wrote it?

              Dear Supplier Partner:

              | am pleased to announce: that InfoSearch has adcepted a offer, from
              Online Libary, Inc. to purchase it’s website. Marcus Wellenby, Onlines
              CEO and | have work non-stop in recent weeks to put the deal to-
              gether with minimum affects for both customers and our supplier
              partners. This will inable the InfoSearch.com web site to contine to
              operate and, give it a chance to realize it’s potential.

             | want to apologize to any of you who have had a difficulty, in contact-
             ing us while we have operated with a skeletel staff in anticipation of
             this transatcion. | also want to personnelly thank you. For your sup-
             port and for a wonderful asociation to those of you | have the plea-
             sure of meeting.

              Best Regrds,

             Suzanne Boyles


Chances are, you wouldn't take Suzanne’s message very seriously. After all, how credible is some-
 one who can’t take the time to write a message without glaring errors, or doesn't know how?
228   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




We think error-free e-mail is important. Remember these key points:
         ™   The e-mail you write conveys a particular image to your readers. If your grammar,
             punctuation, and spelling are sloppy, your image will be, too.
         ™   Some careless writing and errors will mislead readers, or make it difficult for them
             to understand what you're trying to say.

Before sending out an e-mail message, do yourself and your readers a favor by proofreading it.
The process doesn't take long, and it can go a long way towards promoting a positive, profes-
sional image of you and your organization.

ATTACHMENTS

Always tell your readers whenever you attach a file to your e-mail. Otherwise, they might delete,
forward, or save the message before noticing the important file they needed.

It takes time to open and read an attachment. Save your readers time by telling them what the
attachment is, instead of forcing them to open it just to find out. Also include a cover e-mail that
clearly explains what you expect the reader to do with the attachment.

When you send attachments, consider your audience. Sometimes only your primary reader—the
person named on the To line and not the people on the CC or BCC lines—needs the attachment.
In those cases, you might want to send the others a separate e-mail without the attachment.

Also, if the attachment is long and complex, consider summarizing it briefly in the body of the
e-mail message.

THE SUBJECT LINE


Imagine a news website without headlines. How would you know what stories you wanted to
read? A well-written subject line is like the headline for a news article: it draws the reader’s at-
tention and tells the reader what the e-mail is about. The subject line gives the reader a reason to
open the e-mail. It's also your first and most important opportunity to get your message across.


Notice the difference between the original and revised subject lines in the following examples:

        ORIGINAL          Changes

        REVISION          Health benefits will change on Dec. 1: Please enroll
                                                                     LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   229




       ORIGINAL             Planning date?

        REVISION            Planning Project: Is meeting on Apr. 2, 6, or 9?

The revised subject lines are compelling. They grab the reader’s attention and provide enough
information to make the reader want to read and respond to the message.

WORD SUBJECT LINES CAREFULLY. Certain words or phrases can get your message sent to the
spam, or junk mail, folder, where your reader will probably never see it. Here are a few examples:

              For your eyes only                        Opportunity Knocks

              Profit Free                               Confirmation of order

              Look at this!                             $$ HM

 Your organization might have a list of words and phrases to avoid. Check with the people who
 provide you with technical support. By the way, always put something in the subject line. A
 blank subject line is not only useless to the recipient, it might get your message tagged as spam.

 MAKE SUBJECT LINES DESCRIPTIVE AND ENGAGING. Try to use them to pique the reader's in-
 terest. The best subject lines both summarize and introduce the contents of the e-mail.

         NOT DESCRIPTIVE               Budget

         DESCRIPTIVE                   Marketing budget increased 10%

 MAKE SUBJECT LINES SPECIFIC. An effective subject line includes enough detail to distinguish
 it from similar e-mails. It should tell readers what the e-mail is about, and enable recipients to
 find the e-mail again by searching for a key word or phrase.

         VAGUE              Report

         SPECIFIC           Robotix computer upgrade project report


 WATCH THOSE EXCLAMATION POINTS. Ina misguided attempt to call attention to their e-mail
_messages, some writers “liven up” their subject lines with language and punctuation in the at-
 tempt to make the message seem more important than it is.

             Only 3 days left to apply!

             Your presence required!!
230   PROFESSIONAL     WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Anything with an exclamation point get your message sent to the spam folder. Furthermore, it's
unfair to mislead readers by conveying a false sense of urgency. Remember the boy who cried
“Wolf!” If you do it too often, no one will ever take you seriously. If a message really is urgent,
your system might let you flag it or mark it in some way. Better yet, make a phone call to let the
recipient know it’s coming and needs immediate attention.

MAKE SUBJECT LINES CONCISE AND CLEAR. A compelling subject line gets the message across
without unnecessary words or obscure abbreviations.

              WORDY AND CONFUSING                               This msg inclds the details abt nu mktg pln

              CONCISE AND CLEAR                                 New marketing plan details

Change your e-mails’ subject lines when the subject changes in a reply to an earlier e-mail. Ina
back-and-forth multireply “conversation,” pay special attention to the subject line. If the focus
remains on the original topic, you might not need to change the subject line. But you can mis-
lead or confuse the reader by keeping the original subject line when a reply or series of replies
changes the topic of your current e-mail.

CONSIDER THE LENGTH. Long subject lines are often truncated, especially on handheld de-
vices. If you can't avoid a long subject line, make sure the key information appears in its first few
words.




POSSRTHOHHRTOEEHHREEHEDREBE




How much attention do you pay to the subject line? Do you usually stop to consider whether
it accurately describes and previews the message? Can you think of a time that you forgot to
change the subject line when you replied to a message but changed the topic?
                                                         LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   231




                                 Assignment
Check the salutations on ten recent e-mail messages you've sent and received. Are they
appropriate to the situation? Too formal? Too casual? Too abrupt? How would you
change them? Write three of the original salutations or greetings on the lines below.
Then write the changes youd make.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




Look at five recent e-mail messages you've sent and five you've received. Do they have
useful closings and signatures? What changes would have helped?

Do you already have a signature file that automatically adds a signature block to your
e-mail? Do you have at least one alternative signature? If so, review those files to see
whether they need any changes.

If you dont have a signature file, create at least two that would be appropriate for the dif-
ferent kinds of e-mail you send. Decide which signature file should be your default—the
one that will be added automatically to every message unless you manually select a differ-
ent one.



If you don’t know how to create a signature file, consult your Help menu or the people in
your organization who provide technical support.
232    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




      4.   Look through a magazine or some news articles. Circle or jot down some headlines that
           draw your attention. Notice how the headline writer gave you a little preview of the ar-
           ticle in those few words. Write out the best three headlines below.




      5.   Look at the subject lines from five e-mails you've sent and five you've received. Do they
           meet the criteria of a well-written subject line discussed in this chapter? If not, how
           could you revise them so they would be more effective? Write three of the original sub-
           ject lines and their revisions below.

           ORIGINAL




           REVISION




           ORIGINAL




           REVISION




           ORIGINAL




           REVISION



      6.   Write effective subject lines based on these scenarios:

           Simon needs someone to volunteer to provide administrative assistance for the Heart
           Association project.

           SUBJECT LINE
                                                       LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   233




Melissa can't attend the Verizon meeting on February 6, but wants someone to attend in
her place and take notes.

SUBJECT LINE


Grisha believes that the draft of the Clorox presentation needs a lot more work.

SUBJECT LINE

Do you regularly send e-mail to groups? Review the distribution list for at least one of
those groups. Add or remove addresses to make sure that the right people—and only the
right people—get those messages.
234
                                                                                                235



 RESOURCES CONSULTED AND RECOMMENDED                        FOR CONTINUED LEARNING

The Chicago Manual of Style. 15th ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.

Einsohn, Amy. The Copyeditor’s Handbook: A Guide for Publishing and Corporate
   Communications, with Exercises and Answer Keys. Berkeley: University of California Press,
   2006.

Fogarty, Mignon. Grammar Girl: Quick and Dirty Tips for Better Writing.
   http://grammar.quickanddirtytips.com.

Merriam-Webster’ Collegiate Dictionary. 11th ed. Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, Inc., 2005.

Straus, Jane. GrammarBook.com. http://grammarbook.com.

Turabian, Kate L. A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and Dissertations. 7th ed.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007.

Williams, Joseph M. Style: The Basics of Clarity and Grace. 3rd ed. New York: Pearson Longman,
   2009.
236




ABOUT WRITE IT WELL

Write It Well began in 1979 as Advanced Communication Designs, Inc., a training company that
specialized in helping people communicate more clearly.

Our focus has always been on providing practical information, techniques, and strategies that
people can use immediately. Individuals, teams, training specialists, and instructors in corpora-
tions and businesses of all sizes, nonprofit organizations, government agencies, and colleges and
universities all use our books and training programs.

The Write It Well series currently includes the self-paced training workbooks Professional
Writing Skills, How to Write Reports and Proposals, Grammar for Grownups, and Writing
Performance Reviews. For more about our company and detailed descriptions of our publica-
tions, visit our website, www.writeitwell.com.




ABOUT THE AUTHOR


Natasha Terk is the author of Writing Performance Reviews: A Write It Well Guide and the co-
author of E-Mail: A Write It Well Guide. As the president of Write It Well, she leads the firm’s
business operations and strategy.


Natasha holds master’s degrees from the University of San Francisco and the University of
Manchester, UK. She served as a program officer at the Packard Foundation and as a manage-
ment consultant with La Piana Consulting, and serves on the board of the Ronald McDonald
House of San Francisco.

Natasha has taught business writing at the University of California, Berkeley. She leads on-
site and online webinars and workshops for clients including Hitachi Data Systems, Hewlett
Packard, Granite Construction, National Semiconductor, and the Port of Oakland. Natasha gives
keynote speeches and presentations on business communications at seminars and large confer-
ences. She develops job-relevant, engaging training solutions that help people work more effec-
tively and efficiently.
                                             \


    F
                                            7=

                 3                                   -
             £                         es




    Pd
                                            —
         -           —           ae




                         —            =-     J




                             =                   a




=
—"
i/
    It’s very importanttowrite clearly, concisely, and professionally ifyou want to be competitive
    in today’s business environment. I consider this book to be one of my essential sales tools.
                                                 AMANDA NOGUERA, Regional Sales Director
                                        AVOKE Caller Experience Analytics, BBN Technologies

    Most of our employees — engineers, developers, product managers, marketing staff — were
    never taught how to write professionally. They were just thrown into it. This book offers people
    what they need to get their point across clearly and present a professional image of themselves
    and of our corporation in everything they write.
                                      je      KiNG, Director, Worldwide Marketing Operations
                                                           National Semiconductor Corporation


    The book's for anyone, really. It answers many of our everyday writing questions in simple
    language without getting bogged down by daunting grammar and style rules. And it offers
    clear plans of action for those who might get overwhelmed by the writing process.
    I wish I could get each and every one of our reporters to read Professional Writing Skills. .
    Even as trained writers, they could benefit from its useful and easy-to-remember tips.
                                             MICHELLE MEYERS, Associate Editor, CNET News




  Professional Writing Skills: AWrite It Well Guide leads you through Write It Well’s
  time-tested, six-step planning process for any business writing. The process
_ will help you write business letters, e-mail, and other documents that persuade
  and inform - clearly, concisely, and professionally. This new edition provides
  more tips and tools for writing better e-mail, as well as expanded sections
  on grammar and punctuation — great for learning and for reference.



                  Natasha Terk, President of Write It Well, is the author of Performance Reviews:
                  A White It Well Guide and the co-author ofE-Mail: AWrite It Well Guide. She leads
                  the firm’s operations and strategy and develops books, workshops, webinars,
                  and facilitator guides that provide practical, relevant information, techniques,
                  and strategies that people can use immediately to improve business communication.

    Write It Well (formerly Advanced Communication Designs)          ISBN: 978-0-9824
    was founded in 1980 to help people in the workplace
    communicate clearly and work together effectively.


    Visit us at www.writeitwell.com
a                                                        a            780982    447116
